
"4925","1/2/2003 13:41","03GUATEMALA1","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA3306","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/30/2008 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, SNAR, KDEM, PHUM, CASC, US, GT 
SUBJECT: DRUGS, TRADE, AND HUMAN RIGHTS: AMBASSADOR\'S FIRST 
MEETING WITH PRESIDENT PORTILLO 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 3306 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton 
 
1.  (C)  Summary:  At an informal dinner at the home of 
President Portillo December 28 that also included FM 
Gutierrez and the DCM, the Ambassador emphasize the need to 
focus in Portillo\'s remaining year in office on being 
recertified and on making progress in other areas -- human 
rights, corruption and American citizen murder cases -- 
which, left unattended, could endanger U.S. Congressional 
approval of the CAFTA.  Although the conversation was civil, 
Portillo was upset about Guatemala\'s impending 
decertification, claiming it would weaken his ability to 
govern effectively and undermine the \"reformist\" elements of 
his government.  The Ambassador disagreed, indicating that it 
was not the reformist elements that were being decertified. 
End Summary. 
 
2.  (C)   President Portillo invited the Ambassador to an 
\"informal\" dinner at his home before his presentation of 
credentials ceremony, now set for January 8.  The backdrop 
was the increasingly public USG criticism of the government 
in the latter half of 2002.  In the two weeks before the 
dinner, the local press had run stories based on two leaked 
Guatemalan foreign ministry cables (from Brussels and 
Washington) that, inter alia, reported that the USG was 
weighing the cancellation of Portillo\'s visa and the 
impending counternarcotics decertification of Guatemala. 
 
------------------------- 
CAFTA AND DECERTIFICATION 
------------------------- 
 
3.  (C)  As it had been in a meeting the previous day with 
the Foreign Minister (ref), the Ambassador\'s main message was 
that time had run out on taking steps that could avoid 
decertification.   The government needed to react, when the 
announcement came, as positively as possible, making clear 
its determination to win recertification by the time of the 
next formal review process, in September.  The Ambassador 
also emphasized that the government would need to make 
progress in other areas -- human rights, 
corruption/transparency, American Citizen murder cases and 
the like -- which, left to fester, could endanger U.S. 
Congressional approval of a CAFTA agreement.  The Ambassador 
emphasized what an extraordinary opportunity CAFTA is for 
Guatemala and Central America, offering the best 
possibilities for reducing poverty and containing elements 
that will strengthen transparency in all areas of government 
having to do with trade.  Portillo professed to be a strong 
believer in free trade, pointing to several tariff cuts that 
had increased competition in formerly protected markets 
(Comment:  his prime motivation for the cuts probably was to 
attack opponents in the private sector).  The Ambassador 
recapped his December 27 conversation with FonMin Gutierrez, 
in which the latter described steps (ref) that the GOG would 
take to strengthen its trade negotiating team, which the 
Ambassador candidly told the President was the weakest in the 
region.  Portillo, who showed no awareness we could detect of 
the steps the FonMin had described (ostensibly with 
Presidential approval), nodded his assent. 
 
4.  (C)  Decertification, the Ambassador said, was 
essentially a done deal.  It would not be announced until 
early to mid-January, but the decision had been objectively 
based upon the GOG\'s performance, including the widespread 
use by traffickers of the ports (comment:  this was a 
deliberate zinger, as the President\'s personal secretary, 
Julio Giron, exercises de facto supervision over ports), and 
the poor performance against traffickers, including the 
failed raid in Zacapa, which clearly was leaked by someone in 
the GOG (comment:  another zinger).  Portillo\'s reaction to 
the latter was to agree that the failed raid was a shame and 
to suggest later in the conversation that the Public Ministry 
was to blame. 
 
5.  (C)  However, based on some recent positive steps the GOG 
had taken, the Ambassador said, it was likely that, in the 
absence of any egregious backsliding in the interim, the USG 
would approve a national interest waiver for Guatemala, thus 
avoiding any economic sanctions.  And, recertification during 
2003 was a possibility, but one that the GOG must earn 
through sustained, serious accomplishments.  They should 
start by complying with our six benchmarks. But the GOG would 
need to do much more to get recertified. (Note:  The 
President was unaware that former FonMin Orellana had told 
the Ambassador December 16 that his latest analysis was that 
the President could order the extradition of Marin Castillo, 
one of the six benchmarks for certification.  Gutierrez will 
see where the decision memo is -- but this illustrates the 
sloppy staffing of important issues in the GOG.) 
 
6.  (C)  The Ambassador said that decertification with a 
waiver would permit CAFTA negotiations to begin with 
Guatemala included (local rumor had Guatemala excluded) but 
he said it was politically awkward to decertify a country and 
begin free trade negotiations almost simultaneously.  That 
was why he had suggested to the Foreign Minister that we meet 
again in early January for a more structured discussion of 
the steps the GOG would need to take to be recertified and to 
clear the way for CAFTA approval.  Later in the dinner 
Portillo asked how the USG had analyzed the likely political 
consequences of decertification.  Would it increase or 
decrease his ability to govern effectively?  Would it hurt 
the traffickers or embolden them?  In his opinion, echoed by 
the Foreign Minister, decertification would weaken the 
reformist and positive elements in the GOG during the final 
and hardest year of his administration and would actually 
strengthen the drug cartels, whose beyond-the-reach-of-law 
status would only become more obvious.  It would also become 
a political issue, Portillo and Gutierrez admitted candidly, 
during an election year. 
 
7.  (C)  The Ambassador replied that we did not believe that 
decertification would weaken the reformists.  They were not 
the ones responsible for decertification.  Although the 
opposition and press would seize upon decertification, the 
GOG also had the opportunity to get recertified.  When 
Portillo complained that the system of criminal justice was 
penetrated and corrupted by the drug traffickers, tying his 
hands, the Ambassador responded that one of the weaknesses 
that puts the drug kingpins beyond reach is the lack of a 
criminal conspiracy statute.  Portillo and Gutierrez reacted 
positively to this, Portillo instructing Gutierrez to look 
into it.  The Ambassador suggested the GOG could best exert 
political damage control by reasserting its commitment to 
fighting drugs and its determination to win recertification 
through tough action.  It was in theory possible to win 
recertification before the November elections.  Portillo said 
the GOG would of course adopt the most positive public 
posture possible, as it had no other choice. 
 
------------ 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
8.  (C)  The Ambassador asked Portillo and Gutierrez why 
there was an increase in threats against human rights groups. 
 Portillo asked Gutierrez to respond; the Foreign Minister 
said the basic reason was that several of the human rights 
groups were involved in prosecutorial investigations that put 
at risk numerous former members of the military.  The latter 
responded with the actions and threats of clandestine groups. 
 Portillo added noted that some in the international 
community (comment:  an allusion to us) had called upon the 
government to use military intelligence (D-2) against the 
clandestine groups.  When previous governments had turned to 
the D-2 to carry out police investigations, however, the 
price was a lack of civilian control and human rights 
violations.  The DCM responded that our proposal was for the 
D-2 to provide only information to the appropriate police and 
public ministry officials, nothing more; if the D-2 refused 
to share such information, it certainly provided a test of 
civilian control of the military.  Shifting subjects, the 
President highlighted the impending reduction of some 150 
members (about 20 percent) of the EMP (Presidential Military 
Staff), a long overdue Peace Accords requirement.  (Comment: 
The President did announce this reduction the next day in the 
six-year anniversary commemoration of the Peace Accords 
(septel). 
 
------------ 
Transparency 
------------ 
 
9.  (C)  The recently created Transparency Commission, 
observed the Ambassador, was under considerable pressure to 
resign due to the President\'s charging the Commission with 
ensuring the transparency of the disbursement of funds to be 
collected through the (controversial) 750 million dollar 
Eurobond issue.  Could the President not assign this task to 
some other entity, and allow the private and public members 
of the Commission to focus on larger structural transparency 
issues?  The President agreed that this was a possibility, 
and that perhaps the GOG could instead use a private 
verification service to perform these functions.  The 
Ambassador then raised the lack of transparency and the size 
of the military budget -- two items that went against the 
Peace Accords, and also prevented the USG  -- along with 
other problems -- from having a normal relationship with the 
Guatemalan military.  Portillo agreed that the military 
budget needed more transparency, and said he would explore 
this (comment: a promise he has made before but never 
followed through on).  He disagreed, however, that the 
military budget had increased significantly in real terms 
since 1996 (comment:  according to Minugua, the 2002 budget 
is about 50 percent higher than the Peace Accords target of 
0.66 percent of GDP). 
----------------------------- 
American Citizen Murder Cases 
----------------------------- 
 
10.  The Ambassador said that, with another American citizen 
murdered in December, eleven U.S. citizens had been murdered 
in Guatemala in the last two years.  None has been solved. 
It is impossible to explain and justify the lack of progress 
in these cases to the families involved and to the Congress. 
 
-------------------- 
Election Observers 
------------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) Asked, Portillo told the Ambassador that the GOG 
would once again invite international election observers for 
the 2003 elections -- the campaign as well as election day 
itself.  He urged the US to work with the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal (TSE), which he described as new and inexperienced. 
(Comment:  WHA DAS Fisk signed our assistance agreement with 
the TSE in November.  Portillo\'s statement is positive in 
terms of assuring that the elections are free and fair.) 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
12.  (C) The meeting covered our most pressing issues with 
the GOG, and initiated the working relationship between the 
President and the Ambassador.  Portillo was polite and 
responsive, but was uncharacteristically subdued.  He showed 
little enthusiasm for his upcoming last year in office. 
Portillo is a complex personality; part of his positive and 
pragmatic side was to invite the Ambassador to this working 
dinner before the credentials ceremony.  The decertification 
decision, however, rankles him. He claimed that local 
misinterpretation of A/S Reich\'s HIRC testimony cost him a 
teaching job in Mexico after he leaves office in 2004 -- and 
his tendency will be to respond to it negatively.  We will 
keep working with FonMin Gutierrez to get the GOG to react in 
the most positive way possible.  On CAFTA, the President was 
relatively uniformed and unengaged.  He is probably 
personally suspicious of any process that might provide 
benefits to the private sector, in which a number of his 
enemies work.  At the same time, he doesn\'t want to be left 
behind by the rest of Central America.  All in all, not a bad 
first meeting, but genuine progress in all the areas 
discussed will not be easy. 
 
Hamilton 
"
"5014","1/8/2003 22:07","03GUATEMALA55","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, ALSO FOR D/HS, HOMELAND SECURITY GROUP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, CVIS, PREL, PGOV, APER, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: ESTABLISHMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WORKING GROUP 
 
REF: 02 STATE 263389 
 
1. Embassy Guatemala has established a Homeland Security 
Working Group (HSWG) comprising all the agencies at Post with 
law enforcement or security responsibilities, as well as 
appropriate Mission section heads.  The HSWG will ensure Post 
is able to coordinate its resources to provide Mission-wide 
support for \"Homeland Security Abroad\" initiatives.  The HSWG 
will meet every other week, or as needed, to implement 
instructions from Washington and to follow up on initiatives 
generated at post.  The HSWG will be chaired by the DCM, and 
the Political Section will serve as coordinator. 
 
2. The HSWG will work in close coordination with the EAC and 
other standing committees responsible for transnational crime 
issues, but will not replace those committees.  The Rule of 
Law Committee, the Visas Viper Committee, and the Narcotics 
and Corruption Committee will address issues that arise in 
their particular areas of responsibility, but that do not 
specifically involve threats to homeland security. The EAC 
will continue functioning normally, and will be able to 
invoke the HSWG if it determines the emergency it is 
addressing also involves a threat to homeland security. 
 
3.  In the immediate aftermath of the September 11 attacks, 
post set up a similar working group to coordinate 
Mission-wide responses to terrorism, with good results.  The 
Counter-Terrorism Working Group proved to be both responsive 
to Washington and adaptable to changing local conditions. 
The Homeland Security Working Group will make that function 
permanent. 
Hamilton 
"
"5015","1/8/2003 22:29","03GUATEMALA57","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, ETRD, MOPS, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE BERGER SUPPORTS CAFTA AND A 
REDUCTION OF THE MILITARY 
 
 
Classified By: A/DCM David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  In a tour d\'horizon with the Ambassador on 
January 7, PAN Presidential candidate Oscar Berger said that 
the PAN believes it will win the 2003 national elections, and 
that their priorities as a government would be completing 
negotiation of a free trade agreement with us, \"rightsizing\" 
the military and implementing the 1996 Peace Accords (without 
calling it that).  The Ambassador told Berger that addressing 
Guatemala\'s growing problem of violent common crime and the 
influence of the criminal mafias would be critical for the 
success of the next government, whoever is elected.  End 
summary. 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador and A/DCM had breakfast with 
center-right Partido Accion Nacional (PAN) presidential 
candidate Oscar Berger, and his campaign manager Eduardo 
Gonzalez on January 7.  Most polls show Berger significantly 
ahead of all other potential candidates in public preference; 
Guatemalan polls are notoriously inaccurate, however, and the 
elections remain almost ten months away.  Gonzalez noted, in 
that connection, that current polling is like asking a person 
who isn\'t hungry what he wants for dinner, implying that the 
PAN realizes current numbers are soft.  Berger enjoys 
considerable financial support from the private sector and 
growing popular support from those opposed to the ruling 
Frente Republicano Guatemalteco (FRG). 
 
THE UPCOMING ELECTIONS 
---------------------- 
3. (C)  Berger expressed confidence that the PAN will win the 
2003 national elections, noting that the polls show him 
considerably ahead of other potential contenders.  He 
believes FRG Secretary General and former strongman Efrain 
Rios Montt will not be a candidate, choosing instead to 
protect his legal immunity by running again for Congress 
where he is certain to win a seat.  Berger and Gonzalez both 
expressed concern that the ruling FRG would use government 
resources to leverage public support in the elections, and 
argued that OAS election observation needs to begin long 
before election day (Note: we understand the local OAS office 
is already in talks with the Supreme Electoral Tribunal on 
the possibility of an early OAS observation role in the 
elections. end note).  Berger believes the FRG will try to 
use financial payments to the former civil patrol members 
(ex-PACs) to buy their votes, and will manipulate the ongoing 
census to increase the FRG\'s representation in the 
legislature. 
 
4. (C) In response to the Ambassador\'s question regarding 
public divisions in the PAN, Berger remarked that he had 
decided, against the advise of some of this collaborators, to 
make concessions to party Secretary General Leonel Lopez in 
order to heal the wounds still dividing the party from the 
recent primary election.  He implied that he is prepared to 
offer Lopez much of the patronage he sought.  It was apparent 
from Gonzalez\'s reaction to this statement that the decision 
to make concessions to Lopez continues to divide Berger\'s 
team.  Berger also commented that he is meeting with small 
political parties from the full range of the political 
spectrum seeking to build a broad base of support.  He noted 
that he has already had positive responses from emerging 
political leaders Otto Perez Molina and Jorge Briz. 
 
5. (C) Berger believes that his election would ensure that 
all the countries of Central America have forward-looking 
pragmatic leaders, commenting that, following the elections 
of Maduro and Bolanos, the Portillo administration is last of 
a breed of populist authoritarians that used to rule the 
isthmus. 
 
CAFTA 
----- 
6. (C) The Ambassador told Berger that we believe a free 
trade agreement between Central America and the United States 
will revolutionize the countries of the isthmus, and will 
offer unprecedented opportunities for economic growth and 
poverty reduction.  Berger agreed, and said his presidency 
would fully support expedited negotiation of CAFTA, and 
expressed regret that the Portillo government has not 
invested more effort in the regional negotiation.  Berger, 
who travels frequently to El Salvador and maintains a strong 
relationship with President Flores, opined that El Salvador 
is significantly ahead of Guatemala in preparations for 
CAFTA, and argued that Guatemala had suffered from \"a poor 
negotiating team\" and lack of interest on the part of 
Portillo.  He promised that a PAN government would make CAFTA 
one of its highest priorities. 
 
THE FUTURE OF THE ARMED FORCES AND FIGHTING CRIME 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
7. (C) Prompted by the Ambassador, Berger mused about the 
future of the military in Guatemala, arguing that they 
currently have no role which justified their consumption of 
such a considerable part of the government\'s budget.  He said 
his own inclination is to eliminate the military altogether 
or turn it into a national guard \"like in Costa Rica,\" but 
his advisors disagree with him.  He said that if the military 
can not be abolished, it should be given a crime fighting 
role \"as in Honduras.\"  He said Portillo has come up with a 
plan to put 15,000 soldiers in a modified uniform on the 
streets to control crime, and Berger thinks that is a good 
idea.  The Ambassador noted that using the military in a 
police support role would violate the Peace Accords, and 
asked if that job could not better be done by the police. 
Berger took the point, but said that he believed military 
discipline was necessary to confront the overwhelming problem 
of violent crime. 
 
8. (C) The Ambassador asked Berger how he envisioned 
combating the organized crime mafias which currently have so 
much influence with the government, noting that the success 
of the next government will depend to a large extent on 
bringing violent crime and organized crime under control. 
Berger acknowledged that controlling the influence of 
organized crime is not going to be easy.  He said that when 
he travels for campaign rallies to Peten, Izabal and Zacapa 
(the heartland of narcotrafficking) he has to be very careful 
about who offers him security and who wants to be 
photographed with him, as he does not know to distinguish 
between local supporters and local druglords.  He said his 
own local campaign organizers are totally intimidated by the 
criminal mafias and often are scared to shield him from them 
when they want to participate in his rallies.  Berger said 
that his campaign would set up an intelligence section which 
would vet all names for public positions, so that his 
government would not come to power with debts or promises to 
give jobs to narco-traffickers. 
 
IMPLEMENTING THE PEACE ACCORDS (BY ANOTHER NAME) 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
9. (C) Berger said that the party is working diligently on 
drawing up a plan of government, and that the basis for the 
PAN campaign platform would be the \"essence\" of the 1996 
Peace Accords.  Berger commented that there was no national 
consensus to back the accords, generating resistance to plans 
which bear the \"Peace Accord\" label.  He said that the PAN 
platform would parallel the Peace Accords closely, but that 
it would not make explicit reference to the Accords. 
 
REGIONAL INTEGRATION 
-------------------- 
10. (C) Berger disparaged the Central American Parliament 
(PARLACEN) for not being anything more than a hide out for 
third rate politicians and crooks.  He said that it was the 
most worthless of the more than 60 Central American 
integration organizations, and it absorbed more money than 
all the other institutions put together.  He said that 
governments found it to be a convenient way of providing 
patronage, however, and he does not see any initiative to 
abolish it. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
11. (C) Berger was very much at ease, and discussed his goals 
for addressing national issues with greater depth and 
self-confidence than in the earlier stages of his campaign. 
He wanted to project himself as someone who shares many of 
our same values, and someone we could work with to transform 
Guatemala through free trade and greater cooperation against 
transnational crime.  Despite early poll results favorable to 
Berger, the outcome of the election is far from predictable. 
That said, disaffection with the current FRG government has 
led many, at this early stage of the campaign, to see Berger 
as the most viable alternative. 
Hamilton 
"
"5031","1/9/2003 21:59","03GUATEMALA64","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000064 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, AMGT, APER, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR HAMILTON PRESENTS CREDENTIALS 
 
1. Ambassador John R. Hamilton presented credentials to 
President Alfonso Portillo in a ceremony at the National 
Palace on the morning of January 8, 2003. 
 
2. Following his presentation of Credentials, Ambassador 
Hamilton made the following statement to the press: 
 
In the course of the ceremony in which I presented my 
credentials, I expressed to President Portillo my 
determination to take every opportunity to support Guatemala 
in the construction of a more democratic, more peaceful, and 
more prosperous future for the Guatemalan people. 
 
Our countries have a long history of close cooperation in 
promoting our mutual interests and in meeting the challenges 
we share. I declared to President Portillo my desire to see 
that the ties of cooperation that link our countries not only 
continue, but become stronger and deeper. 
 
Today is an apt time to reflect upon the relationship between 
the United States and Guatemala, because negotiations begin 
today for a free trade agreement between the United States and 
Central America. This agreement offers a new opportunity for 
our peoples. Free trade brings greatest benefits to countries 
that have an environment of transparency and respect for the 
rule of law. I sincerely hope the Government of Guatemala will 
undertake more concrete actions to respond to these challenges 
in the coming months. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"5032","1/9/2003 22:44","03GUATEMALA66","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE253570","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR HR/CDA/MLSP LINDA OBRIEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AOMS, APER, AMGT, AFSI, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA NOMINEE FOR THE 2003 OMS CONFERENCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 253570 
 
1. Embassy Guatemala would like to nominate Paula C Wikle for 
the 2003 OMS Conference to be held March 16 through March 22 
in Washington, DC. 
 
2. Information on nominee is as follows: Paula C. Wikle, 
FP-06, Political Section OMS. 
Embassy Guatemala is a mid-sized embassy with 4 FS OMS 
assigned. 
 
 
Thank you. 
Hamilton 
"
"5049","1/10/2003 16:44","03GUATEMALA73","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, PM/B, DEFENSE FOR CHAIRS, 
USDP-DSCA, JOINT STAFF FOR J-5 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, MASS, MCAP, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: URC-119 RADIO REQUEST FOR GUATEMALAN MILITARY 
 
1. Summary and Action Request:  Embassy requests State 
Department and Defense Security Cooperation Agency 
concurrence to transfer one URC - 119 High Frequency Radio 
set to the Guatemalan Military through the Excess Defense 
Articles Program. The radio\'s purpose is to enhance natural 
disaster response capabilities by upgrading and better 
integrating regional communications.  After careful 
consideration, Post has concluded that the benefits of this 
particular transfer outweigh reservations about Guatemalan 
military performance on key issues.  End Summary. 
 
2.  The proposed transfer is part of a region-wide upgrade 
aimed at providing an Automatic Link Establishment (ALE) 
capability to the High Frequency Radio network used by the 
System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces 
(SICOFAA).  ALE-capable equipment continuously assesses and 
adjusts the quality of HF radio links allowing them to be 
reliably used for digital data transfers.  Guatemala and 
Nicaragua are the only countries in the SICOFAA system 
without ALE capable HF radios.  Post understands that an URC 
- 119 radio has been approved for Nicaragua.  Providing the 
same ALE-capable radio to the Guatemalan Military would 
significantly enhance the ability of the U.S. Air Force to 
communicate and coordinate with the Guatemalan Air Force in 
the event of a large-scale natural disaster.  The radio is 
not well-suited for communications within Guatemala and the 
possibility that it could be used for purposes other than 
intended is remote. 
 
3.  Under current sanctions, EDA is available to Guatemala on 
a case-by-case basis.  The last EDA transfer to Guatemala 
occurred in 1997 and consisted of medical supplies worth 525 
thousand USD.  The value of the proposed radio transfer is 
9,404 USD, broken down as follows: 
 
AM-7223 Amplifier             $2,269 
RF-7210A ALE (Controller)     $3,093 
RT-1446 Radio                 $4,042. 
 
The antenna set that is normally included in a complete URC - 
119, will not be part of the proposed transfer as the 
Guatemalan Air Force already has a suitable set in its 
inventory. 
 
4. The above equipment is already physically located in 
Guatemala.  It was used to provide a demonstration of ALE 
capabilities during the Chiefs of American Air Forces 
Conference (CONJEFAMER) held in Guatemalan on May 21, 2002, 
and is currently being stored by the MilGroup Commander. 
 
5. Comment and Action Request:  Post carefully considered the 
risk of sending mixed signals to the Guatemalan Military 
before deciding to go forward with the request for 
authorization to make the transfer.  Guatemala\'s significant 
exposure to natural disasters and its geographic proximity to 
the U.S. argue for USG efforts to mitigate such disasters 
wherever it can be done in ways that do not violate other US 
interests.  The proposed transfer is not precedent-setting as 
EDA assistance has been provided to the Guatemalan Military 
in recent years.  The chance that this system could be used 
for purposes other than enhanced regional communication is 
negligible.  The cost of the proposed transfer is quite small 
and the equipment is already in country.  Based on these 
points, Post requests Department approval to transfer this 
equipment to thet Guatemalan Military.  Please advise. 
Hamilton 
"
"5053","1/10/2003 18:18","03GUATEMALA77","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000077 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, EAID, PGOV, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND MINUGUA CHIEF TOUR D\'HORIZON 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador and USAID Director met 
with MINUGUA Chief Koenigs, who was thankful for USG support 
on extension of MINUGUA\'s mandate through 2004, and was 
cautiously optimistic about further implementation of the 
Peace Accords.  The Ambassador discussed possible 
counternarcotics decertification, CAFTA negotiations, and 
donor collaboration in the Consultative Group.  Koenigs 
described MINUGUA\'s priorities for 2003-2004, which include a 
very limited electoral monitoring role, and said MINUGUA 
would have little to contribute to an investigation of 
clandestine groups in Guatemala.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) On January 6, Ambassador Hamilton, USAID Director 
Anders and USAID Coordinator Reisman paid a courtesy call on 
MINUGUA Representative Tom Koenigs, his deputy Maria 
Maldonado and assistant Jens Urban.  The discussion was 
wide-ranging and cordial in tone. 
 
Grateful for Extended Mandate 
----------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Koenigs thanked the Ambassador warmly for USG 
support for extending MINUGUA\'s mandate to the end of 2004 
and outlined MINUGUA\'s priority agenda for its remaining two 
years, namely human rights, indigenous advancement, and 
demilitarization.  MINUGUA\'s focus will be on 
capacity-building of local institutions, and all human rights 
case verifications will be conducted jointly between MINUGUA 
and the Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman (PDH).  Koenigs 
said he would propose to UN headquarters that all field 
officers work exclusively in local capacity building in 2004. 
 
 
Upbeat on Accords; Concerned About \"Differences In Agenda\" 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Koenigs said he was optimistic about prospects for 
progress on Peace Accords implementation in the remaining 
year of the Portillo Administration, despite the challenges 
ahead.  Koenigs highlighted MINUGUA\'s successes and ongoing 
efforts to urge the government to adhere to key elements of 
the peace agenda.   He cited the importance of the 
Consultative Group process and meeting in Guatemala later 
this year.  The Ambassador pledged support for the donor 
consensus in the CG while noting we had some doubts over the 
value of a CG with an outgoing government. 
 
4.  (SBU) Koenigs referred to a perceived \"difference in 
agenda\" between the USG and MINUGUA, particularly in the area 
of security and demilitarization.  On the security issue, 
Koenigs said that although personal security is the top 
concern of the majority of Guatemalans, Guatemala lacks a 
\"Giuliani\" to help address law enforcement problems.  He was 
critical of the performance of the National Civil Police 
(PNC), citing \"stupidity\" as \"half of the problem.\"  Koenigs 
also noted that the PNC did not receive adequate resources 
(and international donor support was limited) and was 
consistently overshadowed by the military. 
 
5.  (SBU) Koenigs said that MINUGUA is particularly concerned 
about \"remilitarization\" and the growing power of the 
military (he cited joint patrolling with PNC, potential role 
in maritime patrols, etc.).  While claiming a good working 
relationship with the military, particularly the Minister of 
Defense, Koenigs nonetheless believes that civilian oversight 
and control is weak at best.   Koenigs also expressed concern 
that no security body be set up outside of civilian control 
(Comment: perhaps alluding to Presidential candidate Oscar 
Berger\'s idea to convert the Army into a \"gendarmerie-like\" 
institution.  End Comment.).  Koenigs credited the GOG for 
its announced plan to demobilize the EMP, but expressed 
concern that the EMP\'s civilian presidential security 
replacement (SAAS), might be vulnerable to a security 
incident intended to undermine its political viability. 
 
6.  (SBU) The Ambassador doubted that we actually have a 
difference in agenda.  He explained current restrictions on 
our mil-mil relationship, i.e., regular IMET and FMF being 
prohibited by law.  He said we will have a frank dialogue 
with the Guatemalan military on human rights, transparency in 
the military budget and on the need for the military to be 
apolitical.  Thus, the Ambassador said, we see no difference 
in agenda. 
 
7.  (SBU) Koenigs asked the Ambassador how USG narcotics 
decertification would affect the GOG.  The Ambassador 
explained the possibility of a national interest waiver and 
said we will seek GOG participation in a Central Amercian 
Free Trade Agreement regardless.   The Ambassador told 
Koenigs that while there was obvious tension in our bilateral 
relationship due to our concerns over corruption and 
narco-trafficking, we have every intention of making progress 
in these areas and in the overall bilateral relationship. 
 
Sees Limited MINUGUA Role in Elections Observation 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
8.  (SBU) Koenigs said that MINUGUA sees itself playing a 
very limited role in elections monitoring -- since its field 
presence and capacity are now so limited.  He said the OAS 
and the EU (which is well advanced in planning an observer 
mission) must take the lead role in elections monitoring. 
(Note:  USAID is funding part of the OAS\' broader voter 
outreach effort and is gathering more information on other 
OAS and EU plans for election monitoring.  End Note.)  Since 
Guatemala\'s last two elections have been largely free and 
fair, Koenigs does not expect UN headquarters to mount an 
observation mission in 2003 unless it receives a specific 
request from the GOG.  Were MINUGUA asked to take a more 
prominent role in elections monitoring, he said, it would 
need additional resources. 
9.  (SBU) When pressed about a possible Rios Montt candidacy, 
Koenigs commented that he guessed it to be a \"50/50\" 
possibility, particularly now given his hold on the Army 
through his son\'s recent promotion.  Koenigs said he was 
under strict orders from UN headquarters not to comment 
publicly on the validity of specific candidacies, 
particularly if Rios Montt were to be cleared to run by the 
Constitutional Court. 
 
Concerned About Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Koenigs lauded the Department\'s annual Human 
Rights Report for Guatemala and commended the Embassy\'s 
continuing concern and emphasis on human rights and 
implementation of the Peace Accords.  Koenigs expressed 
concern about recent extrajudicial killings and threats 
against indigenous leaders.  The style of the attacks clearly 
indicate involvement of individuals trained in military 
techniques. 
 
11.  (SBU) Turning to the proposal from human rights groups 
to mount a commission to investigate clandestine groups and 
activities in Guatemala, Koenigs was distinctly 
unenthusiastic about MINUGUA collaboration and about any such 
commission\'s prospects for success.  Koenigs stated flatly 
that, despite mention of the worrisome existence of 
clandestine groups in its most recent report, MINUGUA does 
not have specific information on clandestine groups, could 
not take on the task of verifying the existence of these 
groups without additional resources, and currently would not 
have much to contribute to such an investigation. 
Furthermore, Koenigs said that the Salvador death squad 
commission being promoted as a model for this commission was 
considered to have been largely ineffective by the UN. 
Comment 
------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Koenigs, who has a background in Green Party 
politics before working for the UN for three years in Bosnia, 
seems a littled surprised but pleased to be so closely allied 
with the U.S. in Guatemala, his (mis)perceptions of 
\"differences in agenda\" notwithstanding.  This initial 
meeting was useful in clarifying some of those perceptions, 
and setting a cooperative tone for collaboration in the 
run-up to the Consultative Group meeting.  Koenig\'s 
misgivings about a commission to investigate clandestine 
groups seem to stem from an understandable concern to prevent 
further MINUGUA mandate-creep at a time when it is beginning 
its phase-out. 
 
Hamilton 
"
"5087","1/13/2003 18:31","03GUATEMALA82","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03SECSTATE5849","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, DRL, AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, LY, GT, UNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA CONSULTING INTERNALLY ON LIBYAN CHAIR OF 
59TH CHR; SENDING NEW AMBASSADOR TO GENEVA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 5849 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reason 1.5 (b). 
 
Libya as Chair of UNCHR 
------------------------ 
 
1. (C) Embassy raised reftel points with the MFA Director for 
Multilateral Affairs Sylvia Corado on January 9.  Corado 
expressed her personal dismay with Libya chairing the UNCHR, 
but said that the GOG had not decided how it would respond to 
this unprecedented situation.  Corado noted that Foreign 
Minister Gutierrez had only been in office ten days and had 
not been able to focus much on multilateral issues due to 
\"growing problems in the bilateral relationship with the U.S. 
and the EU.\"  Further complicating the matter is the fact 
that Guatemala is currently without an Ambassador in Geneva 
(see below).  Given the importance of the issue, Corado said 
that Foreign Minister Gutierrez would want to formulate 
Guatemala\'s position himself and that he would probably 
consult President Portillo before making any final decisions. 
 She promised to apprise him of our concerns.  Although time 
is short, Corado was confident that Gutierrez would formalize 
Guatemala\'s position well in advance of the election in 
Geneva on January 20. 
 
New Guatemalan Ambassador to Geneva 
----------------------------------- 
 
2. (U)  Foreign Minister Gutierrez has named Ronalth Ivan 
OCHAETA Argueta, a personal friend who has served for the 
last six months as Director of the OAS office in Lima, Peru, 
as Guatemala\'s new Ambassador to Geneva.  According to the 
Foreign Ministry,  Gutierrez made the decision to nominate 
Ochaeta on January 7.  Ochaeta is expected to take up his 
duties as early as mid-January.  Ochaeta\'s diplomatic career 
began in March of 2000 when he was named Ambassador to the 
OAS by President Portillo.  His connection to Gutierrez stems 
from their work together as Human Rights leaders.  Ochaeta 
and Gutierrez worked together on the REMHI report under the 
Auspices of the Catholic Church.  Ochaeta worked for the 
ArchBishop\'s Office for Human Rights (ODHA) for six years. 
Ochaeta is a lawyer, 38 years old and married (NFI).  He 
holds a Master\'s Degree in International Law.  We have not 
heard why the GOG decided not to send Ambassador Rivera 
(formerly the GOG Ambassador in Washington) to Geneva as 
earlier announced. 
Hamilton 
"
"5113","1/14/2003 16:32","03GUATEMALA91","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE8893","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000091 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, CVIS, KWMN, SMIG, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: G/TIP INVITEE CONFIRMED:  ANA CARPIO ALFARO 
 
REF: STATE 8893 
 
1.  Reftel invitation to the February 23-25 international 
conference entitled \"Pathbreaking Strategies in the Global 
Fight Against Sex Trafficking\" was delivered on January 13 to 
Ana Ignez Carpio Alfaro, International Correspondent for 
Telemundo based in Guatemala.  Ms. Carpio accepted the 
invitation and USG funding for travel and per diem expenses 
with pleasure. 
 
2.  Ms. Carpio\'s DPOB is 18 October 1967, in Montevideo, 
Uruguay.  She holds Guatemalan citizenship, and has no CLASS 
hits. 
 
3.  Embassy G/TIP point of contact, PolOff Erik Hall, 
explained to Carpio that she will soon be contacted directly 
by Gordon James, Inc. and offered to facilitate her 
application for a visa, which is at her own expense. 
 
Hamilton 
"
"5118","1/14/2003 22:16","03GUATEMALA102","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, PINR, MASS, PGOV, SNAR, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES MILITARY-TO-MIILTARY 
RELATIONSHIP WITH MOD 
 
 
Classified By: DATT COL RICHARD NAZARIO FOR REASON 1.5 (A) AND (D). 
 
 1.  (C) Summary: During an introductory call on MOD Robin 
Moran, the Ambassador restated USG policy in dealing with the 
Guatemalan military and reviewed the benchmarks for possibly 
establishing normal military-to-military relations.  The 
Ambassador said that the military needs to improve its human 
rights performance, especially its cooperation with other 
agencies, show positive results in curtailing illegal 
activities, and increase transparency in the military budget. 
 The MOD acknowledged the problems in the bilateral 
relationship and agreed that more needs to be done.  End 
summary. 
 
2.  (U) On 9 January, 2003, Ambassador Hamilton paid an 
introductory call on Minister of Defense, Major General Robin 
Moran  The meeting took place at the MOD\'s office; the 
Ambassador was accompanied by DATT and the MILGROUP Commander. 
 
3.  (C) The Ambassador began by telling the MOD frankly that 
the Guatemalan military continues to have a negative image in 
the USG, based largely on the human rights abuses committed 
during the internal conflict, the lack of cooperation in 
ongoing investigations into these atrocities, and deeply 
ingrained corruption.  The Ambassador noted that there is a 
perception that, in the last couple of years, the military 
has moved backwards in terms of human rights protection and 
budget transparency.  As a result, the current USG 
restrictions, which prevent normal military-to-military 
relations in terms of training, FMF and other military 
assistance, will remain in place.  When the Guatemalan 
military shows significant progress and complies with the six 
benchmarks (see para 11) that we have previously discussed, 
the U.S. Executive would be prepared to advocate lifting the 
restrictions with the Congress. 
 
4.  (C) The Ambassador noted that one of his personal goals 
while in Guatemala is to see Guatemalan military performance 
improve to such an extent that compelling arguments could be 
made for restoring a full military-to-military relationship. 
He said that it is up to the Guatemalan military, however, to 
show that they have reformed to such an extent as to merit a 
restored relationship. 
 
5.  (C) The Ambassador told the MOD that there is a high 
probability that Guatemala will be decertified based on poor 
counter-narcotics cooperation, and that this would affect 
other areas of the bilateral relationship.  The Ambassador 
noted that recertification could be possible, even in the 
current year, but would take a determined effort by the 
government to deal effectively with this problem.  The 
Ambassador said to the MOD that it is imperative that the 
military redirect its priorities and resources, and increase 
cooperation with other government agencies to combat drug 
trafficking together and show positive results.  The 
Ambassador also told the MOD that the military needs to 
cashier corrupt officers and eliminate the influence that 
some retired military officers have over military matters 
such as promotions, assignments and operations.  He also 
mentioned the imperative to do all possible to put an end to 
threats against the Guatemalan human rights community. 
 
6.  (C) An apparently sincere MOD thanked the Ambassador for 
his frankness and his candid observations regarding the 
weaknesses of the military.  The MOD said that these types of 
criticism have provided him with ammunition he needed to 
fight corruption and eliminate \"bad apples.\"  The MOD 
explained that he had used recent declarations made by US 
officials about parallel forces and corruption to get 
authorization from President Portillo to remove from active 
duty several senior officers allegedly involved in 
corruption. 
 
7.  (C) The MOD described other initiatives that the military 
is taking to professionalize the institution, such as a major 
restructuring that will involve the reduction of 
approximately 6,000 members of the Armed Forces and the 
closure of several military installations around the country. 
 This restructuring will save money in salaries and overhead 
maintenance of the installations.  The money saved could be 
used to improve quality of life, training and equipment.  The 
MOD said that the personnel reduction involves approximately 
1,000 officers and 5,000 enlisted personnel and specialists. 
The MOD noted that he was promised a budget allocation by 
April to compensate officers and specialists for their 
services and to contribute to their retirement pensions.  In 
response to the Ambassador\'s question about how these 
officers will be selected for retirement, the MOD said that 
an honor selection board will be formed to review each 
officer\'s record and standard of living.  Those officers with 
a record of bad performance or who cannot justify their 
standard of living based on their salaries or other 
legitimate income will be removed first. 
 
8.  (C) The MOD tried to justify the need for secrecy of the 
military budget in order to be able to protect the country, 
and the lack of more active participation by the military in 
anti-narcotics operations based on scarce resources.  The 
Ambassador responded that there are several ways to justify 
the military expenditures and budget to their Congress while 
maintaining legitimate state secrets.  In regard to the lack 
of resources, the Ambassador suggested that the military 
needs to be more aggressive in working with the judicial 
system and other government institutions to find ways to use 
seized assets from anti-narcotics operations, such as boats 
and airplanes, against illegal traffickers. 
 
9.  (C) The MOD stated to the Ambassador that on December 31, 
2002, he traveled to Mexico accompanied by the Minister of 
Government to meet with their counterparts in order to 
increase regional cooperation in the fight against narcotics 
traffickers.  The MOD stated that the pledge for cooperation 
between both countries was put to the test immediately upon 
his return when the Mexican Navy was allowed to enter 
Guatemalan waters in pursuit of narco-traffickers, and 
captured two go-fast boats and over 2,200 kilos of cocaine. 
The MOD said that he needs more resources and intelligence 
cooperation to be able to be more responsive to these types 
of operations.  The Ambassador stated that based on current 
restrictions, the Guatemalan military should not count on any 
US material assistance other than advice and intelligence 
cooperation, but instead the military should seek increased 
regional cooperation and reprioritize use of their current 
resources. 
 
10. (C) Comment: The Minister of Defense clearly values the 
relationship with the USG, and was open in acknowledging the 
problems that have kept the bilateral military-to-military 
relationship at a low in recent years.  While anxious to work 
with us to improve the relationship, particularly in reducing 
the influence of former military officers and in increasing 
military cooperation against transnational criminal threats, 
Moran did not suggest that the GOG is moving to address the 
specific benchmarks for restoring IMET and FMF.  We will 
continue to use his interest in a better relationship with us 
to seek concrete action on the benchmarks during the coming 
months. 
 
11. (C)  In the interest of comprehensiveness, the six 
benchmarks are: 
--  Military cooperation with investigation into human rights 
abuses committed during the internal conflict; 
--  Disbandment of the EMP; 
--  Removal of certain key officers implicated in corrupt 
activities, human rights offenses, or organized crime; 
--  Full military cooperation and intelligence sharing with 
the USG against narcotics, alien smuggling and terrorism; 
--  Cooperation of the military (D-2) with civilian 
authorities to identify individuals and groups harassing 
human rights workers and provide intelligence; 
--  Military recognition of congressional (civilian) 
oversight of their budget. 
Hamilton 
"
"5162","1/16/2003 16:22","03GUATEMALA127","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","02GUATEMALA2605","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/16/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S INITIAL CALL ON HELEN MACK 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 2605 
 
     B. 02 GUATEMALA 2970 
     C. 02 GUATEMALA 3275 
 
Classified By: HR Off, Katharine Read, for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (U) Summary: The Ambassador paid an introductory call on 
Helen Mack at the Myrna Mack Foundation on January 13.  They 
discussed the proposal to investigate clandestine groups, the 
impending decertification decision, the Consultative Group 
meeting, the status of the Mack case, and recent wave of 
violence.  After a cordial discussion, the Ambassador held a 
brief question and answer session with the press in which he 
reiterated support for human rights groups and concern over a 
\"deteriorating human rights situation.\"  See paragraph 14 for 
account of efforts we are making to support the proposal to 
investigate clandestine groups. End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador, accompanied by PolOff and HROff, 
visited the Myrna Mack Foundation on January 13 to meet with 
prominent justice and human rights advocate Helen Mack.  Mack 
had not been able to attend the Ambassador\'s initial meeting 
with human rights groups on December 20 (Ref C).  Mack began 
by thanking the Ambassador for his visit and his vocal 
support of human rights workers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Questions about the Investigative Commission Proposal 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3. (C) Mack invited the Ambassador to attend the press 
conference that the Human Rights Ombudsman, Sergio Morales, 
is hosting on January 16, to present to the GOG and the 
public a proposal to investigate clandestine groups.  The 
Ambassador asked Mack if the human rights community had 
decided on a specific date range for the scope of the 
investigative commission (Ref B), what the legal status of 
the commission would be, and if Sergio Morales would be the 
public leader of the proposal after his press conference.  He 
also asked why Morales chose January 16 for his public 
announcement and what kind of responses the human rights 
leaders had received from GOG entities so far. 
 
4. (C) Mack said that the human rights community now agrees 
that the scope of the investigative commission should be from 
January of 1996 to the present.  Mack said the legal status 
of the commission is still negotiable, but that the 
international status of the commission would guarantee its 
integrity and freedom to operate in the country. 
 
5. (C) Turning to the Ombudsman\'s role, Mack said it is clear 
that Morales knows it is in his professional interest to ask 
for this commission and to embrace the human rights 
community, but he is also concerned about his personal 
safety.  Mack implied that, although Morales will lead the 
call for a commission, the human rights community will 
continue to play a major role in ensuring that the commission 
is set up and can do its work. 
 
6. (C) Mack said the Ombudsman chose January 16 to make the 
proposal public because the human rights community calculated 
that U.S. counter-narcotics decertification was imminent and 
that the GOG might support the creation of the commission in 
order to regain favor with the USG and the international 
community.  Mack asked the Ambassador if he would consider 
negotiating a decertification waiver in exchange for 
acceptance of the commission by the FRG leadership.  The 
Ambassador explained that decertification is a unilateral 
decision of the USG and will not be negotiated with the GOG. 
However, he pledged our continued support for the commission 
and told Mack he will attend the Ombudsman\'s event launching 
the proposal on January 16. 
 
7. (C) Mack, who has a close personal relationship with Vice 
President Reyes because of her past experience as a 
businesswoman and Opus Dei member, told the Ambassador that 
she had solicited Reyes\' support for the commission, arguing 
that it offers the FRG an opportunity to distance itself from 
the Portillo administration.  Mack said that while he did not 
make any commitments, Reyes is \"open\" to the idea.  He is the 
only member of the GOG whom Mack has consulted. 
 
------------------ 
Consultative Group 
------------------ 
 
8. (SBU) Mack and the Ambassador agreed that a Consultative 
Group meeting could be useful to promote further steps toward 
completion of the peace accord goals.  The Ambassador 
mentioned the USG concern that, if the Consultative Group 
meeting were held now, Portillo would try to manipulate it 
for electoral ends.  However, as MINUGUA and civil society 
are strongly in favor of another Consultative Group meeting 
during this administration, the Ambassador said the USG 
accepts the idea.  He added that we will push to have 
opposition political parties involved so that they too will 
buy into the Consultative Group\'s conclusions and 
recommendations. 
 
---------------- 
Mack Case Status 
---------------- 
 
9. (SBU) The Ambassador asked Mack about the status of her 
cases against the GOG in the Inter-American Court on Human 
Rights (IACHR) and against the three military officers in the 
domestic courts (Ref A).  She said that the trial in the 
IACHR is set for February 18-20 and that she and her lawyers 
are busy preparing for the oral debate.  The sentence the 
domestic courts issued in October finding Colonel Valencia 
Osorio guilty and General Godoy Gaitan and Colonel Oliva 
Carrera innocent is currently in the appeals court, as both 
the defense and the prosecution have appealed.  Mack said the 
three possibilities from this appeals process are that the 
court will annul the sentence, confirm the sentence, or find 
all three officers guilty.  Mack is hoping for the 
condemnation of all three, but hopes that at the very least 
the sentence will be confirmed. 
 
---------------- 
Renewed Violence 
---------------- 
 
10. (SBU) The Ambassador shared with Mack his concern over 
the recent shootings of judges and threats against human 
rights workers.  In the past three weeks there have been a 
string of murders or attempted murders against prominent 
individuals, including a former Minister of Defense, former 
President of Congress, and two sitting judges.  He asked her 
what she thought of the murder of Judge Hector Mauricio 
Rodriguez, who was killed on January 12.  Mack replied that 
even though he was an administrative judge and the Supreme 
Court President said that Rodriguez was not involved in 
\"conflictive cases,\" he was the presiding judge in the Maycom 
and Telgua telecommunications corruption cases.  She said 
Rodriguez had received previous threats from his work in the 
Criminal Court, which is why he was carrying a gun at the 
time of his shooting. 
 
11. (C) Mack believes the threats against human rights 
activists Orlando Blanco and Claudia Samayoa, as well as the 
blatant surveillance of Ombudsman Morales\' daughters, are all 
connected to the proposal to investigate clandestine groups. 
She thinks members of these groups are threatened by the idea 
of an international investigation and are seeking to 
intimidate its proponents.  The Ambassador pledged to 
continue to support human rights workers publicly and to call 
on the government to investigate these incidents. 
 
------------------------ 
Press gets a Firm Pledge 
------------------------ 
 
12. (U) At the conclusion of the meeting, Ambassador Hamilton 
had a brief question-and-answer session with the press. 
Leading daily Prensa Libre published the following excerpt 
from his statements: 
 
\"This (human rights) situation is troubling; after years of 
improvement, it is deteriorating.  We want to see advances 
and a situation in which there are neither threats nor 
political violence.  You can be sure that our support (for 
human rights groups) is going to continue.\" 
 
The article also mentioned that Ambassador Hamilton was 
concerned about recent acts of violence in the capital and 
that he has expressed confidence that the Public Ministry 
would investigate the murder of Judge Rodriguez as well as 
other violent crimes. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
13. (C) The Ambassador\'s meeting with Helen Mack highlighted 
continued USG support for human rights groups but revealed 
that the human rights community does not seem to have a firm 
grasp on where the money will come from (note: Mack mentioned 
MINUGUA transition funds or UN Operations funds), how to 
lobby the GOG (other than Mack\'s effective relationship with 
Reyes), or who will effectively lead the proposal to its 
fruition. 
 
14. (C) Although the proposal is no panacea for the problem 
of clandestine groups, we believe it has merit and are 
encouraging the GOG and the FRG to support it.  To that end, 
the Ambassador spoke by phone with President Portillo January 
14, Portillo responding that the GOG would indeed back the 
proposal (we shall see).  The Ambassador also pitched the 
proposal to Attorney General Carlos de Leon (on whose turf 
the commission would intrude) and to FRG Deputy Zury Rios 
Sosa (septel).  De Leon expressed qualified support, noting 
that legal niceties had to be respected in giving an 
international mechanism authority to investigate.  Rios said 
the FRG \"would not oppose\" but resisted being coaxed into a 
more positive position pending consultation with the party. 
The Ambassador will also raise the subject with the Foreign 
Minister and Vice President, both of whom have been at the 
Gutierrez inaugural in Quito.  We are also encouraging 
support from the Guatemalan private sector and from 
colleagues in the Diplomatic community.  In that vein, 
MINUGUA Director Tom Koenigs was more positive about the 
commission in a January 14 meeting with the Consultative 
Group Dialogue Group than he had been in a meeting January 6 
with the Ambassador.  End Comment. 
Hamilton 
"
"5164","1/16/2003 17:41","03GUATEMALA128","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","02GUATEMALA2891","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: PAN IN THE PROCESS OF OVERCOMING INTERNAL RIVALRY 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 2891 
 
     B. 02 GUATEMALA 2977 
     C. 02 GUATEMALA 3158 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Erik Hall for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  The National Advancement Party\'s two rival 
leaders, presidential candidate Oscar Berger and party 
Secretary General Leonel Lopez Rodas, announced their accord 
 
SIPDIS 
to work together in support of Berger\'s presidential 
candidacy.  In a symbolic media event on January 13, 
bulldozers demolished a cement block wall between PAN 
headquarters and the adjacent Berger campaign office.  The 
deal worked out between the two men consolidates the support 
of Lopez loyalists for Berger\'s presidential candidacy in 
exchange for Berger\'s support for other candidacies backed by 
Lopez.  While details about the deal are partial, they 
apparently include an even split of Congressional 
candidacies, consensual decision-making in the PAN\'s 
executive committee, and future consideration of an accord on 
the vice presidency and mayoralty of the capital.  Key 
private sector backers of Berger are happy with the accord, 
and some hope Berger will now reach outside the PAN in 
selecting his running-mate.  By assuring party unity for the 
moment, the agreement between the two men boosts Berger\'s 
presidential prospects.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The PAN\'s November primary generated significant 
animosity between the two leaders of the Party -- Oscar 
Berger and Leonel Lopez (see RefTels -- and neither side 
sought a rapprochement with the other in the early days after 
the election.  Despite Berger\'s overwhelming primary victory, 
Lopez Rodas continued to exercise significant control over 
the party organization through his influence with its local 
affiliates and his majority in the party\'s Executive 
Committee.  Several of Berger\'s financial backers echoed the 
views of a Prensa Libre editorial calling on Berger to broker 
peace with Lopez in order to preserve party unity.  They 
argued that Berger\'s unwillingness to make concessions to 
Lopez threatened to split the party, making a loss in the 
national elections more likely. 
 
The Deal:  Lopez Rodas\' Version 
------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) Leonel Lopez Rodas told us on January 12 that he and 
Oscar Berger had reached a firm agreement on the following: 
 
--  They will name an equal number of congressional 
candidates on the national list with Berger getting even 
numbers and Lopez getting odd numbers.  The same applies to 
the list for congressmen representing Guatemala City. 
 
--  Mauricio Urruela (a Lopez supporter) is the candidate for 
mayor of Guatemala City (for now).  He will receive the full 
support of the party.  In early April, the PAN will conduct a 
poll, and if it looks as if Urruela will not win, he will be 
replaced by Berger\'s candidate, Eduardo Castillo. 
 
--  Lopez Rodas is the favorite to become the Vice 
Presidential candidate.  However, if by April it looks as if 
the PAN needs to bring in someone from outside to boost their 
chances, then Lopez and Berger will make a decision on who to 
ultimately fill this slot. 
 
-- Lopez considers Berger\'s campaign manager, banker Eduardo 
Gonzalez, to be the main barrier to effective communication 
and collaboration between his camp and Berger\'s.  Lopez 
believes Gonzalez has been the strongest advocate of not 
making concessions to Lopez that could later undermine 
Berger\'s ability to carry out his own plan of government if 
elected. 
 
The Deal:  View from Berger Supporters 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) The Berger-Lopez Rodas agreement is viewed somewhat 
differently by Berger supporters.  Carlos Arias, CACIF\'s 
Labor Commission chief and purportedly a political strategist 
for Berger\'s major sponsors, gave PolOff a different account 
of the Berger-Lopez Rodas deal in a discussion on January 10. 
 The sponsors, which Arias refers to as the \"organized 
private sector\" (SPO), is comprised of the Gutierrez-Bosch 
clan and others, including Peter Lamport, who acts as the 
group\'s international affairs person.  Cement king Enrique 
Novella was part of the team before he died in a plane crash 
in El Salvador late in 2002.  According to Arias: 
 
--  The SPO is happy that Berger has accommodated Lopez 
Rodas.  The deal includes an even split of Congressional 
candidates and consensual decision-making in the PAN 
executive committee (Lopez Rodas had a one-vote margin of 
control there, but has agreed that Berger will be added to 
the group). 
--  The Vice Presidency is not part of the bargain.  That 
issue will be revisited in March or April.  Arias implied 
that there was an agreement that the Vice Presidential 
candidate should come from outside the PAN (ruling out Lopez 
Rodas).  Ideally, it would be someone who could first unify 
the small third parties and bring leftist votes to Berger. 
Arias said his personal preference would be Alvaro Colom. 
There have also been talks with Mayan organizations about 
Rigoberto Queme, the indigenous Mayor of Quetzaltenango. 
(Comment:  Queme has registered a party to give him an option 
to run for president.  End Comment.) 
 
--  Arias said that the PAN\'s candidate for Mayor of 
Guatemala City was also not part of the Lopez Rodas-Berger 
deal.  He noted that Prensa Libre had a story saying Berger 
had selected Mauricio Urruela as his preferred candidate. 
Arias called Urruela \"a thief\" from a good family who is 
hated by the SPO.  He called the press article a trial 
balloon. 
 
--  Asked what role Eduardo Gonzalez would have in a 
potential Berger administration, Arias said Gonzalez would 
run it from within.  He credited Gonzalez with engineering 
Berger\'s primary victory. 
 
--  The SPO invested heavily in the PAN primaries, and also 
contracted a U.S. political consultant and Felipe Noguera, an 
Argentine based in Miami for technical assistance.  For now, 
they have retained only Noguera\'s services. 
 
--  SPO members recognize that to recoup power they must 
focus on the 2003 election (supporting Berger) while also 
looking beyond the presidency and cultivating Congressional 
deputies in as many parties as possible.  They are now 
totally committed to legal, constitutional pursuit of lasting 
influence in the GOG, \"whatever their attitudes may have been 
in the past.\" 
 
--  The immediate task now is to finalize Berger\'s political 
platform.  In parallel, the SPO will also produce its own 
proposals on a plan of government, including how to finance 
it, and distribute it to all political parties. 
 
--  With the new accommodation between Lopez Rodas and 
Berger, the main losers, according to Arias, will be the 
Unionist party.  The Unionist split from the PAN was a 
reaction by former president Arzu against Lopez Rodas.  While 
some Unionists will return to the PAN to support Berger 
nevertheless, some Unionists closest to Arzu will not be 
welcomed by Lopez Rodas. 
 
--  According to Arias the SPO\'s \"kings\" of the private 
sector have changed their thinking:  first, by deciding to 
work together for mutual rather than private interests, and 
second, to accommodate to new rules of the game under 
globalization by seeking influence by operating within the 
democratic system.  He believes it is in the interest of the 
SPO for the USG to be aware of this democratic evolution and 
hopefully to welcome it. 
 
5.  (C) Note:  Felipe Noguera, the Argentine consultant, has 
a long history as consultant to El Salvador\'s ARENA party, 
according to Pollo Campero magnate Juan Luis Bosch in a 
conversation with EconCouns.  ARENA is the political model 
the SPO is emulating, including its support for Berger and 
the PAN, and resuscitating the local pro-private sector think 
tank FUNDESA as a copy of El Salvador\'s FUSADES.  Bosch paid 
for Noguera\'s participation in CACIF\'s general annual 
assembly a year ago, which was orchestrated around 
presentations by Noguera y Associates that purported, by 
\"scientific\" and \"objective\" criteria, to show that the PAN 
was the only option for right-thinking Guatemalans.  End 
Note. 
 
Berger Campaign Worried About Possible Narco-Financing 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
6.  (C) We met on January 13 with Eduardo Gonzalez, Berger\'s 
campaign manager, at his request.  Gonzalez is worried that 
the Berger campaign will be offered financing from dubious 
sources that might have links to illegal activities, and 
asked for Embassy assistance in \"vetting\" contributors.  We 
informed Gonzalez that the Embassy can not vet their campaign 
contributors, and urged the PAN to check out campaign 
contributors locally, as their supporters in distant areas 
were likely to know who is a druggie and who isn\'t, and to 
just say \"no\" if they have any doubts. 
 
7.  (C) Gonzalez also said that Berger is worried about how 
to limit the influence of organized crime in their 
government.  We responded that the key is appointing honest, 
reliable, incorruptible Ministers of Government and Defense, 
passing effective conspiracy legislation, and pressing the 
Courts and Public Ministry for results.  Gonzalez said that 
Berger is determined to carry out a profound reform of the 
military, but that he would want USG advice in the process. 
Once in Government, he said, Berger would need counsel from 
the USG on which officers are close to Ortega Menaldo. 
Gonzalez added that he is worried about the possible use of 
violence by organized crime to keep Berger from taking 
office. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  (C) The Berger-Lopez Rodas agreement is an important 
milestone for Berger, who emerges considerably strengthened 
by the alliance.  On January 15 a major national daily 
supporting Berger reported polls showing Berger way ahead in 
popular preferences, at 45%, followed by Colom, with 9.7% and 
the FRG\'s Rios Montt at only 2.6% (Note: Guatemalan polls are 
not historically reliable.  End Note).  A good vice 
presidential pick would further boost Berger\'s chances. 
 
9.  (C) Berger also emerges from the accord hostage to Lopez 
Rodas\' influence until the election.  Lopez Rodas detests 
Gonzalez, who is widely viewed as the power behind the Berger 
throne.  We suspect that Gonzalez will play a far greater 
role in a Berger government, should it come about, than Lopez 
Rodas.  Lopez knows that after the election he will be of 
less value to Berger unless he is able to establish a firm 
base in Congress for his allies.  Gonzalez is not only the 
architect of Berger\'s campaign, he is also the guy CACIF and 
the SPO trusts to keep the next government running in their 
direction. 
Hamilton 
"
"5189","1/17/2003 14:57","03GUATEMALA137","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL:GEORGE WHITE AND WHA/PPC:CHARLOTTE ROE 
USTR FOR ANDREA DURKIN AND BUD CLATANOFF 
DEPT OF LABOR FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, PHUM, PGOV, ELAB, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: USING THREAT OF GSP REVIEW TO PREPARE FOR CAFTA 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Pending further steps from the GOG to 
protect labor rights, Embassy recommends that USTR inform the 
Guatemalan Embassy in Washington (and the Department instruct 
us to inform the GOG here) that the GSP petition is under 
informal USG review pending an assessment of current GOG 
efforts in three areas.  We believe that doing so could lead 
to progress in:  bringing overdue criminal prosecutions to 
court; streamlining the labor justice system; and reinstating 
illegally fired workers.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (SBU) On December 2, the AFL-CIO filed a petition with 
USTR to withdraw GSP benefits from Guatemala due to lack of 
compliance with labor rights conditions.  The International 
Labor Rights Fund also submitted petitions against Guatemala 
and El Salvador.  We have reviewed the AFL-CIO petition, but 
not that of the ILRF. 
 
3.  (SBU) Guatemala has been reviewed many times over past 
decades, but has never lost GSP benefits.  This review would 
be the first since USTR announced in May 2001 suspension of 
review of Guatemala in the wake of passage of major Labor 
Code reforms and sentencing of labor violators in the SITRABI 
trial.  At that time and since, the USG has repeatedly 
expressed concern that the revised labor code be effectively 
enforced. 
 
4.  (SBU) The standard for labor rights compliance with GSP 
is broad and low (i.e. for the GOG to be \"taking steps\" to 
afford its workers their internationally recognized labor 
rights).  Thus Guatemala\'s immediate problem is less the 
massive labor violations that occur every day than the 
impunity that labor rights violators generally enjoy, despite 
adequate protections in law.  That impunity stems from a weak 
labor justice system, a weak criminal justice system, and 
weak labor code enforcement measures by the Executive.  The 
DYMEL case was a good example of this, until US interests 
spurred us to take corrective action.  The end result was a 
happy exception to the rule that even if workers win in 
court, labor violators can avoid justice. 
 
The Petition 
------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) The AFL-CIO petition is generally accurate 
describing specific failures of the GOG to guarantee labor 
rights.  It describes many notable cases in which fundamental 
labor rights, including the right to organize a union, have 
been flagrantly violated by employers, who often dismiss 
labor organizers in violation of labor code protections. 
Labor courts often rule against employers (as in the DYMEL 
case), but sentences are not enforced if employers refuse to 
reinstate illegally fired workers. 
 
6.  (SBU) Even more serious are a series of unsolved murders 
of labor leaders (the GSP petition mentions six since January 
1999; MINUGUA cites four in the period 1/1/2000-9/15/02; 
another murder occurred in late November, 2002).  In response 
to international criticism (from the ILO and under the GSP 
process) the Public Ministry formed a new Special Prosecutor 
for Crimes Against Unionists and Journalists in July 2001, to 
centralize investigation of these cases.  However, the 
Special Prosecutor\'s Office suffers from the usual resource 
constraints and is regarded as hostile to labor concerns by 
unions.  As of September 2002, the MP had issued only two 
arrest warrants for 51 open cases. 
 
7.  (SBU) The petition also describes some cases which have 
since been resolved to a certain extent or been addressed by 
non-government actors: 
 
-- Coca Cola\'s local bottler recently agreed to a collective 
bargaining agreement with its union; 
 
-- Jalapa municipal workers struck in 2002, but returned to 
work after concessions from the mayor; 
 
-- Choi Shin-Cimatextiles maquila has instituted regular 
meetings with its unions, though nobody has been charged for 
earlier violence there; 
 
-- ILO/IPEC has announced a new project to combat child labor 
in the Guatemala City municipal dump. 
 
8.  (SBU) Finally, the petition ignores positive GOG actions 
(or \"steps\") on some fronts.  In 2002, these positive actions 
included the creation of a consensual National Plan for 
Occupational Health and Safety in 2002, cooperation with the 
ILO\'s International Program to Eliminate Child Labor in 
several sectors of the economy, and the revitalization of the 
Labor Ministry under a new labor minister, Victor Hugo Godoy. 
 Godoy took office in February 2002, has had some success 
reforming his ministry internally, while maintaining good 
relations with AID and the Embassy, and has moderated the 
antagonism between his predecessor and the private sector. 
Labor Ministry fines are up, (the total is more than 10 times 
the total imposed by labor courts in the past 50 years, 
according to Labor Minister Godoy) though they are lower than 
permitted under the new labor code. 
 
9.  (SBU) In 2001, we used the pressure of formal GSP review 
to support legislative changes to bring the Guatemalan labor 
code in compliance with its ILO commitments.  Though the 
outcome was what the USG sought, it came at some political 
cost.  The resulting reforms gave the Labor Minister new 
enforcement powers, which have not been forcefully exercised 
since employers have recourse to the courts, but which 
represent a real advance in the law.  However, despite the 
increase in fines cited by the minister, the situation facing 
most Guatemalan workers who try to form unions is little 
changed. 
 
Recommendation 
-------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Given this situation, Embassy wishes to encourage 
further GOG remedial actions to protect labor rights.  We 
therefore recommend that USTR inform the Guatemalan Embassy 
in Washington (and the Department instruct us to inform the 
GOG here) that the GSP petition is under informal review 
(i.e. that a formal USTR decision will be made after the 
Embassy assesses GOG progress accomplishing the elements 
outlined below). 
 
A.  Bring overdue criminal prosecutions to court and replace 
Special Prosecutor: 
 
We will suggest that the Attorney General replace the current 
Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Unionists, given the 
latter\'s poor performance.  As in other areas of law 
enforcement interest, we will press for results on 
outstanding criminal cases, particularly unsolved murders. 
The AG will want resource support to accomplish this, and we 
should consider that request when it comes.  NAS is already 
planning to donate used excess computer equipment from other 
Public Ministry programs. 
 
B.  Streamline the labor justice system: 
 
While the former minister introduced draft legislation to 
speed labor enforcement, it has not been acted on by Congress 
and is not supported by labor or employer groups.  Instead, a 
labor justice committee was formed by the GOG with UNDP 
support and participation by judicial system and Executive 
branch members, and civil society (labor and employer 
groups).  We should support this effort, and press for 
concrete results (consensual administrative and legislative 
changes to improve the labor justice system, including more 
vigorous police enforcement of judicial sentences). 
 
C.  Reinstate illegally fired workers: 
 
The AFL-CIO GSP petition cites the Finca Maria Lourdes case 
as emblematic of the problems of reinstating workers fired 
for attempting to organize a union on a traditional coffee 
plantation.  It also involves an affiliate of the labor 
federation directly supported by the AFL-CIO.  We will urge 
that the GOG effect a resolution (through reinstatement or a 
financial settlement of workers claims) of this case. 
Hamilton 
"
"5194","1/17/2003 15:34","03GUATEMALA139","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE239506","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/C: RIGGS AND WERKSMAN, WHA/PPC: HAMANN, 
AND WHA/USOAS: STICKLES. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCOR, KCRM, SNAR, PREL, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: THIRD ANNUAL CORRUPTION REPORT - GUATEMALA 
 
REF: 02 STATE 239506 
 
 1. Summary: Guatemala made limited progress in 2002 in 
implementing its commitments under the Inter-American 
Convention Against Corruption.  The primary obstacle to 
greater progress was the lack of effective leadership on the 
part of the Executive in fighting corruption, and the 
political polarization that heightened confrontation between 
the GOG and its growing number of critics. Transparency 
International rated Guatemala near the bottom (81st out of 
102 countries) of its annual review of public perceptions of 
corruption.  On October 10, 2002, then-WHA Assistant 
Secretary Otto Reich testified to the U.S. Congress that 
 
SIPDIS 
corruption has increased under the Portillo Administration 
and had become the primary impediment to the strengthening of 
democracy in Guatemala.  Guatemala\'s cooperation in the war 
on drugs also fell to historically low levels in 2002, in 
large part due to pervasive corruption.  End Summary. 
 
Accomplishments by the Government of Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- - 
2. There were a limited number of successes in the GOG\'s 
efforts to control corruption in 2002.  Congress passed two 
important pieces of legislation which make it easier to 
prosecute government officials for corruption.  Both laws 
will come into force in early 2003.  Several other 
transparency measures were proposed in Congress, including 
whistle-blower protections and a mechanism for the 
participation of civil society auditing government 
expenditures, but Congress had not passed these bills by the 
end of the year.  One of the most concrete accomplishments in 
2002 was the implementation of currency declaration forms at 
the International Airport.  This initiative, which was 
intended to help implement new money laundering legislation, 
made it possible for the GOG to prosecute individuals who 
attempt to bring into the country or out of it more that 
10,000 USD without declaring the funds to customs officials. 
While there have been no convictions yet, numerous arrests 
have been made and several cases are going forward to 
prosecution.  The measure creates a significant disincentive 
for money laundering. 
 
3. A further potential accomplishment was the announcement by 
the Attorney General\'s Office that investigations had been 
opened into the activities of five former military officers 
who are believed to be involved in organized crime -- all of 
the individuals are believed to have ties to senior GOG 
officials.  The GOG also announced in 2002 the establishment 
of an ambitious National Anti-Corruption Plan which it 
drafted in coordination with World Bank experts.  This 
project has not yet advanced significantly.  Another 
accomplishment was the disbanding of the special 
counter-narcotics police (the DOAN) in the wake of 
extra-judicial killings and mounting evidence that the DOAN 
was engaged in selling seized drugs.  One of the most 
promising recent accomplishments was the GOG\'s naming of a 
blue-ribbon Transparency Commission composed of several 
respected members of civil society.  GOG efforts to 
manipulate the commission, however, have led to threats by 
several members to resign and have brought into question the 
efficacy of the commission. 
 
Accomplishments of Civil Society 
-------------------------------- 
 
4.  Civil society was an active player in the anti-corruption 
debate in Guatemala in 2002.  Some civil society actors were 
motivated by their focus on strengthening the democratic 
institutions and processes of the state, and others by a more 
partisan interest in discrediting a government whose levels 
of corruption have been higher than Guatemalans are used to. 
The primary accomplishment of civil society groups in 
anti-corruption efforts in 2002 has been to keep the issue of 
government corruption in public view, primarily through use 
of the news media.  This initiative has helped overcome 
traditionally high levels of apathy on the part of the 
general population.  Press coverage of corruption scandals 
was relentless.  In February, the \"Foro Guatemala,\" a civil 
society organization encompassing representatives of most 
organized sectors of Guatemalan society, held a major 
conference on the effects of corruption.  The results of 
several studies were compiled and released with great 
fanfare.  The theme of the conference has not had the 
expected resonance among the population, however, and shortly 
after the conference a national opinion poll found that only 
41% of Guatemalans agreed that acts of corruption should be 
denounced when detected.  A banking scandal involving shell 
corporations in Panama established in the names of the 
President and Vice President, among others, resulted in the 
formation of a loose coalition of small political parties and 
civil society leaders known as the Civic Movement Aganist 
Corruption (\"Moviemento Civico Contra la Corrupcion\").  The 
movement did not take root, however, when they failed to 
mobilize significant participation in anti-corruption 
protests on the Presidential Palace to demand the resignation 
of the President and Vice President. 
Hamilton 
"
"5201","1/17/2003 16:50","03GUATEMALA143","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000143 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/17/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, SNAR, ETRD, CASC, KIPR, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES COUNTER-NARCOTICS 
CERTIFICATION AND CAFTA WITH CONGRESSWOMAN ZURY RIOS 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: On January 16, the Ambassador and FRG 
legislator Zury Rios discussed possible counter-narcotics 
decertification and the importance of securing more effective 
GOG cooperation in the war on drugs before a free trade 
agreement is ready to be approved by Congress.  Rios said 
that the FRG strongly supports CAFTA, but said that the lack 
of counter-narcotics cooperation was the fault of the 
Executive.  She lamented that the timing of decertification 
will be used by the FRG\'s opponents to their advantage in the 
upcoming election.  Rios offered to seek the repeal of a 
recently approved copyright law which represents a major 
setback for IPR protection, and welcomed a continuing 
dialogue with the Ambassador on issues affecting the 
bilateral relationship. End summary. 
 
2. (C).  The Ambassador, DCM and PolCouns had breakfast with 
Zury Rios on January 16 to discuss the full range of 
bilateral issues.  Rios is the Second Vice President of 
Congress and is the daughter of President of Congress and 
former military ruler Efrain Rios Montt. 
 
Diminished Counter-Narcotics Cooperation 
---------------------------------------- 
3. (C) The Ambassador told Rios that GOG counter-narcotics 
cooperation in 2002 had fallen sharply from previous years, 
and that as a result there is a near certainty that, in the 
annual exercise mandated by U.S. law, Guatemala will be 
decertified as a cooperating partner in the war against 
drugs.  He noted that recent achievements increase the 
possibility that Guatemala will be extended a vital national 
interests waiver, thus avoiding any sanctions, but that it 
will be important to get cooperation back on track in order 
for Guatemala to be re-certified at the semi-annual review in 
six months. 
 
4. (C) Rios responded with thinly veiled pique that \"the 
United States is the superpower, and it has to do what it has 
to do.\"  She argued that the timing of decertification was 
\"unfortunate\" as it would be seen as a message from the USG 
during the elections.  She said that the media (which is 
largely anti-Portillo) and the opposition parties would use 
it against the FRG in the upcoming national election, and 
lamented that this action had not been taken by the USG in 
2002 so that it could have been cleared up before the 
election season.  She then switched tracks, and said that the 
Guatemalan Executive had brought decertification upon itself, 
it was solely to blame for the GOG\'s poor performance in 
2002, and she hoped that decertification would get its 
attention and make it take serious remedial actions.  Rios 
commented that on January 14, Congress (which is dominated by 
the FRG) had voted unanimously for a resolution calling on 
President Portillo to fire Minister of Government Reyes 
Calderon (who has ultimate responsibility for all law 
enforcement -- including counter-narcotics).  While 
Congress\'s censure of Reyes Calderon was based on his 
inability to control spiraling violent crime, Rios was 
implying that Portillo\'s choices of ineffective ministers has 
exposed the FRG to damaging criticism on the public security 
front in the upcoming elections, and they would not defend 
Portillo from our criticism of his poor performance on drugs. 
 
Free Trade with Central America and the New IPR Law 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
5. (C) In response to the Ambassador\'s question about the 
FRG\'s view of free trade negotiations between Central America 
and the US, Rios said that the leaders of the ruling party 
are unequivocal supporters of CAFTA.  She stressed that 
successful CAFTA negotiations are a high priority for the 
FRG.  The Ambassador said that there are many opponents of 
free trade in the United States, and that it is important 
that before any agreement is ready to go to the U.S. 
Congress, other bilateral issues of interest to American 
constituencies be successfully addressed, including 
counter-drug cooperation, justice in the case of murdered 
Amcits, a cessation to threats against human rights activists 
and protection of intellectual property rights, among others. 
 
6. (C) The Ambassador told Rios that the USG was concerned 
over new harmful IPR legislation passed in December, 2002 by 
the Guatemalan Congress.  This law was not vetoed by the 
President and will become law once published by Congress. 
Rios commented that she had not voted for the law (note: 
which was proposed by an opposition congressman, but 
supported by the majority of FRG legislators), and was 
unfamiliar with what could be done to correct it at this late 
stage.  She promised to look into it, and later called back 
to say the FRG would seek the law\'s repeal as soon as it is 
published. 
 
Investigating the Clandestine Forces 
------------------------------------ 
7. (C) The Ambassador told Rios that he would attend that 
same afternoon a press conference held by Human Rights 
Ombudsman Sergio Morales (septel) in which Morales would call 
for the creation of an international investigatory commission 
tasked with uncovering the activities of \"clandestine 
forces.\"  These clandestine groups are believed to be 
responsible for the rash of threats and attacks against human 
rights workers in the past five years.  The Ambassador asked 
Rios if the FRG supported Morales\'s proposal, saying this 
would be a chance for the party to get on the side of the 
angels.  Rios responded that she was unfamiliar with the 
proposal, but that the FRG had supported Morales election as 
Human Rights Ombudsman and they were generally supportive of 
his work.  She said the FRG would review the proposal 
carefully.. 
 
Elections and Reform of the Electoral Code 
------------------------------------------ 
8. (C) Rios said the FRG has not yet decided who will be 
their standard bearer in the upcoming presidential election. 
She added that the FRG is making one more attempt to pass the 
electoral reform law (which has been in debate for almost two 
years), and that the FRG had agreed to drop some of the more 
controversial articles in order to secure opposition support. 
 She said that the law contains a provision which will delay 
enactment of the law until after the 2003 elections so no one 
could claim that it was being passed in order to improve the 
FRG\'s chances in the upcoming election.  Rios commented that 
the most important reform contained in the law is a provision 
to move voting booths out into rural locations with more than 
500 voters, greatly increasing access to voting for 
Guatemala\'s rural poor.  (Note:  This provision was one of 
the most controversial, as it was seen by the opposition as 
favoring the FRG, whose base is largely in rural areas. end 
note). 
 
Comment 
------- 
9. (C) The meeting was cordial, and Rios clearly wants a good 
working relationship with the USG, stressing the importance 
of CAFTA and offering to be helpful on addressing our IPR 
concerns.  While she knows that we are uncomfortable with her 
father\'s presidential ambitions (which she skillfully dodged 
in our conversation), she recognizes that there are too many 
shared interests for the FRG not to remain fully engaged with 
us. 
Hamilton 
"
"5202","1/17/2003 17:51","03GUATEMALA145","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000145 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: PORTILLO SPEECH TURNED FRG CAMPAIGN RALLY 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The FRG used the occasion of President 
Portillo\'s January 14 state of the union speech to bus in to 
the capital thousands of former self defense committee 
patrollers (ex-PACs).  After delivering his annual review of 
his government\'s accomplishments and priorities in Congress, 
Portillo and FRG leader Rios Montt addressed the crowds, who 
have been promised compensation for their unpaid service to 
the nation during the 36-year civil conflict.  While the 
substance of the official speech was nothing new, the pro-FRG 
rally marked the first major FRG event of election season, 
and suggested that the FRG is not yet attempting to distance 
itself from Portillo\'s record.  End Summary. 
 
Cup Half Full Speech to Congress 
-------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) In an hour-long speech to Congress on January 14, the 
third anniversary of his swearing-in, President Portillo 
emphasized his government\'s accomplishments, including the 
following highlights: 
 
-- New Things:  He cited as accomplishments the creation of 
new government bodies and key legislation to tackle 
persistent problems, including the Commission for 
Transparency and Against Corruption, the National Council for 
Food and Nutrition Security, the Presidential Commission 
Against Discrimination and Racism, the Secretariat for 
Agrarian Issues, laws on Agriculture and Fishing, Urban and 
Rural Development Councils, reforms to the municipal code, 
and decentralization; 
 
-- Statistics:  He also cited the number of free fertilizer 
bags distributed to campesinos, the 47.6% increase in the 
minimum wage for agricultural workers in his term (43.6% for 
non-agricultural workers), financial and monetary reforms, 
macroeconomic stability, and record tax collection (10.58 
percent of the GNP); 
 
-- Military Restructuring:  He cited troop reductions, 
closure of bases, and phased reduction of the EMP; 
 
-- Free Trade:  He claimed to have promoted free trade and 
pledged to vigorously pursue a CAFTA; 
 
-- Media Attack:  Portillo also made jabs at the news media, 
\"in the hands of private interests who do not necessarily 
have national interests at heart;\" 
 
--  Corruption:  He claimed to have showed openness to combat 
it despite enduring strong criticism; 
 
--  Failings:  He acknowledged failings on completing some 
Peace Accords commitments, citing \"great challenges and 
enormous obstacles;\" and (in apparent self-defense) warned 
against \"criminalization\" politics by substituting calls for 
prosecution in place of debate; 
 
-- Belize:  He said the Belize border dispute is \"an open 
wound that we will not reopen further...or close at the cost 
of legitimate national interests.\" 
 
-- Elections:  He pledged an impartial vote and smooth 
transition to the next administration. 
 
Speeches in the Square 
---------------------- 
 
3.  (U) After delivering his speech and distributing the 
government official report in Congress, Portillo, accompanied 
by aides and the FRG leadership, addressed a crowd estimated 
at 20,000 (the largest grouping of supporters during his 
tenure) gathered in the city square outside the former 
National Palace.  The crowds were reportedly bused in on a 
fleet of 200 buses, and FRG T-shirts featuring Efrain Rios 
Montt were distributed.  Rosenda Perez, the leader of the 
ex-PAC association of Peten, was in the front row of 
spectators. 
 
4.  (U) Portillo repeated parts of his official speech to the 
crowd, promised not to \"defraud\" the ex-PACs, warned that 
critics would \"invent stories\" about the organization of the 
rally, and lauded Rios Montt as a leader.  Haroldo Quej Chen, 
who, as FRG Secretary of Organization and ex-PAC himself, was 
the likely orchestrator of the rally, introduced Rios Montt 
as \"a leader any politician fears, a leader any animal fears, 
the greatest leader Guatemala has...\"  (Note:  It was Quej 
Chen who cited to the press the high estimate of 30,000 
attendees.  End Note.).  FRG Congressional bench leader 
Aristides Crespo told the crowd that \"they attack us, they 
defame us, they criticize corruption, and we have never 
denied that we have problems, but one must not forget that 
its was the previous government who sold the electric utility 
and telephone company and as a result everyone pays more for 
electricity and the telephone.\" 
 
5.  (U) For his part, Rios Montt told the crowd that \"as FRG 
Secretary General, I declare that this event is not sponsored 
 
SIPDIS 
by the government or promoting any particular candidate.  It 
is a recognition of the accomplishments up until now of this 
central government and the municipal governments.\" 
 
Reaction 
-------- 
 
6.  (U) Reaction to Portillo\'s official speech and the rally 
were predictable, with media highlighting opposition and 
civil society criticizing Portillo\'s official speech for 
avoiding of key issues (i.e. difficult bilateral relations 
with the U.S., corruption and insecurity), and decrying the 
misuse of official funds and personnel in the staging of a 
highly partisan rally. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The President\'s speech was a stock defense of his 
government\'s (in some cases) legitimate accomplishments and 
was most notable for what it left out:  any mention of us 
(with the exception of the positive reference to CAFTA).  We 
interpret this as a signal of Portillo\'s interest in 
minimizing attention to tensions in the bilateral 
relationship.  More interesting than Portillo\'s official 
speech was the FRG\'s demonstration of its capacity to turn 
out a (paid) crowd, and its confirmation of ex-PAC support at 
its base.  While the official campaign period will not begin 
until May, we can expect more FRG campaign rallies 
thinly-veiled as \"pro-government\" rallies in the future. 
During this interregnum before the official campaign, the FRG 
is faced with a dilemma.  While explicit in its support for 
Rios Montt as FRG leader and presumed presidential candidate, 
the rally did nothing to distance the party from Portillo and 
his legacy of corruption. 
Hamilton 
"
"5203","1/17/2003 18:04","03GUATEMALA146","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","02GUATEMALA2970","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000146 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KJUS, GT, UN, OAS 
SUBJECT: OMBUDSMAN CALLS FOR INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION TO 
INVESTIGATE CLANDESTINE GROUPS 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 2970 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 0127 
 
1. (U) Summary: On January 16, Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio 
Morales unveiled a proposal for a UN-OAS led commission to 
investigate clandestine groups (for details on the proposal, 
see Ref A).  The proposal was enthusiastically received by 
the press, human rights NGOs, and the international 
community.  The Ambassador had previously contacted the 
President, senior FRG members, the private sector, and the 
press to urge a favorable response to the proposal.  After 
the presentation, the Ambassador told the press that the USG 
welcomes the initiative, that we hope the GOG will support 
it, and that we\'ll be taking a look at how the USG can 
support it.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Sergio Morales, along with his top assistants Maria 
Eugenia Morales de Sierra and Dunia Illias, invited human 
rights activists Helen Mack, Frank LaRue, and Orlando Blanco 
to join him on January 16 to present the proposal for a 
UN-OAS led commission to investigate clandestine groups.  The 
Ambassador, with other members of the diplomatic and NGO 
communities, and press, were in attendance and received the 
announcement with enthusiasm and support. 
 
3. (U) Morales began the press conference by calling on the 
Government of Guatemala to listen to the human rights groups 
leading the call for this commission.  He said the \"moment 
has come\" for the GOG to recognize that there will be no 
peace in Guatemala until clandestine groups are removed from 
their positions of power.  Morales requested that the 
President and the Congress authorize a request to the UN 
creating the commission. 
 
4. (U) Maria Eugenia Morales de Sierra then gave details from 
the proposal, including a six-month period of investigation, 
the composition of the investigative team (one UN member, one 
OAS member, and one notable Guatemalan nominated by the 
President), and the scope (from January 1996 to the present). 
 Morales de Sierra also mentioned that the findings of the 
commission could possibly be used to remove the influence of 
these groups from the government as well as in prosecutions 
by the Public Ministry. 
 
5. (U) The press appeared initially stunned by the weight of 
this announcement, and had many questions for the Ombudsman. 
Members of the press asked what the GOG\'s, UN\'s, and OAS\'s 
responses were, to which Morales replied that he had not yet 
received any official responses.  The press also asked why 
they had not heard anything about this proposal before, and 
Morales said that they were being careful because the 
existence of clandestine groups is such a grave, but 
sensitive, issue. 
 
6. (U) LaRue chimed in with thanks for the Ombudsman and a 
brief explanation that this commission would be carrying on 
the work of previous investigative commissions, but also 
would work to end the current cycle of impunity that 
endangers human rights and justice advocates in Guatemala 
today.  Contradicting Morales, LaRue (and later Mack) also 
said that while the human rights movement would welcome the 
congress\'s ratification of the proposal, only the President\'s 
request is necessary for the international community\'s 
acceptance and formation of the commission. 
 
7. (U) Mack said UN and OAS involvement would protect the 
work of the commission. Mack maintained that clandestine 
groups are powerful mutations of war era power structures and 
must be removed if Guatemala is ever going to progress. 
Blanco said that he is worried about the way in which 
clandestine groups influence weak democratic institutions. 
 
8. (U) The Ambassador informed Mario Polanco, Helen Mack and 
Frank LaRue of his lobbying efforts in support of the 
proposal with the government and private sector (Ref B), for 
which they expressed appreciation.  Polanco told HROff that 
the human rights community was pleased by how strong a 
backing the Ambassador was giving this initiative.  Polanco 
and Blanco both told HROff that they see the USG as their 
primary ally in the fight against clandestine groups. 
 
-------- 
Reaction 
-------- 
 
9. (U) Leading dailies gave prominent coverage to the press 
conference in their January 17 editions.  El Periodico and 
Prensa Libre carried the Ambassador\'s statements and Prensa 
Libre featured front-page pictures of the Ambassador shaking 
Morales\' hand.  Siglo Veintiuno showed the Ambassador shaking 
Mack and LaRue\'s hands in a front-page photo. 
 
10. (U) The Ambassador was quoted by El Periodico supporting 
the proposal: 
 
\"I hope that the government gives its firm backing to this 
proposal for a commission to investigate clandestine groups. 
I think it is a terrific initiative that can make a 
tremendous contribution.\" 
 
11. (U) Comment: The press conference was a great success, 
generating attention and public support for the proposal. 
Although the USG is not providing financial support at this 
time, our moral support is clearly most welcome.  However, 
some fundamental details, such as the GOG response and role 
remain unclear.  While the proposal came from civil society, 
the Ombudsman showed leadership by adding his public support 
and imprimatur.  We will continue to look for ways to support 
the proposal through our public and private diplomacy.  End 
Comment. 
Hamilton 
"
"5204","1/17/2003 18:07","03GUATEMALA147","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE7902","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA,USOAS, WHA PPC, S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, AORC, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN DELEGATION TO THE THIRD CICTE 
CONFERENCE 
 
REF: STATE 07902 
 
1. Poloff delivered reftel points to Sylvia Corado, Director 
of Multilateral Affairs for the Foreign Ministry.  The 
Guatemalan delegation will be headed by Vice Minister Gabriel 
Aguilera of the Foriegn Ministry and will include Vice 
Minister of Interior Alfredo Caseres, Colonel Francisco 
Permudes of the Ministry of Defense, Inter-Institutional 
Coordinator for Security (and former General) Miguel 
Calderon, Corado herself, and a representative from the 
Guatemalan Embassy in San Salvador, most likely the 
Ambassador.  Comment: Corado participated in an International 
Vistor\'s Program titled \"Anti-Terrorism and Democracy\" in 
August of 2002. End Comment. 
 
2. Corado said that Guatemala would not be able to ratify the 
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism at the 
conference, but that the GOG is continuing to work toward 
ratification.  Corado strove to convey that the GOG is 
serious about implementing recommendations that came out of 
the last CICTE conference.  Corado was pleased to hear the 
U.S. intends to announce a substantial voluntary 
contribution, but expressed doubts about the GOG\'s ability to 
provide financial support.  Corado also said that Guatemala 
was not planning on requesting any bilateral meetings with 
U.S. officials at the CICTE. 
Hamilton 
"
"5248","1/21/2003 21:22","03GUATEMALA159","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000159 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CORRESPONDENCE FOR THE SECRETARY FROM FOREIGN MINISTER 
GUTIERREZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PBTS, GT, BZ 
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM FOREIGN MINISTER GUTIERREZ TO 
SECRETARY POWELL 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: STATE 3578 
 
1. Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez gave us on January 21 a 
letter to Secretary Powell (dated January 17) in which he 
thanks the Secretary for his letter (reftel) congratulating 
Gutierrez on his nomination as Foreign Minister.  In his 
letter, Gutierrez expresses his desire to work together with 
the USG to address shared concerns, and restates the 
Guatemalan Government\'s interest in resolving its border 
differences with Belize.  An Embassy translation of the text 
follows in paragraph two; the original is being sent by pouch 
to WHA/CEN. 
 
2. Begin text: 
Guatemala, January 17, 2003 
 
Most Excellent Mr. Secretary: 
 
It is an honor for me to thank you for your letter of 
congratulation and the remarks you made in it about my 
experience.  I am committed to my country by the confidence 
given me by President Alfonso Portillo in naming me Minister 
of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Guatemala. 
 
I fully agree with your comment that our countries share 
common goals like those listed by you in your letter.  In 
that regard, I want to express to you my determination to 
address these issues, which, in some cases, I believe are 
goals where we have shared responsibility. 
 
I view my responsibility at the head of this Ministry as a 
challenge to find means to confront these shared concerns 
that you mention.  The goals we share in the furtherance of 
our bilateral relations will constitute an important priority 
for me. 
 
In regard to the territorial differences between Guatemala 
and Belize, I want to reiterate to you emphatically that, as 
is outlined in the Third Report of the President to the 
Congress of the Republic, this issue represents \"a 
fundamental theme that the Government has sought to resolve 
through peaceful means, through legal action and in accord 
with the stipulations of international law.  The policy of 
the Government has been to actively seek a resolution to the 
border differences that is peaceful, honorable, equitable and 
permanent.\" 
 
In the same manner, I would like to express my desire that 
the cooperation between our nations be strengthened and 
continue in every field, for the purpose of building a more 
worthy, secure and just world, which is the legitimate 
aspiration of our citizens and all humanity. 
 
Thank you again, and I hope in the near future to be able to 
speak personally with you.  I take advantage of this 
opportunity to express to you my highest esteem and most 
distinguished consideration. 
 
Edgar Gutierrez 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
(end text) 
 
 
 
 
Hamilton 
"
"5281","1/23/2003 22:24","03GUATEMALA188","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, SNAR, PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT:  AMBASSADOR\'S FIRST MEETING WITH G-13 
REPRESENTATIVES (DONOR DIALOGUE GROUP) 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador met on January 14 with 
members of the Donor Dialogue group (6 major bilateral 
donors, plus 4 multilaterals, MINUGUA, USAID, and UNDP) to 
discuss development cooperation and preparations for the 
May consultative group meeting. Ambassadors and IFI Reps 
queried the Ambassador on possible narcotics 
decertification, voicing concern that it could negatively 
impact on promoting the Peace Accord agenda and the 
Consultative Group meeting scheduled for May, as well as 
complicate multilateral loan review and approval processes. 
Spain cautioned that decertification could influence 
Guatemalan electoral outcomes.  The Ambassador said the USG 
is committed to promoting peace, human rights, anti- 
corruption -- not just a narrow anti-drug agenda -- and 
described how U.S.-Central American trade negotiations 
would also lend support for advancing a broad agenda.  He 
discussed the difficulty that we would have in securing 
Congressional ratification of a trade agreement if 
Guatemala was not cooperating fully in counter-narcotics 
efforts, and if there was not progress on human rights, 
corruption and the like.  There was agreement to work 
together on a public relations strategy that would preserve 
the unified front and strength of the group\'s message 
before GOG and civil society.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On January 14, the Ambassador, USAID Director 
Anders and Deputy Director Kennedy met with Ambassadors 
from the Netherlands, Spain, Canada, Germany, and Norway, 
Charge d\'Affairs of Sweden, and Resident Representatives of 
IDB, World Bank, EU and MINUGUA.  Following opening remarks 
by the Ambassador on U.S. policy priorities in Guatemala 
(improved cooperation in drug trafficking, trade 
negotiations, Peace Accord implementation, improvements in 
human rights and anti-corruption), the chair of the donor 
dialogue group (Dutch Ambassador Arend Pieper) welcomed the 
Ambassador\'s participation in the donor dialogue group, 
noting how important U.S. leadership had been to organizing 
the donor dialogue group, building credibility with civil 
society, and facilitating a common front of donors at the 
last Consultative Group.  Ambassador Pieper expressed his 
hope that the donor dialogue group could again reach 
consensus on a group statement for the upcoming 
Consultative Group. 
 
Decertification, Peace Accords, and the Upcoming Elections 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Discussion quickly turned to the issue of possible 
U.S. counter-narcotics decertification, with IDB 
representative Barbery asking whether the public 
announcement would make specific mention of involvement of 
high level GOG officials in drug trafficking or 
moneylaundering, or if the public statements would remain 
more general.  Barbery noted that the Board members have 
increasingly raised the issue of corruption in loan review 
and approval meetings. The Canadian Ambassador asked about 
the timing of the U.S. decision and benchmarks for a 
recertification decision.  The Ambassador noted that any 
U.S. public statement would be carefully crafted, and that 
countries not certified would be reviewed periodically and 
could be recertified when significant progress had been 
made against quantifiable benchmarks.  The Ambassador noted 
that we would again review Guatemala\'s level of cooperation 
and efforts in September, along with other countries. 
MINUGUA Rep. Koenigs noted that if decertified, a 
\"recertification\" for Guatemala in September or October 
could have tremendous impact on the Guatemalan elections. 
The Spanish Ambassador echoed this concern, stating that a 
decision would have negative (\"nefasto\") consequences. 
The IDB opined that both the opposition and FRG would hope 
to use certification in the upcoming electoral campaign, 
either as a promise of future performance (\"we\'ll get the 
country recertified\") or as a vote of confidence (if the 
FRG succeeds in getting Guatemala recertified).  The 
Ambassador noted that without a possibility of 
recertification, the Portillo Administration would have 
little incentive to make improvements, and that we would 
make a judgment strictly on the merits of the government\'s 
response. 
 
4. (SBU) European countries and MINUGUA were especially 
concerned that U.S. emphasis on drug trafficking would sap 
what little implementation capability the Portillo 
Administration had left, shifting resources and GOG 
attention away from the Peace Accords and the nine point CG 
agenda.  The World Bank rep noted the possibility that the 
EU would soon release a report critical of Guatemalan 
progress against the CG agenda, possibly coinciding with a 
suspension of project funding, leading Guatemalan 
authorities to question the utility of a CG later this 
year.  (NOTE:  EU rep noted that a consultant\'s report 
summarizing progress against the nine point CG agenda would 
be presented and discussed in a meeting of EU members in 
early February.  He noted that the EU had already discussed 
suspending specific programs/activities where the GOG 
lacked political will, and that they would soon make good 
on the threat giving two examples, the failure of the 
Government to appropriate counterpart funds for education 
and justice sector programs.  The EU report will not be 
made available publicly, nor to other Embassies.)  The 
Ambassador responded to the concern about overemphasis on 
drugs by detailing again the ways in which the CAFTA 
process could be used to advance a broader agenda, largely 
overlapping with Peace Accords goals. 
 
Leveraging GOG Performance in an Election Year 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5. (SBU) Spurred by MINUGUA, there was a brief discussion 
of various mechanisms for leveraging GOG performance during 
a difficult election year.  MINUGUA noted several: 
negotiation of a new IMF stand-by agreement; the CG meeting 
in May; and formation of a special investigative body to 
look into parallel forces.  U.S.-Central American trade 
negotiations (including pressure that could be brought by 
other Central American countries on Guatemala to \"clean up 
their act\") is another.  The Swedish Charge noted that 
their insistence on a CG this year was to keep the Peace 
Accords front and center on the national agenda of this 
Administration as well as that of the opposition parties. 
He noted that the opposition\'s attention could be easily 
shifted to another agenda, if allowed to by the 
international community.  The Ambassador noted that we 
would be supportive of the various efforts, especially the 
creation of the special investigative body promoted by the 
Human Rights Ombudsman.  He noted that the U.S. was seeking 
ways to contribute financing, and urged other countries to 
provide support.  (Note: The Canadian and Norwegian 
ambassadors told him afterward that, in view of the 
Ambassador\'s support, they would attend the January 16 
launching of the proposal. End note) 
 
A Carefully-Crafted Public Diplomacy Strategy Needed 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
6. (SBU) Ambassador Pieper suggested that the next meeting 
of the donor dialogue group focus on how individual 
countries and the group should respond as the media 
attempts to build the case that the international community 
is making good on conditionality expressed at the last 
Consultative Group to withdraw funding if progress falters. 
World Bank rep Somensatto suggested that it was equally 
important to make sure to clarify differences, if any, on 
member positions on bilateral versus multilateral 
assistance.  He urged all members not to lose sight of the 
importance of helping this Administration sustain macro- 
economic stability during the election period.  Somensatto 
also asked that the U.S. specifically, and donor group at 
large, express public support for the National Commission 
on Transparency and Corruption, so as to ensure this effort 
is fully supported by Guatemalans. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) This was a lively and useful exchange of views 
that brought concerns of our donor community colleagues 
clearly into view.  Their fear that decertification will 
hijack the Peace Accords agenda strikes us as a bit 
overdrawn, and the Ambassador attempted to assuage these 
concerns by emphasizing that our bilateral agenda is much 
broader than just drug interdiction.  We will remain 
actively engaged with this group. 
HAMILTON 
"
"5282","1/23/2003 22:51","03GUATEMALA189","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA146","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000189 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KJUS, GT, UN, OAS 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND PRESS MAINTAIN PRESSURE ON GOG FOR 
PROPOSAL TO INVESTIGATE CLANDESTINE GROUPS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 146 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 171 
 
Classified By: Katharine Read, HROff, for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: In the days following the Human Rights 
Ombudsman\'s public presentation of the proposal for a UN-OAS 
led commission to investigate clandestine groups (Ref A)), 
the media has followed up with domestic editorials and 
international endorsements of the idea.  The Ambassador has 
continued to solicit support from the GOG, in both his 
January 17 meeting with Foreign Minister Gutierrez, and his 
January 21 meeting with Finance Minister Weymann (Ref B). 
End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Leading dailies Siglo Veintiuno and El Periodico 
covered the statements made by the Ambassador, the Canadian 
Ambassador, Amnesty International London, and local NGOs in 
support of the proposal.  Siglo Veintiuno directly quoted the 
Ambassador\'s statement of, \"It appears to me to be a very 
good initiative and very well thought-out.  The Commission 
can make a contribution to the strengthening of democracy and 
I hope the Government supports it, because I think it is 
something positive.\"  The Canadian Ambassador and Amnesty 
International reportedly echoed the Ambassador\'s sentiment 
and urged the GOG to support the Commission. 
 
3. (U) In a January 20 signed editorial in El Periodico, 
human rights activist Miguel Angel Albizures wrote about the 
hold which clandestine groups exercise over the civilian 
government.  Albizures acknowledged that clandestine groups 
were a pre-FRG phenomenon, but that the situation has 
deteriorated during the Portillo administration, despite 
Portillo\'s campaign promises to end the insecurity and 
delinquency affecting Guatemalans.  Albizures reiterated the 
human rights community sentiment that \'enough is enough\' and 
urged the GOG to \"open its eyes, even though it is in the 
final stretch of its disastrous governance.\"  He said that 
this proposal would \"test Portillo\'s political will, because 
it is the President who must ask the UN and OAS for this 
Commission.\" 
 
4. (C) In a January 17 meeting called by Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez to discuss counter-narcotics efforts, the 
Ambassador reiterated his support of the proposal to 
Gutierrez and Ministers of Defense and Interior.  The 
Ambassador urged the GOG to give the proposal its full 
support and said that this would be a credible way in which 
they could demonstrate their commitment to reform.  Gutierrez 
agreed that the presence of clandestine groups was alarming 
and said that he came to similar conclusions during his time 
at the SAE, when he produced a report on clandestine groups. 
However, Gutierrez mentioned that he believed any 
investigation should be geared towards a fact-finding 
exposition rather than an evidence-gathering prosecution. 
Gutierrez also spoke (vaguely) of the need to move ahead \"at 
the right political moment.\"  The Ambassador responded that 
there was no better moment than the present. 
 
5. (C) On January 21, the Ambassador spoke with Finance 
Minister Eduardo Weymann, an FRG inner circle member, about 
human rights, CAFTA, and counternarcotics efforts.  He said 
that the USG was giving the proposal firm public support and 
suggested it would behoove the GOG to back the effort to 
establish a commission to investigate clandestine groups. 
Weymann responded that Vice President Reyes would lead the 
FRG\'s policy on the proposal and that Reyes was already in 
contact with Helen Mack about this and other threats against 
human rights workers. 
 
6. (C) Also on January 21, Congress passed a resolution 
proposed by opposition congresswoman Nineth Montenegro to 
urge Portillo to accept the proposal to investigate 
clandestine groups.  The resolution passed with the support 
of 90 deputies, including members of the FRG.  In response to 
public and private pressure for executive action, Portillo 
and Gutierrez announced on January 22 that they had invited 
Human Rights Watch Director Jose Miguel Vivanco to facilitate 
the discussion between the Ombudsman, human rights NGOs, and 
the GOG on the mandate of the proposed Commission.  (NOTE: 
Vivanco is a long-time friend of Gutierrez, and his 
objectivity has been questioned by some.  We know Vivanco, 
however, and believe his involvement can be helpful.) Human 
rights groups are concerned that this may be a ploy on behalf 
of the GOG to hijack the Commission, but are refraining from 
public comment until they collectively decide how to proceed. 
 
7. (C) COMMENT: We are pleased by the continued press 
coverage of the proposal.  We will maintain the high-level 
dialogue on the proposal by raising it in press statements 
and in meetings with other GOG officials.  End Comment. 
Hamilton 
"
"5357","1/28/2003 13:35","03GUATEMALA218","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000218 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, SNAR, PHUM, ETRD, GT 
SUBJECT: TOUR D\'HORIZON WITH PRESIDENTIAL PRE-CANDIDATE 
ALVARO COLOM 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David E. Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) At a January 24 breakfast meeting with the Ambassador, 
presidential pre-candate Alvaro Colom of the center-left 
Union for National Hope Party (UNE) said that the main 
challenge for the winner in this year\'s presidential election 
will be to jump-start the economy and to shut down the 
transnational criminal mafias that currently have so much 
influence in the government.  He said that he would be 
meeting with PAN presidential pre-candidate Oscar Berger 
later that day to begin talks on an agreement to make these 
the focus of their common campaign against the ruling FRG. 
Colom dismissed rumors of his joining forces with the PAN 
during the first round of the election, but said that a 
second round alliance is already being discussed.  Colom 
believes he currently has 17% of the vote, though polls we 
have seen show him at between 5% and 12%.  Colom does not 
expect electoral fraud on voting day to be significant, but 
believes the FRG is already \"stacking the deck\" by wooing the 
ex-PAC\'s and others with irresponsible financial promises. 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador told Colom that we share his concerns 
over the influence of organized crime as well as his interest 
in promoting economic growth.  The Ambassador discussed our 
support for the idea of setting up a commission, under the 
auspices of the UN/OAS, to investigate the operations of 
\"clandestine groups.\"  He noted that we look forward to 
working with the winner of the next election to curb the 
influence of these transnational criminal mafias.  The 
Ambassador said that the best hope for reducing poverty in 
the region was the successful negotiation of a free trade 
agreement between Central America and the United States.  A 
free trade agreement would meet opposition from sectors of 
U.S. society concerned about the situation of human and labor 
rights in Guatemala, the lack of resolution of the cases of 
11 Amcits murdered since 1999 and the lack of cooperation in 
the war against drugs.  It is critical that there be 
significant progress in these areas before CAFTA can be 
concluded.  Colom agreed, and said that his party is a big 
supporter of CAFTA (Note: In private life, Colom is an 
apparel exporter. End note). 
 
3. (C) Comment:  Colom won 20% of the vote in the 1999 
elections and, despite the subsequent fracturing of 
Guatemala\'s left, continues to have significant popular 
support.  It is too early to guess whether his movement can 
make it into the second round of elections, but at a minimum 
the votes of his supporters will be critical in a tightly 
fought race. 
Hamilton 
"
"5363","1/28/2003 15:23","03GUATEMALA220","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","02GUATEMALA3281|03GUATEMALA146|03GUATEMALA189","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KJUS, GT, UN, OAS 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND LARUE DISCUSS CLANDESTINE GROUPS 
COMMISSION AND HUMAN RIGHTS EFFORTS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 146 
     B. GUATEMALA 189 
     C. 02 GUATEMALA 3281 
 
Classified By: Katharine Read, HROff, for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: The Ambassador visited the headquarters of 
the Center for Legal Action in Human Rights (CALDH) on 
January 22 to meet with director Frank LaRue.  The Ambassador 
informed LaRue of his personal efforts in support of the 
commission to investigate clandestine groups with various GOG 
leaders, briefed LaRue on impending decertification and the 
link between combating narcotics trafficking and democracy, 
and promoted CAFTA as a democratic opportunity worthy of 
support from civil society.  LaRue credited the government 
for the naming of Human Rights Watch leader Jose Miguel 
Vivanco as a \"facilitator\", saying \"it just goes to show that 
you should never underestimate the FRG,\" but was guardedly 
optimistic about Vivianco\'s possible role after direct 
discussions with him the day before.  After discussing the 
proposed commission, LaRue warned the Ambassador that the 
other dangerous development on the human rights front is the 
resurgence of the ex-PACs.  LaRue said he participates in a 
regional civil society effort to engage in CAFTA talks (at 
the cost of criticism from some US NGOs) and highlighted the 
effectiveness of an AID-supported project to prevent crime by 
working with urban gangs.  In remarks to the press, the 
Ambassador praised the work of CALDH, was cautiously positive 
on the Vivanco appointment, and warned about the pervasive 
negative effects of narco-trafficking on corruption of 
democracy and rising local drug use.  End Summary. 
 
Vivanco Appointment 
------------------- 
 
2. (C) In their meeting at CALDH, held at LaRue\'s request, 
the Ambassador began with a discussion of the Portillo 
administration\'s decision, announced on January 21, to enlist 
Human Rights Watch Executive Director Jose Miguel Vivanco to 
facilitate the formation of a mixed commission to investigate 
clandestine groups.  LaRue said this was a reminder to all to 
\"never underestimate the FRG,\" because the FRG was prone to 
capitalize on any opportunity to improve its public image. 
While skeptical of Portillo and Gutierrez\'s motives, LaRue 
remained positive about Vivanco\'s inclusion. (Note: HROff 
spoke with human rights activists Helen Mack and Mario 
Polanco on January 22, who were initially leery of Vivanco\'s 
invitation, but now also think his leadership may be useful 
in pushing their agenda.) 
 
3. (C) LaRue said that he spoke with Vivanco on January 21, 
because they also have a long personal relationship.  Vivanco 
told LaRue that he understood he would only be facilitating 
discussions between the GOG, the NGO community, and the Human 
Rights Ombudsman\'s Office.  Vivanco promised LaRue that he 
would facilitate, not mediate, participation of all three 
groups to help define the mandate of the Commission.  Vivanco 
said he would arrive in Guatemala on February 10 to begin 
these talks. 
 
Other Commission-related Developments 
------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador briefed LaRue on his efforts to pitch 
the proposal from the \"top-down\" in the GOG. (Ref B)  LaRue 
mentioned that, since the release of the proposal on January 
16 (Ref A), he had received a \"defensive\" letter from 
Attorney General Carlos de Leon about the Public Ministry\'s 
efforts to investigate threats against human rights workers. 
LaRue expressed understanding for the AG\'s defensiveness, and 
said the human rights movement does not seek, by supporting 
the mixed international commission, to discredit or alienate 
the Public Ministry, which has its own key role to play as an 
investigative body. 
 
5. (C) In response to the Ambassador\'s question about the 
UN\'s response to the proposed commission, LaRue said that he 
views the UN response as mostly positive.  He cited as 
evidence meetings he had in New York during the holidays with 
Martha Doggett, who played an important role with the 
Salvadoran commission and now handles Guatemala at UN HQ, and 
more recently in Guatemala with MINUGUA Chief Koenigs.  LaRue 
and the Ambassador agreed that firm, public USG support may 
be motivating the UN to react more and more positively to the 
proposal. 
 
6. (C) LaRue asked the Ambassador if there was any 
possibility of the USG declassifying pertinent documents for 
the Commission.  The Ambassador said that the USG had not 
decided on that, but that the Commission should not pin all 
their hopes on evidence collected by USG agencies.  The 
Ambassador explained that declassification of documents from 
the post-1996 period the commission would potentially cover 
could be difficult because the issues are current and sources 
need to be protected. 
Twin Dangers:  Clandestine Groups and Ex-PACs 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) LaRue said that, although he was thrilled that the 
threat of clandestine groups to human rights groups and the 
general population was finally being addressed, he felt 
increasingly worried about the resurgence of former civil 
defense patrols (ex-PACs).  LaRue heard that the military 
veteran\'s association (AVEMILGUA) was looking to include the 
ex-PACs as associate members.  This would swell AVEMILGUA\'s 
membership from its current 76,000 members to over 200,000, 
making it a very powerful lobbying group in the upcoming 
elections.  The Ambassador asked if the former URNG 
combatants had any sort of collective structure.  LaRue shook 
his head and said that, sadly, the political left is 
fractured and weak.  The majority of the former URNG members 
feel abandoned by their leaders because since demobilization, 
the leaders have been well compensated but the troops were 
financially \"left behind.\" 
 
Opportunities:  Decertification and CAFTA 
----------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (C) The Ambassador told LaRue that decertification was 
coming soon, but that it will serve more as a moral statement 
against the GOG and not financially affect average 
Guatemalans due its probable waiver.  The Ambassador said 
that if the GOG earns back their certification, then the USG 
will give it to them, because the USG wants to be clear that 
this is not an attempt to influence 2003 elections.  LaRue 
said that he was pleased with the USG decision to decertify 
and that he hoped it would prompt real, serious convictions 
of criminals and steps towards improvement. 
 
9.  (C) The Ambassador and LaRue then turned the discussion 
to the coincidental timing of decertification and CAFTA 
negotiations.  While some in civil society question how we 
can engage the GOG on CAFTA and decertify them on 
counternarcotics cooperation at the same time, the Ambassador 
explained that at this stage there is no linkage.  He 
cautioned, however, that anti-drug cooperation would have to 
be on track if CAFTA is to be approved by Congress. 
 
10.  (C) LaRue briefed that Ambassador on his involvement 
with the Center for Integration and Development (CID), a 
Central American civil society consortium that would like to 
represent democratic and human rights concerns in the CAFTA 
negotiations.  LaRue explained that all the other Central 
American governments have been open to including NGOs in the 
informal process, while the FRG has ruled out any private 
sector or civil society participation.  The Ambassador said 
that he was pleased that civil society groups recognize that 
CAFTA not only promises lowered tariffs, but also good 
governance, and that the USG is fully supportive of a process 
that involves full consultation with a variety of 
non-governmental actors. 
 
Bright Spot:  AID-supported CALDH Gang Project 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
11.  (U) LaRue asked the Ambassador if he would lend 
political support to a crime prevention program of CALDH that 
is funded by AID for approximately 18 more months.  LaRue 
said that CALDH was very successful so far, but that recently 
they had run into difficulties with the new police chief (who 
refuses to meet with them) and the they were concerned about 
the pre-Christmas preventative detention plan that triggered 
the Pavoncito prison riot (Ref C).  LaRue said that, during 
the Pavoncito riots, the CALDH mentees refrained from 
engaging in the violence and protected the art supplies that 
were part of their rehabilitative program.  The Ambassador 
pledged to raise the project with the new police chief and 
lobby for a meeting with project leaders. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
12.  (C) LaRue is an articulate and able human rights 
activist, open to working cooperatively with other sectors of 
society, and is the leader of Guatemala\'s largest human 
rights NGO.  He himself noted differences within the human 
rights community over engagement with the GOG (he is in favor 
of it, despite visceral dislike for Portillo, and CALDH\'s 
open genocide case against Rios Montt), engagement in CAFTA 
talks (again, he supports), and, frankly, his openness to 
engagement with the USG in support of the human rights 
agenda.  We will follow up this meeting by continuing to 
collaborate with the human rights community on the formation 
of the commission, on CAFTA talks, monitoring the resurgence 
of ex-PACs, and enlisting the support of civil society for 
more serious counter-narcotics efforts. 
Hamilton 
"
"5383","1/29/2003 14:00","03GUATEMALA231","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: GERARDI WITNESS FOUND DEAD 
 
REF: 02 GUATEMALA 2649 
 
1. (U) Summary: A key witness in the Gerardi trial was 
reportedly murdered on December 19, 2002.  The body of the 
witness, Noe Gomez Limon, was found on January 21, nearly a 
month after the murder, and details about the murder remain 
fragmentary.  On January 22, MINUGUA called on the government 
to investigate his death and to protect the remaining 
witnesses in the Gerardi case.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Noe Gomez Limon was an inmate at the prison in 
Antigua, Guatemala in 1998, along with his brother, Gilberto 
Gomez Limon.  Gilberto testified during the summer 2001 
Gerardi murder trial that he saw fellow inmate Obdulio 
Villanueva leave the prison the night of Bishop Gerardi\'s 
murder, April 26, 1998.  In the 2001 trial, Noe testified 
that he had repeatedly been threatened in an effort to 
silence his brother Gilberto. 
 
3. (SBU) MINUGUA and the Archbishop\'s Office on Human Rights 
(ODHA) confirmed Noe Gomez Limon\'s accounts of being under 
threat until his murder in December.  His brother Gilberto\'s 
testimony was considered \"key\" to the verdict in 2001, when 
Obdulio Villanueva was found guilty along with three other 
defendants.  That verdict is now in question, after one 
appeals court annulled the sentence and ordered a retrial 
(reftel), prompting another court to uphold the 2001 sentence 
while an appeal of the retrial decision is heard.  ODHA 
director Nery Rodenas told HROff that the public audience for 
the presentation of the appeals will be held on January 31. 
 
4. (C) Rodenas also informed HROff that Noe Gomez Limon was 
under the Public Ministry\'s witness protection program in 
another country until sometime in 2002, when he relinquished 
their protection and returned to Guatemala.  Rodenas assumes 
that this was an attempt to intimidate Gilberto Gomez Limon, 
brother of slain Noe Gomez Limon, from returning to Guatemala 
should another trial be ordered by the courts.  Gilberto is 
still in the witness protection program and his testimony is 
crucial to the prosecution\'s case against Obdulio Villanueva. 
 
5. (C) Rodenas said that this is the first witness from the 
Gerardi case that has been murdered, while virtually all of 
the witnesses for the prosecution have been threatened since 
their involvement in the events of April 26, 1998.  Rodenas 
is troubled by the reluctance of the Public Ministry to 
investigate Gomez Limon\'s death, especially because his 
murder was not reported until a month after it supposedly 
occurred in his home.  Rodenas said the longer the Public 
Ministry waits to conduct the investigation, the less likely 
it is they will obtain any results that would help shed light 
on who is behind the murder. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT: Continued attempts to intimidate and 
eliminate witnesses in the Gerardi case remain deeply 
troubling.  Whether this murder was politically motivated 
remains to be proven, though we are inclined to agree with 
Rodenas that the convenient timing of the murder so close to 
the impending appeals decision is no coincidence.  Ambassador 
is raising this case and our concern about the Gerardi appeal 
status with the Attorney General.  End Comment. 
Hamilton 
"
"5400","1/29/2003 20:00","03GUATEMALA243","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, SNAR, PHUM, ETRD, PINR, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND RIOS MONTT DISCUSS DECERTIFICATION, 
CAFTA, HUMAN RIGHTS AND LEGISLATIVE ISSUES 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  In a January 27 meeting with the Ambassador, 
President of Congress Rios Montt professed to be a strong 
supporter of CAFTA (which he views as reducing the political 
influence of the traditional economic elites), and expressed 
understanding for Guatemala\'s impending counternarcotics 
decertification.  He regretted that the decertification 
decision would come during the election year, but said it was 
\"correct.\"  Rios Montt volunteered nothing on his plans for 
the upcoming election, but did say it would not be easy for 
the USG to remain neutral.  He offered to help us on a 
variety of bilateral issues.  Although the meeting was frank, 
it was cordial enough, and it was clear that Rios Montt wants 
to be viewed by us as a pragmatic ally on those issues where 
our interests coincide.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) The Ambassador, PAO and PolCouns met with President 
of Congress Efrain Rios Montt at Congress on January 27.  The 
retired General and former defacto President was accompanied 
by three of his most trusted parliamentary advisors: First 
Vice President of Congress Carlos Hernandez, Third Vice 
President of Congress Jorge Arevalo and Frente Republicano 
Guatemalteco (FRG) caucus head Aristides Crespo.  Not present 
was Second Vice President of Congress Zury Rios Sosa, his 
daughter.  Rios Montt took the Ambassador\'s 
\"isn\'t-there-a-Vice-President-missing?\" tweaking in good 
grace. 
 
Counternarcotics Cooperation and CAFTA 
-------------------------------------- 
3. (C) As he has with other official and unofficial 
interlocutors, the Ambassador said that the White House would 
soon announce a decision regarding the certification of 
countries that cooperate in the war against drugs, and that, 
in all likelihood, Guatemala would be decertified.  He noted 
that a recent upsurge in cooperation by the GOG and increased 
cocaine seizures would augur well for Guatemala getting a 
vital national interests waiver.  The Ambassador noted, 
however, that it is critical that GOG cooperation against 
narcotics improve quickly, as prolonged decertification would 
make it more difficult for the U.S. Congress to consider 
entering into a free trade agreement with Guatemala at the 
time negotiations are concluded.  The Ambassador argued that 
a free trade agreement (CAFTA) offers the best hope for 
reducing poverty in Guatemala, and that it is in both 
countries\' interests to ensure that negotiations proceed 
smoothly, addressing promptly non-trade related issues that 
could fuel opposition to an agreement. 
 
4. (C) Rios Montt regretted that decertification should come 
at the beginning of the election campaign, and said 
Guatemalans would inevitably link the two.  He added that the 
United States \"would do what it had to do,\" but said that we 
were \"correct\" in decertifying.  He did not defend the 
Portillo Administration\'s record on counternarcotics 
cooperation, nor argue (as other senior GOG officials do) 
that flagging counternarcotics cooperation was a result of 
resource constraints. 
 
5. (C) On CAFTA, Rios Montt said that he is one of its 
greatest proponents.  He agreed that it was the region\'s best 
hope for poverty reduction, and added that it would break the 
power of the monopolies that have long dominated Guatemala\'s 
economy as well as its politics.  Rios argued that free trade 
would also be hard to sell to some in Guatemala\'s Congress, 
noting that legislators who have ties to \"mercantilist 
business sectors\" are intent on opposing it. 
 
6. (C) The Ambassador noted that critics of globalization and 
others in the U.S. will question why we are entering into a 
special trade relationship with Guatemala when threats 
against human rights workers are growing and the murders of 
11 Amcits (now 12) since 1999 have gone unsolved.  He urged 
the ruling party legislators to use their influence with the 
government to ensure that attention is brought to these 
issues. 
 
The Upcoming Elections 
---------------------- 
7. (C) The Ambassador told Rios Montt that the United States 
will be scrupulously neutral in the November 2003 national 
elections.  He noted that the sole USG interest in the 
elections is that they be \"free, fair and constitutional,\" 
and noted that we are working with the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal (TSE) and civil society organizations to contribute 
to the transparency of the process.  The Ambassador asked 
Rios Montt if criticisms of the way the TSE members were 
elected could contribute to a constitutional challenge at 
some point (Note: OAS reps have told us they have doubts that 
the mechanism used to replace a full tribunal member who 
resigned with an alternate was legal. end note).  Rios Montt 
responded that the mechanism used was that established in the 
Tribunal\'s statutes, but said that constitutional lawyers 
could make arguments for and against (Note: None of the 
political parties has objected to the way the TSE member who 
resigned was replaced, and the OAS\' concern does not, at 
least at this stage, appear to be shared by any of the 
parties. end note). 
 
8. (C) Rios Montt said that he doubted that it would be easy 
for the United States to remain truly neutral in the upcoming 
electoral campaign.  He made no allusions to his own possible 
candidacy, but at one point in the conversation said that if 
the FRG were the largest \"opposition party\" in Congress in 
the next session, we could count on their support. 
 
9. (SBU) Rios Montt said that the FRG continued to pursue 
reform of the electoral law, but had given up pressing for 
implementation of reforms this year.  He believes the bill 
will eventually be adopted, but not put into place until 
after the 2003 elections. 
 
The Clandestine Groups 
---------------------- 
10. (SBU) The Ambassador drew attention to the recent 
announcement of the Human Rights Ombudsman in regard to the 
creation of an international commission to investigate the 
operations of clandestine groups.  The Ambassador praised the 
legislators for passing a resolution supporting this 
initiative and urged the FRG leaders to give this proposal 
their full support.  Congressman Arevalo responded that 
indeed Congress had passed the resolution with the vote of 
all the FRG members. 
 
The 2003 Legislative Agenda 
--------------------------- 
11. (U) In response to a question from the Ambassador, Rios 
Montt said that the priorities for the 2003 legislative 
agenda would include laws designed to implement Peace Accord 
commitments.  He noted that financial transparency laws would 
top the agenda, with the Law of Public Contracts and a 
Freedom of Information Law already under discussion.  He said 
that Congress was also working on a law to compensate those 
affected by the war (note: the term he used did not 
distinguish between victims and former civil patrol members). 
 This legislative session will be substantially reduced by 
the election campaign, which will soon begin distracting the 
attention of legislators. 
 
New Horizons 
------------ 
12. (C) The Ambassador thanked Rios Montt for the quick 
action by Congress in 2001 to approve the New Horizons joint 
military exercise in the Peten.  He noted that we are 
planning a similar exercise in Jutiapa in 2004, and were 
already working on an agreement with the GOG to authorize 
this exercise.  He asked the legislators if we could count on 
their continued support for this exercise.  Rios Montt 
responded that he is a strong believer in civic action 
exercises and would ensure continued support in Congress as 
long as he was President of Congress.  He noted that, by 
2004, the composition of Congress was less certain. 
 
IPR Legislation 
--------------- 
13. (U) The Ambassador expressed concern about legislation 
recently passed by Congress which represents a big step 
backward for IPR protection and violates Guatemala\'s 
international commitments on the matter.  He asked the 
legislative leaders to take quick action to bring Guatemala 
back into compliance with its international IPR commitments, 
particularly in view of ongoing CAFTA negotiations where 
Guatemala\'s IPR regime would become a matter of discord. 
 
14. (SBU) Rios Montt opened by saying that the new law was 
not inconsistent with the direction international drug patent 
protection was heading, and alluded to official USG 
statements supporting generic drugs.  He recognized, however, 
that arguments could be made against its conformity with 
Guatemala\'s international IPR commitments, and said Congress 
was prepared to repeal the law as soon as it is published and 
the Executive sends a bill calling for its repeal.  He 
implied that the law, which was promoted by opposition 
congressmen, would not be in effect for long before it was 
repealed. 
 
Fuel Taxes 
---------- 
15. (SBU)  The Ambassador commented that the Guatemalan tax 
authority (SAAT) was using the lack of explicit language 
exempting diplomatic missions from paying the new fuel tax to 
charge this tax to embassies in violation of the Vienna 
Convention.  Noting that Congress was rewriting that law, he 
asked that they give consideration to including specific 
language which would honor Guatemala\'s commitment under the 
Vienna Convention and specifically exempt diplomatic missions 
from these taxes.  Rios Montt said that he had been a 
Military Attache in Madrid for several years and understands 
the importance of fully implementing the Vienna Convention. 
He promised to ensure that new tax laws include assurances 
that protect diplomatic missions against paying the taxes. 
 
Tyco and 911 
------------ 
16. (U) The Ambassador told the legislators that a U.S. 
company (Tyco) had made a significant investment in designing 
the architecture of a 911 system for Guatemala at the request 
of the GOG, and they needed to know if the GOG was interested 
in purchasing their product (the actual phone and support 
equipment).  Tyco does not want to invest further if the GOG 
is not interested, but they do not want to walk away now if 
the GOG is going to buy the system.  Tyco told us that the 
funding decision was being held up by Congress. 
 
17. (U) Rios Montt said that GUATEL (the national phone 
company) has the funding in hand should it decide to purchase 
the system, and said Congress will not have any role to play 
in this decision.  He added that he thinks a 911 system is a 
good idea, but noted that in Guatemala there is no police and 
ambulance infrastructure to support it.  He quipped that 
there would be no first responder to send if someone called 
911 asking for help.  He questioned whether it would not be a 
better idea for a U.S. company to bid on a concession to run 
not only a 911 phone line, but the complete package of first 
response. 
 
Rios Montt\'s view of his country 
-------------------------------- 
18. (C) Rios Montt closed the meeting by welcoming the 
Ambassador to Guatemala and saying that Guatemala is a very 
complex and complicated country.  He said that ethnic 
identity continues to divide the country in ways that will 
not be easily overcome.  He added that Guatemalans have a 
deeply entrenched culture of confrontation which long 
preceded the arrival of the Spaniards, and said that 
compromise and consensus are not native.  Rios Montt said 
that much of the current confrontation can be blamed on the 
traditional economic elite\'s often violent resistance to 
change, but said that CAFTA offered the opportunity to 
\"democratize\" the economy once and for all. 
 
Comment 
------- 
19. (C) The General was animated, in good form, and clearly 
wanted to come across as a pragmatist we can deal with in 
areas where our interests coincide.  He did not try to 
address the historic concerns he knows that we have regarding 
his role during the internal conflict and appeared resigned 
to accepting that those impressions will never change.  Rios 
Montt views CAFTA as the best tool for breaking the back of 
the traditional economic monopolies that have long played an 
important role in Guatemalan politics, and as such he is an 
ardent supporter.  While tacitly acknowledging that there 
will be areas where our interests will not coincide (e.g. his 
electoral ambitions), it was clear that Rios Montt believes 
we share many interests in common, and he is prepared to work 
with us to advance those interests. 
Hamilton 
"
"5401","1/29/2003 22:43","03GUATEMALA248","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA207|03GUATEMALA231","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000248 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR WEIGHS IN WITH ATTORNEY GENERAL DE LEON 
ON GERARDI AND CHOCON CASES 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 231 
     B. GUATEMALA 207 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton, for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The Ambassador phoned Attorney General Carlos 
de Leon on January 29 to enlist his immediate action on the 
investigation of a recent Gerardi witness murder (Ref A) and 
the protection of the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, 
Tatiana Morales, who has been receiving threats coincidental 
to her involvement in the Chocon case, which is set to go to 
trial on January 30.  De Leon responded that he was 
initiating an investigation into the murder and doing the 
best he could to protect Morales.  The Ambassador thanked him 
for his efforts and for his work on the case involving two 
Peace Corps Volunteers (Ref B).  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador phoned Attorney General Carlos de Leon 
on January 29 to express concern over the murder of Noe Gomez 
Limon, the brother of a key witness in the high-profile 
murder case of Guatemalan Archbishop Gerardi.  The Ambassador 
noted that human rights and press sources tell us that the 
Public Ministry has yet to open an investigation into his 
murder.  The Ambassador said that he hoped these sources were 
mistaken, but suggested the need for the Public Ministry to 
investigate the murder both vigorously and publicly.  De Leon 
responded that the Public Ministry was indeed investigating 
the murder, but agreed that they should do so more publicly. 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador noted as well that Tatiana Morales, the 
Special Prosecutor for Human Rights Cases, has been receiving 
threats because of her involvement in the Chocon case, which 
is set to go to trial on January 30 in the High Impact Court 
of Chiquimula.  (NOTE: This is the trial of 16 former 
anti-narcotics police who killed two civilians and sought to 
cover it up.)  The Ambassador noted that Morales is 
reportedly unable to communicate effectively from Chiquimula 
with her office and asked that that situation be fixed. 
 
4. (C) De Leon said he was on top of the situation, that he 
was providing Morales with an armored vehicle and follow car 
with armed guards for the time she is in Chiquimula, and that 
the National Civilian Police are providing 50 policemen for 
courtroom security and order.  De Leon has just met with the 
President of the Supreme Court, who was concerned about 
threats to one of the three judges in the case.  The judge 
was considering withdrawing from the case.  De Leon (and the 
Supreme Court President, who phoned for the Ambassador later 
on the same subject) said the judge wanted to move his son 
and other immediate family members to the US to be with 
relatives, temporarily.  The Ambassador arranged with the 
Consular Section to assure expeditious consideration of their 
visas. 
 
5. (C) The Ambassador also expressed appreciation to De Leon 
for the support (which has, with RSO prodding, been good) the 
Public Ministry has given in the investigation of the assault 
on two Peace Corps Volunteers. 
Hamilton 
"
"5439","1/31/2003 16:41","03GUATEMALA264","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000264 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, ETRD, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENTIAL PRE-CANDIDATE WHITBECK DISCUSSES 
UPCOMING ELECTION 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Former senior FRG member Harris Whitbeck 
told the Ambassador that it is almost certain he will run for 
President as the candidate of the Partido Patriota, and said 
the FRG has lost much of its popular support.  He believes 
Rios Montt would be defeated at the polls if he runs.  The 
Ambassador told Whitbeck that the USG will be strictly 
neutral in the election, and said that we hope this 
government and its successor will improve counter-drug 
cooperation.  The Ambassador said CAFTA represents an 
historic opportunity to reduce poverty in Guatemala, and said 
it is urgent that Guatemalans effectively address our 
non-trade concerns that could endanger approval of CAFTA by 
Congress.  It is too early in the electoral season to 
speculate on Whitbeck\'s chances of winning the Presidency, 
but the polls would suggest at this point that he is a long 
shot. End summary. 
 
2. (C) In a January 30 breakfast with the Ambassador, former 
senior FRG official Harris Whitbeck said that the Partido 
Patriota had offered to make him its presidential candidate 
in the 2003 elections, and he will make a decision in coming 
days.  He told us it is almost certain he will accept. 
Whitbeck, who was a founding member of the FRG, left the 
ruling party in 2002 and accused it publicly of abandoning 
its principles.  He said that he told Partido Patriota 
founder Otto Perez Molina that his one condition for becoming 
the party\'s presidential standard bearer was that he would 
pick his own cabinet, and Perez Molina could head the party\'s 
congressional team (note: retired General Perez Molina has a 
constitutional impediment that keeps him from being the 
presidential candidate until he has been out of the military 
for five years -- in 2004. That impediment does not apply to 
congressional candidacies.  end note).  Whitbeck believes he 
could secure the support of much of the FRG\'s rural base, 
where he is well known because of his government jobs in 
rural development, and believes voters are looking for an 
alternative to the \"corruption-ridden FRG and PAN.\"  He does 
not believe his \"American\" image would cost him votes (Note: 
Whitbeck was a dual national, but renounced his U.S. 
citizenship in 1993). 
 
3. (C) Whitbeck said the FRG is in a tight spot -- Rios Montt 
wants to run, but doesn\'t know if the system will let him; 
the party has no one else it can credibly run, and if it 
stretches outside the party for the candidate, it will 
relinquish control.  Whitbeck opined that the growing public 
momentum for Rios Montt\'s candidacy is designed at least in 
part to keep FRG congressmen from jumping ship and joining 
the opposition, which many are expected to do if Rios Montt 
does not run.  Whitbeck believes that Zury Rios\'s political 
ambitions (which he described as \"uncontainable to the point 
of being almost pathological\") are also keeping the aging 
General in the political fray.  Whitbeck said that if Rios 
Montt runs, he will lose. 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador told Whitbeck that the USG would be 
scrupulously neutral in the upcoming election.  He commented 
that decertification of Guatemala as a cooperating partner in 
the war on drugs was almost certain to happen imminently, and 
said we would be calling on this government and its 
successors to greatly improve counter-narcotics cooperation. 
The lack of significant improvement in counter-narcotics 
performance would imperil Guatemala\'s participation in CAFTA. 
 The Ambassador said that CAFTA offers, in our view, the best 
hope the Central American region has had since the Alliance 
for Progress to reduce poverty, and that we hoped Guatemala 
would quickly address the non-trade issues that could become 
impediments to CAFTA ratification.  Whitbeck agreed that 
CAFTA was an historic opportunity for Guatemala, and said all 
parties should be working to ensure that the negotiation is a 
success. 
 
5. (C) Whitbeck said that reducing the power and influence of 
the narcotics mafias and containing violent crime would be 
difficult challenges for the next government.  He believes 
the military should be reduced, and its excess troops turned 
into a new police force to replace \"the current corrupt 
force.\" He said that, if elected, he would seek USG advice on 
his ministers and senior government officials to ensure that 
he was not putting individuals with ties to organized crime 
in positions of responsibility. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  The long election season is just beginning, 
and it is too soon to tell which two candidates will make it 
to the second round.  Whitbeck will have both the 
disadvantage and the advantage of not being the candidate of 
a major party.  The Partido Patriota, while small, built a 
public name for itself in the 2001 and 2002 protests against 
the Portillo government, and is reported to have received 
significant funding from the Gutierrez-Bosch conglomerate. 
Whitbeck has a better grasp on the realities and needs of 
rural Guatemalans than any of the other potential candidates 
and is progressive on all the issues of importance to us.  At 
this stage, however, the success of his candidacy remains a 
long shot. 
Hamilton 
"
"5446","1/31/2003 20:23","03GUATEMALA275","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE20816","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000275 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2013 
TAGS: CU, PHUM, PREL, GT, UNCHR 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN COSPONSORSHIP OF CUBAN HUMAN RIGHTS 
RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 20816 
 
     B. PARA 4 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton for reason 1.5 (b) 
 
1.  (C)  I have misgivings about our seeking Guatemalan 
co-sponsorship of the UNHRC resolution on Cuba (seeking a yes 
vote would be different).  There is the question, first, 
whether Guatemalan support would be a genuine asset to the 
effort in Geneva.  As the Department is aware, violence and 
threats of violence against the courageous Guatemalan human 
rights community have increased dramatically since the 2002 
UNHRC session.  We have led international community efforts 
to turn this situation around, so far with only limited 
success.  Although we do not know for sure that state 
security elements are involved, we are disappointed that the 
government has done so little publicly and privately to make 
its opposition to such threats clear.  With its own 
credibility on human rights so grievously impaired, 
Guatemalan co-sponsorship at Geneva may actually detract from 
the legitimacy of our efforts, in particular among the Latins 
and Europeans.  The Cubans would exploit this vulnerability 
to the hilt. 
 
2.     A second consideration is that we are gaining credit 
with democratic forces ) and 
the Guatemalan public at large * for the forthright stand we 
are taking here on issues of democratic governance.  These 
includes, in addition to the threats against the human rights 
community: the political influence of organized crime (the 
so-called &clandestine groups8) and narcotics traffickers; 
corruption in a wide variety of manifestations; broader rule 
of law issues; support for free, fair and constitutional 
elections; and full implementation of the 1996 Peace Accords. 
 Impending decertification is an important part of this mix. 
But fear among democratic forces that our needs on 
multilateral issues will ultimately trump their concerns runs 
deep. It would be difficult indeed to convince Guatemalan 
democrats we had not traded their concerns for GOG support on 
Cuba, especially if we were re-certifying Guatemala on drugs 
(no matter how justified on the merits) in the same time 
frame. 
 
3.    That said, if Department determines that the need for 
Guatemalan support overrides these considerations, we will 
give it our best shot.  My senior staff believes replacement 
of FM Orellana with Edgar Gutierrez makes sponsorship, even a 
favorable vote, a much, much tougher sell than last year.  I 
think a yes vote (conceivably even sponsorship) could be 
possible if we pull out all the stops of high-level 
intervention.  Portillo will seek a quid pro quid, possibly 
re-certification.   He should get only the modicum of respect 
he would deserve for doing the right thing on an important 
human rights issue. 
 
// 
Hamilton 
"
"5507","2/4/2003 23:41","03GUATEMALA305","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","02GUATEMALA2649","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000305 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: GERARDI SUPREME COURT APPEAL 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 2649 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 248 
 
1.  SUMMARY: On January 31, the Supreme Court Chamber of 
Appeals held the public audience of the latest appeal in the 
Gerardi case.  The Archbishop\'s Office on Human Rights (ODHA) 
and the Public Ministry presented their appeals of the fourth 
appeals court\'s October 8, 2002 decision (Ref A) to annul the 
2001 conviction and order a retrial.  The Ambassador attended 
the judicial proceedings to show USG interest in justice 
being done in this case.  The judges are expected to render a 
decision by February 6.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Immediately after the Fourth Appeals Court\'s October 8, 
2002, decision to annul the 2001 sentence condemning four men 
for the murder of Bishop Gerardi, the ODHA presented its 
appeal to the Supreme Court.  The public reading of this 
appeal, as well as the oral arguments of both the defense and 
the prosecution, was held on January 31.  Under Guatemalan 
law, the Supreme Court\'s Chamber of Appeals has three working 
days to come to a decision on the appeal. 
 
3.  The courtroom at the Supreme Court was two-thirds full, 
with the bulk of the audience being international human 
rights advocates and various Guatemalan civil society 
notables.  The Public Ministry presented its appeal first, 
followed by the ODHA.  Both parties argued that the 
overturning of the 2001 sentence was illegal because the 
Fourth Appeals Court did not review all of the evidence. 
They maintained that while Ruben Chanax Sontay\'s testimonies 
from preliminary depositions and the actual 2001 trial were 
contradictory, the rest of their evidence from the 2001 trial 
was solid. 
 
4.  All five defense lawyers, including representation for 
Gerardi\'s absolved maid, Margarita Lopez, presented their 
rebuttals following the prosecution.  They argued that the 
appeals process is a necessary part of the justice system and 
that the Fourth Appeals Court\'s decision should be respected. 
 Margarita Lopez\'s lawyer argued that even if a new trial was 
to take place, his client should be removed from the 
proceedings because she was absolved in the 2001 trial. 
 
5.  Immediately following the oral arguments, the court 
adjourned for three working days of deliberations, set to 
conclude on February 6.  The decision will not be released in 
a public audience, but given privately to the parties. 
 
6.  The Ambassador greeted human rights activists and press 
after the judicial proceedings.  His attendance at the trial 
was noted in all four leading dailies, and variations on his 
statements regarding support for justice in Guatemala were 
widely quoted.  For example, El Periodico quoted the 
Ambassador as saying his presence at the Gerardi appeal was 
meant as a \"sign of solidarity for justice in Guatemala.\"  At 
a separate event, the Ambassador later met one of the four 
presiding justices, who was pleased by that explanation for 
the Ambassador\'s presence in court. 
 
7.  COMMENT: We find the recent death of a Gerardi case 
witness extremely troubling (Ref B), and will be alert to any 
signs that the intimidation of witnesses will impact the 
ruling.  The ODHA appeal is based on legal technicalities 
over procedures followed by the lower appeals court, which 
ordered a retrial based on discrepancies in the testimony of 
one witness.  If the original guilty verdict is confirmed, 
the defendants will return to prison.  If the 2001 sentence 
is annulled, a retrial will put witnesses at risk and delay 
(if not set back) justice.  While ODHA is confident its 
argument will save the earlier conviction, we 
"
"5521","2/5/2003 13:31","03GUATEMALA307","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000307 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/PPC (LYNN) AND PM/B (WESTMORELAND) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, MOPS, MASS, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: CIRCULAR 175 REQUEST FOR NEW HORIZIONS 2004 
MILITARY EXERCISE 
 
1. Summary and Action Request:  Post requests circular 175 
authority to negotiate an exercise-specific agreement with 
the Government of Guatemala (GOG) that would cover U.S. 
personnel participating the planned New Horizons 2004 - 
Guatemala exercise.  Except for point number 13 which 
incorporates Article 98-like protections and a few minor 
edits to limit the scope of the agreement to the exercise, 
the text of the diplomatic note proposed below is identical 
to the Status of Forces Agreement Post was authorized to 
negotiate with the GOG in January 2001.  Given that the GOG 
under separate administrations has essentially refused to 
respond to repeated requests to negotiate updated SOFAS 
(pending since March 1999), Post proposes the 
exercise-specific agreement as an intermediate step that 
would help set a positive precedent for a full-blown SOFA in 
the future. 
 
2. New Horizons 2004 is a joint Humanitarian and Civic 
Assistance (HCA) exercise designed to provide training 
opportunities for U.S. military engineers and support 
personnel via the construction of schools, clinics and water 
wells in the impoverished Guatemalan province of Jutiapa. 
The exercise will include Medical Readiness Training 
Exercises (MEDRETES) at several sites in the same area, and 
is scheduled for the March - June 2004 time frame.  End 
Summary. 
 
3. Begin text of proposed diplomatic note. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Relations of the 
Republic of Guatemala and has the honor to refer to ongoing 
discussions between representatives of our two governments 
regarding issues related to the status of the United States 
military and civilian personnel who are employees of the 
United States Armed Forces and who may be temporarily present 
in Guatemala in connection with the Humanitarian and Civic 
Assistance (HCA) exercise known as New Horizons 2004 - 
Guatemala (hereafter referred to as \"the exercise\"), planned 
to be conducted jointly by the Guatemalan and United States 
Armed Forces from 1 March - 30 June, 2004  (hereafter 
referred to as the \"duration of the exercise\").  The Embassy 
has the honor to propose the following agreement between our 
two governments with regard to the conduct of the exercise: 
 
--The present agreement will be in addition to the following 
accords: The Military Air Transit Agreement of December 29, 
1949; the General Accord on Technical Cooperation of 
September 1, 1954; the Military Assistance Agreement of June 
18, 1955, and the Status of Military Mission Personnel 
Agreement of May 4, 1965. 
 
--The present agreement does not imply the passage of a 
foreign army through Guatemalan national territory, nor the 
temporary establishment of foreign military bases. 
 
--\"United States Personnel\" shall mean military and civilian 
personnel of the United States Armed Forces temporarily 
present in Guatemala in connection with the exercise. 
 
--It shall be the responsibility of the United States 
personnel to respect the laws of Guatemala and to abstain 
from any activity inconsistent with the spirit of the 
agreement herein described.  United States authorities will 
take necessary measures to that end. 
 
--The Government of Guatemala shall accord to the United 
States personnel temporarily present in Guatemala in 
connection with the exercise status equivalent to that 
accorded to the administrative and technical staff of the 
United States Embassy in accordance with the Vienna 
Convention on Diplomatic Relations of April 18, 1971.  If, 
notwithstanding the preceding sentence, Guatemalan 
authorities detain any United States personnel, the 
Guatemalan authorities shall immediately notify the Embassy 
of the United States of America in Guatemala and promptly 
return such personnel to United States control.  Guatemalan 
and U.S. military police investigators shall cooperate in the 
investigation of any crime believed to have been committed by 
or against United States personnel. 
 
--United States personnel may enter and leave Guatemala with 
United States Government identification and collective 
movement or individual travel orders. 
 
--United States personnel may wear their uniforms while 
performing official duties in Guatemala. 
 
--United States personnel in Guatemala shall enjoy freedom of 
movement and the right to undertake those activities deemed 
necessary for the performance of their mission. Guatemalan 
authorities shall accept as valid, without a driving test or 
fee, a driving permit or license issued by the appropriate 
United States authority to United States personnel for the 
operation of military or official vehicles.  Vehicles owned 
by the United States need not be registered, but shall have 
appropriate identification markings. 
 
--The Government of Guatemala shall accept as valid medical 
licenses issued by the appropriate United States authorities 
to United States personnel. 
 
--The Government of the United States of America and the 
Government of Guatemala shall waive any and all claims 
against each other, other than contractual claims, for 
damage, loss, or destruction of the other\'s property arising 
from activities to which this agreement applies. 
 
--The Government of Guatemala shall indemnify the United 
States Government for all claims by anyone (vice \"third 
parties\") arising from the activities of United States 
personnel related to the exercises.  For all other claims, 
(vice \"by third parties\") the Government of the United States 
of America shall consider the claims and decide whether it 
will offer an ex gratia payment, and if so, in what amount. 
The Government of Guatemala shall, upon the request of the 
United States Government, submit advice and recommendations 
on Guatemalan law to the claims authorities of the United 
States Government for their use in evaluating liability and 
the amount of damages.  These claims shall be expeditiously 
processed and settled by United States authorities in 
accordance with United States law. 
 
--The military and civilian personnel of the United States 
Armed Forces shall not be subject to any proceedings for the 
enforcement of any judgment given against them in Guatemala 
in a matter arising from the performance of their official 
duties. 
 
--The Government of Guatemala and the Government of the 
United States agree that neither government will surrender, 
expel or transfer by any means, personnel of the other 
government to any international tribunal for any purpose, 
unless such tribunal is established by the UN Security 
Council, without the expressed consent of the other 
government.  Both governments further agree that neither 
government will surrender, expel, or transfer by any means 
personnel of the other government to any entity or third 
country for the purpose of surrender to or transfer to any 
international tribunal, unless such tribunal has been 
established by the UN Security Council, without the expressed 
consent of the other government. 
 
--United States Government equipment, material, supplies and 
other property imported into or acquired in Guatemala by or 
on behalf of the United States Armed Forces in connection 
with the exercise, shall be free from all Guatemala 
inspections, duties, taxes, and other charges.  Title to such 
property shall remain with the United States Government, 
which may remove such property from Guatemala at any time, 
free from export duties, taxes, and similar charges.  The 
exemption provided in this paragraph shall also extend to any 
duty, tax, or other charges, which would otherwise be 
assessed upon such property after importation into, or 
acquisition in, Guatemala.  Such property may be removed from 
Guatemala, or disposed therein, provided that disposition of 
such property in Guatemala to persons or entities not 
entitled to exemption from applicable taxes or duties shall 
be subject to payment of such taxes and duties by such 
persons or entities. 
 
--Baggage, personal effects and other property for the 
personal use of United States personnel may be imported into 
and used in Guatemala free from all inspections, taxes and 
other charges during the period of their service in 
Guatemala.  Such property shall normally be exported or 
transferred to other United States personnel.  Transfers of 
such property to persons or entities in Guatemala not 
entitled to import privileges may be made only under terms 
and conditions including payment of applicable duties and 
taxes imposed by the Government of Guatemala.  The 
exportation of such property and of property acquired in 
Guatemala by United States personnel shall be free from all 
duties, taxes, and other charges. 
 
--The United States Armed Forces and United States personnel 
may use water, electricity, and other public utilities and 
facilities on terms and conditions, including rates or 
charges, no less favorable than those available to the 
Guatemalan Armed Forces, in like circumstances, unless 
otherwise agreed.  The Government of Guatemala shall, upon 
request, assist United States authorities in obtaining water, 
electricity, and other public utilities and facilities. 
 
--Guatemalan authorities shall permit the United States Armed 
Forces and United States personnel to utilize radio 
communication for the conduct of official duties of the 
United States personnel.  The Government of Guatemala shall 
notify the United States Armed Forces of the radio 
frequencies for local and international official 
communication to be used for this purpose. 
 
--United States personnel may deploy with all authorized unit 
and individual equipment.  Maintenance, control, and security 
of equipment will be  the responsibility of the United States 
Armed Forces. 
 
--Vehicles, vessels, and aircraft owned or operated by or for 
the United States Armed Forces shall not be subject to the 
payment of landing or port fees, pilotage charges, navigation 
or overflight charges, or tolls or other use charges, 
including light and harbor dues while in Guatemala.  However, 
the United States Armed Forces shall pay reasonable charges 
for services requested and received.  Aircraft operated by or 
for the United States Armed Forces shall observe local air 
traffic control regulations while in Guatemala.  Vessels 
owned or operated by or for the United States Armed Forces 
shall not be subject to compulsory pilotage in Guatemala, but 
United States Armed Forces will allow a Guatemalan military 
observer on board while in Guatemalan territorial water to 
comply with Guatemalan law. 
 
--United States and Guatemalan authorities may cooperate in 
taking such steps as may be necessary to insure the security 
of United States personnel and property in Guatemala pursuant 
to the provisions herein described. 
 
--The specific responsibilities and actions necessary to 
execute this agreement will be specified in a Memorandum of 
Agreement between the armed forces of both countries.  Any 
differences regarding the interpretation or application of 
the provisions herein described shall be resolved by 
consultation between our two governments. 
 
--The United States has the honor to propose that if the 
foregoing is acceptable to the Government of Guatemala, this 
note and your note in reply shall constitute an agreement 
between our two governments to conduct the exercise under the 
terms of this agreement, which shall enter into force 60 days 
before the exercise commences and will remain in force until 
30 June 2004 or for the duration of the exercise. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign 
Relations of the Republic of Guatemala the assurances of its 
highest consideration.  End text. 
Hamilton 
"
"5531","2/5/2003 21:33","03GUATEMALA317","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA275|03STATE20816","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, CU, GT, UNCHR 
SUBJECT: RULING PARTY OFFICIAL CALLS FOR SUPPORT FOR CUBA 
AT UNCHR 
 
REF: A. STATE 20816 
     B. GUATEMALA 275 
 
1. Aristedes Crespo, Floor Leader for the ruling FRG party in 
Congress, used the visit of three Cuban legislators to 
announce in Congress that the FRG would press President 
Portillo to support Cuba at this year\'s UNCHR in Geneva. 
Crespo said his remarks were in response to Cuba\'s 
long-standing solidarity with the people of Guatemala and 
called for the Government of Guatemala not to vote against 
Cuba. 
 
2.  Crespo is the right-hand-man of Rios Montt, the FRG\'s 
leader and President of Congress.  The FRG holds a 
disciplined 63-seat majority among the 113 members of 
Congress.  The Guatemalan Congress passed a motion last year 
that called for Executive branch support for Cuba at the 
UNCHR. 
Hamilton 
"
"5532","2/5/2003 22:46","03GUATEMALA329","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND S/ES - CR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN OFFICIALS EXPRESS CONDOLENCES FOR SPACE 
SHUTTLE COLUMBIA 
 
1.  Post has received numerous expressions of condolences 
over the tragic loss of the Columbia and her crew.  Phone 
calls, faxes, letters and e-mails expressing sorrow and 
solidarity have come from private citizens as well as 
Guatemalan officials.  Noteworthy are letters from President 
Portillo, Foreign Minister Gutierrez, Supreme Court President 
Ochaita, Human Rights Ombudsman Morales, and UNE Congressman 
Flores. 
 
2.  While most expressions of condolence are addressed to the 
Ambassador, the Embassy or the American people in general, 
President Portillo\'s letter is addressed to President Bush. 
A signed original in Spanish will be delivered via the 
Guatemalan Embassy in Washington.  In paragraph 3 we provide 
an unofficial translation of the text.  Paragraph 4 is an 
unofficial translation of the text of Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez letter to Ambassador Hamilton. 
 
3. Begin text of Portillo letter. 
Mr. George W. Bush 
President of the United States of America 
 
Mr. President, 
 
Greatly dismayed by the deaths of the crew of the shuttle 
Columbia, in my own name and in the name of the government 
and people of Guatemala, we all declare to you and to the 
people of the United States of America, our deepest regrets. 
 
From the heart, 
 
Alfonso Portillo 
End text of Portillo letter. 
 
4. Begin text of Gutierrez letter. 
Honorable Mr. John Hamilton 
Ambassador of the United States of America 
Accredited in Guatemala 
 
Mr. Ambassador, 
 
It is with deep sorrow that I present my condolences to your 
government, the people of the United States, and especially 
the families of the astronauts: Commander Rick D. Husband, 
Pilot William C. McCool, Crewmembers Michael P. Anderson, 
David M. Brown, Kalpana Chawla, Laurel Clark and Ilan Ramon, 
the first Israeli astronaut, for the great loss to all 
humanity that the Columbia accident represents. 
 
Those of us who have closely and enthusiastically followed 
each milestone in the expansion of scientific knowledge 
through the exploration of space, from the first experiments 
at the beginning of the last century (such as those of 
professor Robert Hutchings Goddard) to the flight of Alan 
Shepard in 1961, feel as if we have suffered a severe blow. 
But we know that progress is irreversible and that we will 
surely overcome this blow. 
 
I take this opportunity to reiterate to the Ambassador 
assurances of my highest consideration. 
 
Edgar Gutierrez 
Foreign Minister 
End text of Gutierrez letter. 
Hamilton 
"
"5662","2/10/2003 23:13","03GUATEMALA369","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000369 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, CJAN, EAGR, KTIA, PGOV, PHUM, SNAR, CFED, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSODOR,S MEETING WITH FOREIGN MINISTER 
GUTIERREZ 
 
 
Classified By: AMB JOHN R. HAMILTON FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Over lunch at the residence February 10, the 
Ambassador gave FM Gutierrez a heads up that we are actively 
working on specific benchmarks for re-certification; pressed 
him on Article 98, extradition, Belize-Guatemala, election 
observation, the proposal to investigate clandestine groups, 
and delays in the Mediterranean fruit fly program (Moscamed). 
 Gutierrez was generally forthcoming in most areas; whether 
he can bring his government along remains to be seen.  End 
summary. 
 
Belize-Guatemala: 
----------------------- 
 
2. (C) DCM accompanied the Ambassador; Gutierrez came alone. 
He had just returned from Washington, where he had signed a 
protocol for continuing a regime of confidence building 
measures with his Belizean counterpart, Assad Shoman, with 
OAS Secretary General Gaviria and Deputy SecGen Einaudi 
looking on.  Einaudi had been critical in getting the 
Belizeans to closure, Gutierrez said.  He felt that he would 
be able to develop a good relationship with Shoman, whom he 
intended to visit in Belize after the March elections there. 
He is also taking a proposal to Panama (for the Central 
American summit with Colombia) to include Belize in certain 
Central American integration activities.  He was not (at all) 
encouraging about post-November, Guatemalan election interest 
in the facilitators, recommendations, voicing again what we 
have heard here, that it would have been easier for Guatemala 
to accept the results of international arbitration than the 
facilitators, recommendations.  He in effect shrugged when 
the Ambassador pointed out that the &recommendations8 had 
in fact been negotiated with the MFA (under his predecessor, 
Gabriel Orellana) and that the Guatemalans discovered the 
defects in process pretty late in the game.  He suggested 
that Orellana had failed to keep the government informed, had 
not consulted the &Council of Belize8 (of notables, set up 
under the Arzu government to advise on matters Belizean) and 
that Vice President Reyes Lopez had been horrified when he 
saw what Orellana had agreed to. 
 
OAS Resolution on Colombia Bombing: 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
3. (C) Gutierrez said President Uribe had phoned President 
Portillo over the weekend, seeking Guatemalan support for a 
strong OAS resolution.   Briefed by Portillo, who had 
immediately sat down to draft a statement of support that the 
Central American presidents might make when they meet 
February 11 with Uribe in Panama, Gutierrez said he had 
cautioned Portillo that Guatemala needed to consider any 
resolution carefully, think it all the way through.  He 
clarified, when the Ambassador asked what there is to think 
about when a bomb kills 32 civilians, that Guatemala will 
support a forceful condemnation of terrorism, but that he 
thinks Uribe may be after much more than that and his 
instincts will be to be cautious. 
 
Narcotics: 
------------ 
4. (C) Gutierrez was apologetic that President Portillo had 
surfaced, in the press this morning and in a tendentious 
manner, a proposal that he had intended to broach at the 
lunch, namely that the U.S. engage Guatemala in a much more 
robust program of port security.  Portillo had said that the 
GOG would be proposing, through the Ambassador, that the U.S. 
take over and run the ports, \"with Guatemalan authorities\" 
(the only caveat), and  \"we,ll see then if drug control is 
any better.\"  The Ambassador said we will be continuing our 
technical assistance on port security but that running 
foreign ports is not in our portfolio.  If the GOG wants to 
think in ambitious terms, however, it might consider putting 
out for bid a long-term concession to run the ports, both in 
the interest of overall efficiency and good management and in 
the interest of narcotics control.  Gutierrez returned to the 
subject at the end of the lunch, saying he would raise it 
with Portillo. 
 
5. (C) The Ambassador advised that the Washington 
inter-agency community is engaged in developing benchmarks 
for re-certification and that he hoped to have them in hand 
before the Embassy,s next ministerial level meeting with his 
government, February 21. 
 
6. (C) Guatemala has contracted the Greenberg-Taurig law 
firm, of Washington, which has hired former WHA Assistant 
Secretary Peter Romero, to assist it on re-certification. 
 
SIPDIS 
(The Ambassador met with Greenberg Taurig attorney Ruth 
Espey-Romero and Romero on February 7, outlining what we see 
as the problem areas; Romero out-briefed the Ambassador 
February 10 on his meetings with the government, saying that 
he had emphasized only a strong anti-drug performance would 
sell in Washington. 
 
Extradition: 
-------------- 
7. (C)  Gutierrez claimed that the presidential authorization 
in the Castillo extradition is only one or two signatures 
away from being complete.  He reluctantly agreed to provide 
us a copy of it when we questioned if the authorization would 
come free and clear of conditions with which we could not 
comply.  (We suspect it does and will advise when we get it.) 
 He warned that the authorization goes as far as Guatemala 
can go. 
Elections: 
------------ 
8. (C) Gutierrez says that the Government will be issuing 
invitations to the international community in general (he 
mentioned EU, UN and OAS in particular) to observe 
Guatemala,s November elections.  He needs to coordinate 
further with Guatemala,s elections tribunal before issuing 
the invitations, but does not anticipate problems.  He hopes 
that elections missions could be on the ground, at least with 
a minimum presence, by mid-year. 
 
Clandestine Group Commission: 
----------------------------------------- 
9. (C) Gutierrez gave the Ambassador a heads up that the 
government of Guatemala would be asking for declassification 
of USG classified holdings on this subject.  The Ambassador 
reviewed our support for the proposal but warned against a 
strategy of transferring responsibility for the Commission,s 
success to the U.S.  Gutierrez protested that that was not 
the idea; he recalled that the vast majority of information 
received by the Historical Clarification Commission (Truth 
Commission) had come from Guatemalans (victims and individual 
military officers), but that the little that the U.S. had 
provided had been valuable in cross-checking and verifying 
Guatemalan sources.  The Ambassador said we will see how we 
can be helpful but left a marker that declassification was 
not necessarily in the cards. 
 
10. (C) Gutierrez said that Peace Secretary Catalina 
Soberanis would be the GOG point person on the Clandestine 
Commission proposal.  She is currently ill, however, which 
leaves him to work this week with Human Rights Watch 
executive Jose Miguel Vivanco.  The government has invited 
Vivanco to act as &facilitator8 in reaching agreement on 
the Commission,s mandate and structure.  Noting that the 
Guatemalan human rights community had complained that the 
Government has not yet responded to the human rights 
ombudsman directly, Gutierrez said the problem was that the 
ombudsman launched the proposal publicly but never sent the 
proposal to the government.  A reply to the proposal was 
already drafted for whenever this oversight was corrected. 
Gutierrez also mentioned the government,s interest in not 
limiting the commission,s mandate to the period since 1996 
(note:  putting some practical limits on the commission,s 
mandate was a U.S. suggestion). 
 
Article 98: 
------------- 
11. (C) We briefed Gutierrez extensively on the issue.  He is 
aware of it, had assumed that Guatemalan not being a 
signatory to the Rome Treaty would deal with our concern and 
was disappointed to learn it will not.  He also had not 
understood that the ICC can exercise jurisdiction over 
citizens whose state is not a treaty signatory.  Upshot was 
that he promised to give the issue more attention. 
 
Moscamed program: 
-------------------------- 
12. (C) We briefed Gutierrez on problems we are having with 
the Ministries of Agriculture and Environment in moving ahead 
with this year,s spraying program (whose season is 
determined by the biological cycle of the Med fruit fly).  We 
also alerted him that USDA/APHIS might raise the issue with 
Ambassador Arenales in Washington.  He offered to speak to 
both ministers. 
 
Comment: 
------------- 
13. (C)   This meeting covered a lot of ground.  Gutierrez is 
an easy and responsive interlocutor who conveys a 
well-meaning persona.  Not an FRG member, we\'ll see how much 
influence he has within this FRG government. 
 
 
 
 
Hamilton 
"
"5675","2/11/2003 15:13","03GUATEMALA370","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE34169","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000370 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, IZ, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA NONCOMMITTAL ON IRAQ IN WAKE OF 
SECRETARY\'S UN PRESENTATION 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: STATE 34169 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Due to the absence of President Portillo on February 
6, Ambassador Hamilton discussed Secretary Powell\'s UNSC 
presentation of the case against Iraq with Vice President 
Reyes (reftel).  The Ambassador concluded that no one prefers 
the option of war, and that the best way to convince Saddam 
to disarm peacefully is for the international community to 
stand united in its determination to compel Saddam to disarm. 
 Differences among the international community over the use 
of force only strengthen Iraq\'s determination to resist 
complying with UNSC resolutions.  Reyes acknowledged the 
point and said he had watched the Secretary\'s presentation 
\"live, in its entirety, and with great interest.\"  He did not 
comment on the GOG\'s position on Iraq, but requested a 
Spanish-language translation of the Secretary\'s presentation 
(note: A Spanish translation was sent to the Vice President 
as soon as it was received from Washington). 
 
2.  (C) On February 10, the DCM raised the issue of Iraqi 
non-compliance with Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez and sent 
him with a Spanish translation of Secretary Powell\'s complete 
presentation before the U.N. Security Council.  Gutierrez 
expressed appreciation for the translated transcript but was 
also noncommittal as to GOG policy towards Iraq. 
 
3.  (C) Comment:  Neither the Vice President nor the Foreign 
Minister provided their views on GOG policy on Iraq.  The GOG 
has traditionally held a policy towards the Middle East that 
has closely paralleled our own.  They are strong supporters 
of Israel for reasons unconnected to us.  The GOG also 
recognizes the degree of importance we attach to this issue. 
Hamilton 
"
"5678","2/11/2003 20:43","03GUATEMALA379","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE35553","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000379 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
USTR FOR JON ROSENBAUM AND BUD CLATANOFF 
USDOL FOR ILAB: JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GSP WORKER RIGHTS: EMBASSY SUPPORTS CONSULTATIONS 
OVER REVIEW 
 
REF: STATE 35553 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Embassy believes that bilateral 
consultations would be as productive as a formal GSP review 
of Guatemalan worker rights.  Although the labor rights 
situation is bad, it is not worsening and the GOG has in fact 
taken steps to protect labor rights since the last review was 
suspended.  Furthermore, the political effects of a formal 
review are uncertain.  The GOG is in an election year and is 
reeling from recent USG narcotics de-certification.  Adding 
the threat of withdrawal of GSP benefits could provoke a 
backlash against USG \"blacklisting.\"  We suggest the 
Department support an alternative strategy of bilateral 
consultations to promote labor rights improvements.  We have 
already begun this process by signaling key GOG interlocutors 
privately, and have built it into our Mission Program Plan. 
We welcome USTR participation in these consultations in the 
broader context of CAFTA negotiations.  If decision is made 
to conduct a formal review, however, we will of course work 
to make it a sucesss.  End Summary. 
 
The GOG has \"Taken Steps\" 
------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The AFL-CIO and International Labor Rights Fund 
petitions on Guatemala correctly identify major weaknesses in 
the protection of labor rights in Guatemala.  Labor rights 
violations continue to be common and serious here, and must 
change for Guatemala to be a full partner under CAFTA.  Most 
worrisome to us is the situation of impunity for those who 
attack labor leaders, the ineffective labor justice system, 
and particularly egregious cases of non-reinstatement of 
illegally fired workers.  The petitions do not, however, take 
into account positive steps to protect worker rights taken by 
the GOG since the last USTR review ended in May 2001.  These 
include: 
 
-- creation of a Special Prosecutor\'s Office to Investigate 
Attacks on Union Members in 2001; 
 
-- creation of a consensual National Plan for Occupational 
Health and Safety in 2002; 
 
-- cooperation with the ILO\'s International Program to 
Eliminate Child Labor in several sectors of the economy; 
 
-- revitalization of the Labor Ministry under ex-minister 
Godoy; 
 
-- increased inspections, with the result that the first year 
of implementation of the Ministry\'s newly authorized fines 
totals more than the labor courts have imposed in 50 years; 
 
-- resolution of the high-profile DYMEL dispute. 
 
Movement on Issues Mentioned in Petitions 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) In addition, several problems in the petitions have 
been resolved or require clarification.  For example: 
 
In the AFL-CIO petition; 
 
-- The Jalapa Coca Cola\'s local bottler recently agreed to a 
collective bargaining agreement with its union; 
 
-- Jalapa municipal workers struck in 2002, but returned to 
work after concessions from the mayor; 
 
-- Labor relations at the Choi Shin-Cimatextiles maquila have 
normalized since management instituted regular meetings with 
its unions, which have failed to organize 25% of the workers; 
 
-- With GOG support, ILO/IPEC has launched a new project to 
combat child labor in the Guatemala City municipal dump; 
 
In the ILRF petition; 
 
-- The petition incorrectly asserts that the Labor Ministry 
has failed to use its new power to levy fines; 
 
-- The SITRABI case in Morales, Izabal is resolved.  Further 
attacks have occurred in the area over illegal land 
occupations, not labor rights; 
 
-- The existence of \"solidarity associations\" does not 
violate the right to association; 
 
-- Public sector doctors, health workers and banana workers 
held unofficial work stoppages in 2002, without GOG 
intervention; and 
 
-- discrimination is not grounds for GSP review. 
 
An Alternative Path To Achieve Review Goals 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) We believe that aggressive bilateral consultations 
with the Labor Minister, Foreign Minister, Attorney General 
and Judicial Branch could achieve the same ends as a USTR 
review.  These consultations, which we have already 
initiated, will focus on achieving progress in labor justice, 
investigation of unresolved crimes against union leaders, and 
reinstallation of illegally fired workers.  New 
opportunities, including the new Labor Minister Victor 
Moreira\'s legislative priorities (e.g. to combat gender 
discrimination) could also be incorporated in our 
consultation efforts.  As an Embassy, we are committed to 
make this strategy work and will highlight it strategy in our 
Mission Program Plan, which is about to be submitted. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5.  (SBU) In sum, we think we can best advance labor rights 
through bilateral consultations.  If, however, Washington 
agencies conclude otherwise, count on our full support. 
Hamilton 
"
"5729","2/13/2003 23:30","03GUATEMALA403","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 000403 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, SNAR, PHUM, ECON, ETRD, MARR, GT 
SUBJECT: WHA/CEN DIRECTOR TRIVELLI DISCUSSES CAFTA, 
COUNTER-DRUG COOPERATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS WITH GUATEMALANS 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  During a two-day visit to Guatemala, WHA/CEN 
Director Paul Trivelli discussed counter-narcotics 
certification and free trade with Vice President Reyes and 
the Acting Foreign Minister; CAFTA and fiscal responsibility 
with the economic cabinet and business leaders; and support 
for human rights programs with human rights leaders.  He 
visited the site of an exhumation from the internal conflict 
to show support for the work of threatened human rights 
activists seeking to heal wounds left over from the  war. 
GOG and private sector interlocutors were uniformly excited 
about the prospects of a free trade agreement with the US, 
and recognize that many non-trade related issues must be 
addressed in order for CAFTA to be approved.  Human rights 
leaders are refining their proposals for the creation of an 
international commission to investigate the operations of 
clandestine groups and welcomed our support.  Guatemalans 
view 2003 as a pivotal year for the future of the country, as 
elections and CAFTA negotiations will determine if Guatemala 
will embrace the 21st century at the same pace as its 
neighbors. End summary. 
 
Vice President bullish on CAFTA 
-------------------------------- 
2. (C) The Ambassador, visiting WHA/CEN Director Trivelli and 
visiting AID Assistant Administrator Franco met with Vice 
President Franciso Reyes on February 6 to discuss the full 
range of bilateral issues.  The meeting was frank and 
cordial.  AID/LAC Franco said the USG was pleased to see 
Guatemala field a capable team of negotiators to the first 
CAFTA meeting in Costa Rica, and said the U.S. views a free 
trade agreement as the best hope for reducing poverty in the 
region.  Franco noted that CAFTA would bring with it a deeper 
relationship between our governments and societies, and said 
that Congress would have to consider a range of non-trade 
issues in the bilateral relationship as \"background\" to 
ultimately approving CAFTA.  The Ambassador, Trivelli and 
Franco all noted that corruption, counter-narcotics 
cooperation, effective investigation of Amcit murders, and 
human and labor rights performance were matters that would be 
raised by critics of globalization who will question why the 
United States is seeking a special relationship with 
Guatemala at this time.  Vice President Reyes acknowledged 
that these issues are ultimately inseparable from a free 
trade relationship, calling them \"links in the same chain,\" 
and said the GOG has the political will to address them.  He 
said that President Portillo has asked him to coordinate the 
efforts of the different GOG entities that were participating 
in the trade talks. 
 
3.  (C) Vice President Reyes said that the GOG would like to 
have CAFTA ready to sign by September, 2003 (note: two months 
before national elections. end note).  He believes the 
agreement with Chile could serve as a point of departure, but 
said that Central America\'s unique situation would require 
modifications.  He said that many in the private sector 
oppose a free trade agreement because they believe it will 
threaten their long-held monopolies.  AID/LAC Franco 
responded that it is important that the government address 
these concerns by consulting the private sector and civil 
society throughout the negotiating process. 
 
4. (C) WHA/CEN Trivelli told the Vice President that it is 
critical that Guatemala\'s counter-narcotics cooperation 
improve rapidly.  He also observed that continuing 
decertification status for Guatemala would seriously 
complicate finalization of a free trade agreement.  Trivelli 
noted that there will be a formal review of Guatemala\'s 
counter-narcotics performance in September, and it is crucial 
that major advances take place before that.  Vice President 
Reyes said that bi-weekly consultations had been set up 
between the GOG and the Embassy to address our specific 
concerns, and that the GOG would like to achieve 
re-certification as soon as possible. 
 
5. (C) Trivelli also told the Vice President that the USG 
applauded the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s recent call for the 
creation of an international commission to investigate the 
illegal activities of \"clandestine groups,\" and that we hope 
the GOG will support the proposal.  Vice President Reyes said 
that President Portillo had already expressed his support for 
this endeavor, but that he (Vice President Reyes) was 
withholding judgment until he knew more about its goals. 
 
6. (C) The Ambassador raised our request for GOG support for 
Secretary Powell\'s February 5 UNSC statement on Iraq 
 
SIPDIS 
(reported septel), and asked the Vice President to urge the 
Ministers of Agriculture and Environment to resolve quickly a 
dispute that has put a temporary halt to a joint 
U.S.-Mexico-Guatemalan program to eradicate the Mediterranean 
fruit fly.  The Vice President promised to get in touch with 
the Ministers of Agriculture and Environment that day to see 
how this problem, which could have serious consequences for 
the eradication program in Guatemala, could be resolved 
expeditiously. 
 
Foreign Ministry makes CAFTA priority 
------------------------------------- 
7. (C) The Ambassador and WHA/CEN Director Trivelli met with 
Acting Foreign Minister Rony Abiu at the MFA on February 6 to 
discuss CAFTA, border talks with Belize and an Article 98 
agreement.  Vice Minister Abiu, who had only been appointed 
two weeks previously and who handles the MFA\'s economic and 
trade portfolios, said that the MFA has made securing a free 
trade agreement with the U.S. its \"highest priority.\"  He 
said that the Ministry of Economy had the lead in the 
negotiations, but that the MFA had responsibility for matters 
involving regional integration.  In that vein, he said that 
the MFA was tasked with managing the parallel talks with the 
other Central American partners to establish a customs union 
as a foundation for CAFTA.  The Ambassador and WHA/CEN 
Trivelli noted that it would be crucial to address 
counter-narcotics cooperation, threats against human rights 
workers and the unresolved murders of Amcits before the CAFTA 
process can be finalized.  Abiu acknowledged that \"free trade 
agreements have important underlying political components,\" 
and said the GOG is determined to address those issues. 
 
8. (C) Trivelli raised USG disappointment at the failure of 
Guatemala to embrace the recommendations of the facilitators 
regarding the border demarcation with Belize, noting that it 
is crucial at this juncture that both sides agree to 
confidence and security building measures (CSBM\'s) that will 
reduce border tensions.  Abiu said the GOG also placed a high 
value on extending the CSBM\'s, and said the GOG was hopeful 
that there would be an agreement with Belize which would 
allow Foreign Minister Gutierrez to sign a CSBM\'s agreement 
with Belize on February 8. 
 
9. (C) Trivelli closed the meeting by noting that the USG was 
hopeful that Guatemala would sign an agreement with us 
extending to U.S. military personnel in Guatemala protections 
under Article 98 of the Treaty of Rome.  He noted that U.S. 
military assistance to countries that had not signed these 
agreements would be limited by law, making it difficult for 
the U.S. to continue carrying out humanitarian exercises in 
those countries that had not signed Article 98 agreements. 
The Embassy sent a diplomatic note to the MFA in 2002 
proposing the signing of an agreement, but had not received a 
response.  Abiu said he was unfamiliar with the matter, but 
promised to look into it and get back to us soonest. 
 
Economic Cabinet:  CAFTA and fiscal discipline 
--------------------------------------------- - 
10. (C) The Ambassador and WHA/CEN Trivelli met with Minister 
of Finance Eduardo Weymann, Minister of Economy Patricia 
Ramirez and chief GOG CAFTA negotiator Salomon Cohen on 
February 7.  Cohen, just returned from the first CAFTA 
negotiating session in San Jose, said that the first round of 
free trade talks had gone well, and that all sides were 
energized by the possibilities.  He said that the Chilean 
agreement was a good starting point, but noted that Guatemala 
would require \"special attention\" to issues not covered in 
the Chilean agreement, including sugar, poultry and textiles. 
 On textiles, Cohen said that Guatemala is interested in 
talking about \"cotton-forward,\" a concept he said USG 
negotiators had neither accepted nor discounted.  Cohen and 
Ramirez both said Guatemala was concerned that the 
negotiations would \"start at zero,\" (applied MFN tariffs) not 
taking into consideration that Guatemala already had 
significant benefits under GSP and CBI.  They acknowledged 
that market access talks with Chile had started with applied 
tariff rates, but feared that Guatemala producers would find 
it unacceptable that Guatemala would have to negotiate from a 
base which did not take into consideration tariff concessions 
they already have.  Negotiator Cohen said that for CAFTA to 
work, it would be critical for the USG to provide significant 
infrastructure assistance to Guatemala (he mentioned 
irrigation specifically), noting that otherwise Guatemala was 
unlikely to compete well in any free trade arrangement. 
Trivelli noted that it is critical that the GOG bring the 
private sector and civil society along by consulting 
regularly with them, as their support will be crucial if 
CAFTA is to work. 
 
11. (C) Finance Minister Weymann, overwhelmed by the ongoing 
teachers\' protest demanding a 60% salary increase, said that 
the GOG must impose fiscal discipline.  He said the IMF 
agreement is the only lever he has to compel the cabinet to 
exercise some discipline in spending in an election year.  He 
acknowledged USG concerns over Guatemala\'s low rate of 
taxation (just over 10 percent), and said that taxes will 
have to be raised.  He said that even so he does not know how 
the GOG will pay the 100 Quetzales (roughly $13) monthly 
increase being offered teachers, and he fears it could create 
unmanageable expectations from the rest of the public sector. 
 Weymann said that the government is floating eurobonds for 
the purpose of financing a major reduction in the military, 
providing counterpart funds for foreign aid projects, 
providing support for victims of the internal conflict and 
former civil patrol members, and armor-plating the Quetzal in 
an election year.  The Ambassador expressed the international 
community\'s concern that the proposed uses of the bond\'s 
proceeds had not been clearly explained.  Weymann countered 
that he and Central Bank President Sosa has stated clearly to 
the press how the funds would be used.  He then mentioned 
some of the changes that had been made to the original plan. 
(Comment: In fact the FRG is trying to float the Eurobonds 
for some projects of dubious economic benefit but with 
potential political payoffs in an election year.) 
 
Business leaders optimistic despite confrontation with 
government 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
12. (C) Following lunch with the Economic Cabinet, WHA/CEN 
Trivelli met with representatives of Guatemala\'s private 
sector -- Peter Lamport, Richard Aitkenhead and William 
Stixrud, former Finance Ministers and/or Ambassadors to 
Washington during the PAN administration of Alvaro Arzu.  All 
agreed that the private sector strongly supports the 
conclusion of a free trade agreement with the U.S.  While 
they acknowledged that there was some concern over the lack 
of dialogue with the GOG on CAFTA, they believe that 
ultimately they will be consulted by Guatemala\'s new 
negotiating team.  Lamport commented that some members of the 
private sector are concerned about the fate of poultry and 
sugar in the negotiations, and are not convinced that the 
GOG, currently confronted with the private sector, will look 
after their interests in these areas. 
 
13.  (C) The business leaders said that they would welcome 
dialogue with the GOG, but said the Portillo Administration 
had consistently shunned contact with them.  They said that 
former Minister of Economy Arturo Montenegro lost his job for 
trying to establish a dialogue with the private sector.  The 
private sector leaders acknowledged the need for increased 
tax collection, but said the government had reneged on its 
promises made regarding the fiscal pact.  They do not believe 
Portillo can be trusted to stick to any agreement they reach, 
and have placed their hopes in the election of a new 
government this fall.  The businessmen said that if the FRG 
is re-elected this fall, it would be calamitous for 
Guatemala, and investment would disappear. 
 
14.  (U) Guatemala\'s organized private sector views El 
Salvador as a model for just about everything -- pragmatic 
government, strong political parties (read ARENA), and a 
private sector that is deeply involved in social development. 
 The private sector leaders said that they are in constant 
contact with their Salvadoran counterparts for the purpose of 
adapting their successes to Guatemala\'s situation.  Lamport 
nevertheless agreed with Trivelli that the Salvadoran example 
was not perfect, as ARENA lacked a credible counterweight on 
the moderate left. 
 
Human Rights groups welcome USG support for commission 
against clandestine groups 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
15. (SBU) WHA/CEN Director Trivelli met with human rights 
leaders Helen Mack, Mario Polanco, Claudia Samayoa, and 
Orlando Blanco at the Myrna Mack Foundation on February 6. 
After a brief press conference, Trivelli thanked the 
activists for the meeting and reiterated our strong support 
for advancing human rights in Guatemala and our specific 
interest in the latest initiative to investigate the illegal 
activities of clandestine groups.  Mack thanked him for the 
overwhelming USG support and advice.  Polanco cautioned that 
the human rights groups still needed more guidance to make 
the commission effective.  Trivelli mentioned that the USG is 
looking into ways to help technically support as well as fund 
the international commission which will look into the 
operations of clandestine groups and that we hope other 
donors follow suit.  Trivelli also recommended that the human 
rights groups finalize the details of their proposal before 
entering into negotiations with the GOG.  Mack agreed and 
said they hoped to formulate a proposal that was credible and 
realistic. 
 
16. (SBU) After discussion of the clandestine groups 
proposal, Mack expressed concern over the new law regulating 
NGO\'s which is currently being discussed in Congress.  The 
human rights groups worry that this law will allow the 
government to control the activities of NGO\'s at a time when 
civil society has been in the forefront of opposition to the 
Portillo Administration.  Trivelli recognized their concern 
and said that we would review the law closely. 
 
17. (SBU) In response to a question about the status of 
threats against human rights workers, Samayoa responded that 
the threats have been cyclical.  Some months there are 
numerous new threats and others are relatively quiet. 
Overall, she said threats were continuing and were a grave 
concern to human rights activists. Trivelli and the DCM 
responded that the USG views the protection of human rights 
workers as one of our highest priorities in Guatemala and 
that they should never hesitate to solicit our support in 
specific cases of threats. 
 
Healing scars from the internal conflict in San Jose Poaquil 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
18. (U) On February 7, WHA/CEN Director Trivelli, PolCouns, 
HROff, and ConOff drove out to San Jose Poaquil, in the 
remote mountainous region of Chimaltenango Department where 
the Army and the guerrillas had turned the sparsely inhabited 
river valleys into a no-mans land during the early 1980\'s. On 
the banks of the Motagua River we observed an exhumation of 
war victims\' remains performed by the Guatemalan Forensic 
Anthropology Foundation (FAFG).  The remains were those of a 
family, including small children, who had been murdered by 
\"armed, uniformed men\" as the family tried to protect their 
seed corn from pillaging.  The only survivors were small 
children at the time, and they did not know if the 
perpetrators had been military, PACs or guerrillas, all of 
whom operated in the area.  FAFG director Fredy Peccerelli 
described the process by which the sites are identified and 
the legal process the FAFG must follow so that all of the 
information collected during the exhumation can be preserved 
for future legal cases.  Family members of the victims were 
also present to observe the exhumation of their loved ones. 
They were effusive in their thanks to the FAFG and the USG, 
and said they had been waiting over 20 years to give their 
slain relatives a proper burial. 
 
19. (U) Trivelli thanked the FAFG for all of their brave work 
and asked Peccerelli what his personal motivation was to 
soldier on with the exhumations (this was the FAFG\'s site 
number 252) despite the multiple death threats and 
intimidations he encounters.  Peccerelli responded that while 
in the long term the information the FAFG collects may be 
used to put war criminals behind bars, he said his motivation 
is the thousands of family members they have helped heal.  He 
said, \"the wounds left by the internal conflict run deep and 
the people of Guatemala have suffered.  If I can help my 
country heal, one exhumation at a time, then I feel like I am 
helping to make a difference.\" 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
20. (C) WHA/CEN Trivelli\'s visit came at a time of growing 
internal political confrontation, revolving around the 
upcoming election, and increasing hope of economic 
opportunities generated by a free trade agreement with the 
U.S.  All sides view 2003 as a pivotal year for Guatemala, 
and acknowledged that Guatemala will have to successfully 
address long festering problems of human and labor rights, 
counter-narcotics cooperation, the murders of Amcits, 
official corruption and political confrontation if it is to 
join its Central American neighbors in reaching a new trade 
relationship with the United States.  Guatemalans are 
optimistic that they meet this challenge. 
 
21. (U) This cable was cleared by WHA/CEN Director Paul 
Trivelli. 
Hamilton 
"
"5797","2/18/2003 17:59","03GUATEMALA427","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE38880","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000427 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2013 
TAGS: MCAP, PTER, ETTC, GT, PARMS 
SUBJECT: MANPADS THREAT CONSIDERED MINOR IN GUATEMALA 
 
REF: STATE 38880 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) The information below is keyed by paragraph number 
to reftel questions. 
 
Paragraph 7. General Information: To our knowledge, the 
Government of Guatemala (GOG) does not possess MANPADS. 
However, black and gray arms markets exist in Guatemala and 
exotic weapons systems are said to occasionally move 
through them.  Given the involvement of a Guatemala-based 
arms dealer in the recent diversion of Nicaraguan assault 
rifles to Colombian rebels and rumors of surplus MANPADS in 
the region due to internal conflicts, we cannot rule out 
the possibility that a very small number of MANPADS may be 
held or obtained by non-state groups in Guatemala. 
 
Paragraph 8. Government Cooperation: The GOG can be 
expected to cooperate in the effort to control MANPADS, 
especially if we can provide it with specific information 
about the existence of such weapons.  Guatemala\'s export 
control regulations would technically prohibit transfers 
but enforcement mechanism are inadequate and further 
limited by rampant corruption at all levels of the GOG. 
 
Paragraph 9. Feasible Arguments: The GOG will be receptive 
to the need for responsible action against the MANPADS 
threat and will appreciate the magnitude of liability if a 
successful MANPADS attack were to be traced to its failure 
to take action.  Guatemala does not have a state-sponsored 
air carrier, but depends heavily on tourism for foreign 
exchange earnings. 
 
Paragraph 10. Financial Incentives:  Not applicable since 
Guatemala does not have an official MANPADS stockpile to be 
destroyed. 
 
Paragraph 11. Other Incentives: The bilateral relationship 
is currently more fluid than usual.  This is an election 
year and Guatemala was recently decertified for lack of 
cooperation against narcotics.  Some, but not all, parts of 
the GOG are anxious to cooperate with the USG.  The GOG 
faces large and growing internal dissent which will tend to 
focus its attention on elections above all else. 
 
Paragraph 12.  Government Contacts and Engagement 
Activities:  The Ministers of Defense, Interior, and 
Foreign Relations are the appropriate officials to contact 
regarding this initiative.  Guatemala has appointed an 
Inter-Institutional Coordinator for Security, roughly 
equivalent to a Terrorism Czar.  The May 2003 Special 
Conference on Security in Mexico would be an excellent 
venue for approaching Guatemalan officials on this issue. 
Hamilton 
"
"5798","2/18/2003 17:59","03GUATEMALA428","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E/0/ 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, KCRM, GT 
SUBJECT: PRISON RIOT KILLS GERARDI MURDERER, SIX OTHERS 
 
REF: 02 GUATEMALA 3281 
 
1. Summary.  Sergeant Jose Obdulio Villanueva, serving a 
30-year sentence for the murder of Bishop Gerardi, was 
decapitated along with three other inmates during a 
prison riot on February 12.  The riot was an internal 
power struggle between two groups of inmates.  The sixth 
prison uprising in the past seven weeks, this one has 
taken on added significance due to the presence of 
several former military men involved in Guatemala\'s two 
most prominent Human Rights murder cases.  Conspiracy 
theories are running rampant due to Villanueva\'s key 
role in the Gerardi murder coupled with the successful 
evacuation of three military officers being held in 
connection with the murder of Myrna Mack.  End Summary. 
 
Background to a riot 
-------------------- 
 
2. On December 23, 2002, the bloodiest prison riot in 
recent Guatemalan history left 14 dead in the Pavoncito 
Detention Center (reftel).  Although Pavoncito remains, 
in large part, under the internal control of the 
inmates, many gang members were transferred to the Zone 
18 Detention Center.  Within three days of their 
arrival, these inmates attempted an unsuccessful riot. 
The Zone 18 Detention Center has been largely under the 
control of inmates with military and police backgrounds, 
led by Captain Lima who, like Villanueva, received a 30- 
year sentence for his role in the Gerardi murder. 
Lima\'s control, maintained through extortion and 
violence, was challenged by the ex-mayor of Cuilapa, 
Edwin Franco, an inmate with connections to organized 
crime. 
 
What happened 
------------- 
 
3. In the early morning of February 12, just after 
prisoners from cell block eight were released into to 
the yard for routine exercise, inmates from the Franco 
faction in blocks one and two either broke out or were 
let out of their cells (there are conflicting official 
reports as whether the cell doors were forced).  The 
prisoners entered the empty block eight and proceeded to 
break through the wall into block seven--exclusive 
territory of the military inmates.  For about forty 
minutes, the inmates in block seven managed to hold off 
their attackers and at the same time to open another 
hole in the opposite wall through which many escaped 
into a patio area near the center entrance that was 
under police custody.  By noon the worst was over and 
some wounded inmates were transferred to San Juan de 
Dios Hospital.  By 3:00 PM authorities were able to 
remove visiting family members trapped by the violence 
in the center.  At 9:00 PM authorities were able to 
confiscate cell phones and numerous improvised weapons. 
Full control has not been restored as a result of a 24- 
hour ultimatum issued to prison authorities by Lima, 
some 200 gang members were transferred back to 
Pavoncito. 
 
The Mack Suspects 
----------------- 
 
4.  Police removed the three military officers 
implicated in the 1990 murder of anthropologist Myrna 
Mack (General Edgar Godoy, Colonel Oliva, and Colonel 
Valencia) from the detention center without incident. 
The officers were taken to the military\'s Cuartel 
General but, in a positive development, the Cuartel 
Commander refused to take custody because the police did 
not have a judicial order authorizing the transfer.  The 
suspects were then taken to El Boqueron, a newly re- 
opened maximum security facility in Santa Rosa 
Department where they are currently the only inmates. 
Note: Prison directors have authority to make transfers 
without judicial orders under emergency circumstances, 
even to military jails.  Human rights groups have been 
concerned that these officers would easily escape if 
transferred to a military prison.  In the 1990 murder of 
American citizen Michael Devine, Captain Contreras 
escaped within hours of being convicted and transferred 
to a military prison.  End Note. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5.  Although Villanueva\'s violent execution was the 
result of a riot sparked by an internal power struggle, 
the persistence of the conspiracy theories and rumors 
fueled by these latest prison riots are a fresh 
indication of how little faith Guatemalans have in their 
government.  The zone 18 riot harshly reminded the 
public that official corruption threatens lives.  Over 
the last several weeks, news of official corruption, 
prison riots, and skyrocketing crime rates have been the 
daily fare of all major news networks.  News of the 
latest riot also reminded the public that their 
government has not been able to reassert complete 
control over the inmates in Pavoncito (where gang 
members have just been reinserted).  Captain Lima\'s 
successful ultimatum confirmed for most Guatemalans that 
criminals run the prison system. 
"
"5799","2/18/2003 18:00","03GUATEMALA429","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE44441","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E/0/ 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, IZ, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL NOT ADDRESS FEB 18 UNSC OPEN SESSION 
ON IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 44441 
 
1. Per reftel, DCM discussed Iraq\'s failure to disarm with Foreign 
Minister Gutierrez on February 17.  Gutierrez  was noncommittal.  He 
requested a Spanish version of Secretary Powell\'s UNSC speech of 
February 14 (which Post will provide) and stated that Guatemala would 
not take the opportunity to speak at the Security Council\'s Open 
Meeting on February 18. 
"
"5885","2/21/2003 17:18","03GUATEMALA471","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000471 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DRL, IO AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: VIVANCO MISSION:  STATE OF PLAY 
 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary:  Human Rights Watch Latin America Director 
Jose Miguel Vivanco visited Guatemala February 11-14 to 
consult with the GOG, the Human Rights Ombudsman, and human 
rights leaders about the Ombudsman\'s proposal to create an 
international Commission to Investigate Clandestine Groups 
(CICIACS).  The Ombudsman and NGO leaders were skeptical of 
any effort to change the existing proposal; the GOG publicly 
supported Vivanco\'s efforts.  We expect Vivanco to come back 
with a modified proposal in early March.  End Summary. 
 
FM Welcomes CICIACS Proposal With Reservations 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2.  (U) On February 14, after meeting with Vivanco to discuss 
the CICIACS proposal the day before, Foreign Minister Edgar 
Gutierrez publicly expressed GOG support for what Vivanco 
will achieve through his consultations.  The FM also called 
the proposal \"possible to improve\" and gave his own 
\"suggestions:\"  that the CICIACS be authorized by Congress; 
that its membership be expanded to include representatives of 
Congress, the Public Ministry and the Ombudsman; and that its 
mandate include investigation of crimes implicating private 
security forces and organized crime, in addition to groups 
linked to state agents.  The Ombudsman promptly replied 
publicly that Gutierrez\' suggestions added nothing to the 
existing proposal, and human rights leaders said the GOG 
should now propose the creation of a CICIACS to the UN and 
OAS. 
 
Vivanco Upbeat Despite Tough Early Rounds with NGOs 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3.  (SBU) Jose Miguel Vivanco told the Ambassador, HROff, 
PolCouns, AID officer and PolOff on February 12 that he 
thought he had allayed human rights groups\' concerns about 
his role as facilitator of the proposal for a commission to 
investigate clandestine groups and had made some progress as 
follows. 
 
Process: 
 
-- Vivanco acknowledged that his personal prestige and 
credibility is on the line, and said the GOG had not yet 
limited his efforts in any way. 
 
-- Vivanco said he was to meet with the Attorney General 
later that evening, at the AG\'s insistent request. 
 
-- He would meet with FM Gutierrez on February 13 to get into 
the substance of the proposal for the first time since being 
named as \"facilitator\" by the GOG. 
 
-- He would leave Guatemala on February 14 and would work on 
a proposal based on what he has discussed during his visit, 
in Washington. 
 
-- He will share with us a draft of what he intends to 
propose, and would appreciate Embassy comment and any 
suggestions. 
 
-- He will return to Guatemala in early March to press the 
GOG to accept key elements of a commission. 
 
Substantive Aspects of a Vivanco Proposal: 
 
-- Vivanco said he is willing to disown any effort which is 
not viable to investigate and lead to criminal prosecution. 
Anything less would be a \"show\" and not worth the effort. 
 
-- After consulting with Guatemalan constitutional experts, 
he believes that legislation, not just a government decree, 
is necessary to give the commission sufficient authority to 
survive legal challenges, compel testimony through subpoena, 
and, possibly, to engage in plea bargaining to build cases. 
 
-- He believes the key elements of any commission must 
include more prosecutorial expertise at the commissioner 
level, not just in the technical staff ranks.  To do so, he 
has suggested to NGOs that the commissioners be increased 
from three to five, to include three nominated by President 
Portillo from a list of candidates selected by the ombudsman. 
 The additional two commissioners would be Guatemalan or 
foreigners with impeccable prosecutorial expertise, \"like 
(Spanish investigative magistrate Baltazar) Garzon,\" he told 
NGOs. 
 
-- He believes that the commission must be autonomous but 
will also need police participation, and suggests a specially 
vetted group. 
 
-- He has consulted with Peruvian special prosecutor Jose 
Ugaz, who gave him the idea about including police, as long 
as they can be vetted. 
 
4.  (SBU) Without endorsing his specific proposals, the 
Ambassador expressed strong support for Vivanco\'s efforts to 
put together a proposal for a viable commission.  He confided 
in a short aside to Vivanco that NGOs continue to have 
misgivings about Vivanco\'s role, and will be particularly 
skeptical to any GOG elements (especially police) working 
with a commission and the proposal to enlarge the commission. 
 PolCouns warned that defining the scope of the investigation 
will be important and that the GOG may attempt to do so in a 
manner that protects itself. 
 
HR Groups Still Have Misgivings About Vivanco 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The Ambassador met with human rights leaders (Helen 
Mack, Frank LaRue, Orlando Blanco, Gustavo Meono, Miguel 
Angel Albizures, and Nery Rodenas) on February 14 to discuss 
their views of Vivanco\'s facilitation efforts.  The human 
rights leaders expressed continued reservations about 
Vivanco\'s mission, although LaRue said that they were 
relieved to have clarified that Human Rights Watch stands 
behind Vivanco\'s efforts.  They then described the following 
points of disagreement with Vivanco\'s suggestions: 
 
a) Commission Composition:  increasing the commission members 
from 3 to 5 would upset the balance envisioned by the NGOs. 
Instead, they suggest that the Attorney General use his power 
under Article 44 of the Public Ministry\'s statutes to make an 
agreement with the commission that includes the naming of a 
Special Prosecutor (with commission input) to work with the 
commission, but not be a member of it.  The commission could 
include distinguished prosecutors or jurists named by the 
three member institutions (UN, OAS, GOG), and should also 
hire this expertise for the technical staff level.  LaRue 
added that it would be good if the US could provide staff for 
this purpose.  The commission should not be expanded, which 
would open it to undue GOG manipulation.  Vivanco had 
suggested that the Special Prosecutor be a full member of the 
commission, which they reject. 
 
b) Legal Foundation:  Helen Mack argued that after consulting 
with legal experts, the NGOs propose that the GOG negotiate 
an agreement with the UN and OAS on the creation of the 
commission (including immunities, scope, composition etc.) 
and that the Congress ratify the agreement with a legislative 
accord.  This is how MINUGUA and the Historical Clarification 
Commission were both set up. 
 
c) Initiating Prosecution:  LaRue emphasized that the 
commission must finish its investigation and report before 
pursuing individual cases.  To do the reverse would bog the 
commission down in legal processes and cripple its ability to 
complete a full report. 
 
d) Investigation Period:  Mack indicated that she thought 18 
months would not be enough to complete the investigation, and 
mentioned a 24-month maximum time period as preferable. 
 
6.  (SBU) Meono, who accompanied the Ombudsman on his recent 
visit to Washington and New York, reported that consultations 
there with the UN (including the office of the UN High 
Commissioner for Human Rights), OAS (including someone from 
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights), and 
Department of State were encouraging.  Helen Mack said that 
MINUGUA has been privately very supportive of the proposal. 
 
7.  (SBU) The Ambassador told the group that he intends to 
meet with the Ombudsman to discuss his views and show Embassy 
support.  He also asked the groups to send us the latest copy 
of their revised proposal as soon possible (Mack later told 
us she will need more internal discussions before they can 
send a new document to us.)  In response to the Ambassador\'s 
inquiry of how we can help: 
 
--Blanco asked that the USG reinforce the urgency of getting 
a commission started to the GOG.  They expect Vivanco to 
produce a draft by around Feb. 19, and to be back in 
Guatemala in early March.  The GOG should not be allowed to 
delay its acceptance of a proposal past mid-March. 
 
-- Mack suggested that the Ambassador speak to FM Gutierrez 
and encourage the GOG to stick with the 3-member commission 
proposal.  Mack also requested that the Ambassador discuss 
the proposal with Attorney General de Leon and encourage him 
to support the idea of entering an agreement with the 
commission, including the naming of a Special Prosecutor to 
work with the commission.  She suggested the Ambassador 
emphasize that it is his constitutional obligation to support 
the commission.  LaRue suggested the Ambassador also tell the 
AG that the commission is not seeking to displace the MP, but 
to support its work. 
 
Comment 
-------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Vivanco seemed a little taken aback by the 
suspicious reception from his friends in the human rights 
community, commenting that he had been grilled for over an 
hour about any stipend or per diem he might be receiving. 
That suspicion is based on the misgivings about the GOG\'s 
intentions for the CICIACS proposal more than doubts about 
Vivanco himself.  His exploration of modifications to 
strengthen the proposal, in his view, only worsened those 
doubts.  Gutierrez\' public comments were viewed with the same 
skepticism.  Should he return with a substantially modified 
proposal, Vivanco may find the human rights groups a harder 
sell than Portillo.  We will do what we can to facilitate the 
work of the facilitator, once we receive Vivanco\'s draft. 
HAMILTON 
"
"5886","2/21/2003 17:23","03GUATEMALA473","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000473 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, EAID, PINS, ETRD, ELAB, KDEM, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: PROTESTS IN FINAL YEAR OF PORTILLO ADMINISTRATION 
RAISE SPECTER OF DECLINING GOVERNABILITY 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Erik Hall. Reason 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Portillo\'s virtual absence from public 
during a time of mounting social protests has led to growing 
concern about governability.  The latest challenges, from 
teachers, ex-PACs and the \"campesinos,\" are not easily 
attributed to Portillo\'s traditional opponents in the private 
sector, and the GOG has few resources to address their 
demands.  Bloody prison riots fuel public concerns that the 
GOG may be abdicating its responsibility for security, as the 
prisons were left in the hands of the mutinous prisoners.  As 
election campaigning begins, Guatemalans are concerned about 
the growing potential for confrontation and the lack of 
effective action by the Portillo Administration to resolve 
the conflicts.  One GOG official expressed concern that 
governability could decline this year as popular demands grow 
and the GOG either cannot or will not address them.  It is 
important that monitoring of the election begin early so that 
social tensions do not negatively impact on the transparency 
of the electoral process. End Summary. 
 
Portillo Faces Growing Challenges in Final Year 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
2. (C) President Portillo is facing growing pressure from his 
traditional populist base as he enters the final year of his 
presidency.  His agreement in 2002 to negotiate with former 
civil patrol members (ex-PACs) a compensation package for 
their service during the internal conflict led other social 
sectors to compete for the same potential GOG funds.  Public 
school teachers, an important electoral base of any sitting 
government, have been on strike for over six weeks seeking a 
40% pay increase, and \"campesino\" groups demanding land are 
increasingly marching in Guatemala City and blocking roads in 
the countryside.  Portillo\'s reaction so far has been to let 
his ministers talk with the protesters without making 
commitments, but Portillo himself has been out of the public 
eye for almost a month.  He surfaced in Panama for a recent 
meeting of Central American presidents with Colombian 
President Uribe, but other than that has not appeared in 
public and has not spoken to the press.  He even recruited 
Attorney General Carlos de Leon (constitutionally not a 
member of the executive) to give a nationally televised 
speech calling, on behalf of the President, for the avoidance 
of violence in the protests.  Portillo\'s virtual absence has 
led to much perhaps exaggerated press speculation that 
Portillo is increasingly disengaging from the day to day 
issues of governance and that governability will continue to 
deteriorate in this final year of his administration. 
 
Teachers and Campesinos Drawing Closer 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) As the national teachers strike (an unofficial work 
stoppage rather than a legally sanctioned strike) entered its 
sixth week on February 17, police and military MPs cordoned 
off key government buildings, but could not prevent 
occupation by protesters.  The striking teachers number more 
than 80,000 nationwide, and on January 30 and February 12 
turned out 20-40,000 in the capital -- the largest popular 
protests in recent history.  On February 17, teachers agreed, 
after mediation by Church leaders, to leave the occupied 
Finance Ministry and restart dialogue with the Ministers of 
Labor, Education, and Finance over their demands for more 
funds for education, but the dialogue so far has not produced 
the outlines of a solution.  Finance Minister Weymann told us 
that the GOG does not have the funds to back up its original 
offer of 100 Quetzales (approximately $13) a month pay 
increase for the teachers (which the teachers rejected), and 
said that giving in to the teachers would lead other public 
sector workers to ask for similar increases which would 
\"break the bank.\" 
 
4. (SBU) Meanwhile, campesino groups and organized labor have 
voiced sympathy for the teachers, and talks between the two 
groups were announced for February 18.  Nery Barrios, head of 
the UASP union confederation which includes the striking 
teachers and the major campesino federation, told the 
Ambassador on February 13 that direct action (meaning 
unsanctioned strikes and street-level protest) are the only 
means available to workers to counter fruitless dialogue with 
the GOG.  Jose Pinzon, leader of the other major labor 
federation, the Union of Guatemalan Workers (UGT), said 
workers are disillusioned by electoral politics, where 
\"(political candidates) run (for office) for the people, but 
govern for their financial backers.\" 
 
5. (U) GOG Peace Commissioner Catalina Soberanis told 
reporters on February 17 that the GOG had completed its 
census of ex-PACs and had determined that 600,000 people were 
eligible for compensation.  There has been no significant 
movement, however, on funding a compensation package for the 
former civil patrol members or the widows and orphans from 
the internal conflict. 
 
Prison Riots Go Unchecked 
------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Even as Guatemalans wonder how the GOG is going to 
address the growing social demands, two bloody riots at local 
prisons have left many concerned that the GOG is not 
fulfilling its responsibility to keep order and impose the 
law.  The latest in a series of prison riots, which occurred 
on February 12, left seven dead at the capital\'s preventive 
detention facility, including the convicted murderer of 
Monsignor Gerardi.  Reports that prisoners were playing 
soccer with the decapitated heads of rival prisoners in full 
view of the guards left most Guatemalans numbed.  News of 
this gruesome event set off rumors of GOG intentions to use 
the riot as an excuse to declare a \"state of exception or 
siege.\"  Guatemalans were deeply disturbed by the 
Government\'s inability or unwillingness to impose order in 
the two prisons that were now under the control of the 
mutinous prisoners.  The prison riots coincide with an 
alarming rise in violent crime that affects all Guatemalans, 
but especially the poor, and has led some commentators to 
question whether the Portillo Administration is increasingly 
abdicating its role to provide effective citizen security. 
 
One GOG Insider Concerned About Lack of Response to Protests 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
7. (C) The continuing social tensions and the lack of 
effective GOG response has some concerned within the GOG as 
well.  New Secretary for Strategic Analysis Arturo Montenegro 
confided to us privately his misgivings about the 
determination among Portillo Administration hard-liners, 
especially Vice President Reyes Lopez, to meet growing social 
and political opposition to the government with confrontation 
or total inaction. 
 
8. (C) Montenegro believes that the teacher\'s strike has the 
potential to become a bigger problem for the GOG.  He is 
concerned that it is only a matter of time before the 
ex-PAC\'s begin pressuring the government as well, and said 
the government doesn\'t have any solution to offer.  Instead, 
he said, the GOG was seriously considering firing the 
teachers, adding fuel to the fire.  Election pressures will 
make every possible group surface demanding resources from 
the government.  Meanwhile, he said, the GOG is broke, and 
cannot honor any promises it makes.  In addition, the crime 
situation is fast getting out of hand and no one has a 
solution; none of the solutions being talked about in the 
Cabinet (including using the military) has any hope of 
addressing the problem effectively, he opined.  Finally, 
Montenegro worried that the international community 
(including the US) will gradually disengage from Guatemala if 
they don\'t see the Portillo Administration addressing its own 
problems and strengthening governability in this final year. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C) The confluence of popular demands and street-level 
protests is no surprise--it has surfaced in several forms 
since 2000 (which the GOG has dealt with, often by postponing 
resolution of conflicts) and may increase as the election 
campaign heats up.  The major social groups are competing for 
resources the GOG doesn\'t have to offer, and are frustrated 
after long fruitless efforts at dialogue with the government 
and a succession of unmet promises.  To a large extent, 
Portillo brought this series of social protests on himself by 
conceding early to ex-PAC demands for compensation after they 
blocked tourist and transportation access in the Peten last 
year. 
 
10. (C) The Government does not appear to have a coherent 
strategy for dealing with the current social protests, and 
the lack of leadership, indeed, the virtual absence of 
President Portillo, has led many to question if the Portillo 
Administration is beginning to disengage. 
 
11. (C) If the Portillo Administration does not respond 
effectively to the current challenges to governability, and 
protests continue through the electoral campaign, public 
doubts about the transparency of the electoral process will 
grow.  The international community has little to offer the 
GOG in terms of addressing the underlying problems which have 
led to the protests, but it is in our interest to seek an 
early beginning to international election monitoring in order 
to ensure the transparency and public credibility of the 
elections. 
HAMILTON 
"
"5925","2/24/2003 22:18","03GUATEMALA489","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE32314","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000489 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, PREF, ELAB, SMIG, SNAR, KCRM, KWMN, GT 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY VIEWS ON REGIONAL ANTI-TIP HARMONIZATION 
 
REF: STATE 32314 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Embassy concurs that regional 
harmonization of anti-trafficking in persons legislation, as 
outlined in RefTel, would further U.S. interests in 
Guatemala.  Harmonized anti-TIP legislation is necessary to 
achieve greater regional cooperation to prevent and combat 
trafficking, and to protect the rights of victims.  The 
Regional Conference on Migration may be a useful forum in 
which to promote these efforts.  In Guatemala, prospects for 
passage of new anti-TIP legislation is complicated by 
election-year politics.  For this reason, regional 
discussions would be helpful in 2003, while legislative 
efforts are more likely to prosper in 2004. End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) The following responses are keyed to questions in 
RefTel para 4: 
 
a)  Willingness of key national legislators to introduce and 
promote harmonized anti-TIP legislation: 
 
-- National elections for President, Vice President, all 
Congressional deputies and all Mayors will be held in 
November 2003.  The official campaign period will open in 
May, but political jockeying has already begun, complicating 
the passage of any legislation this year.  For this reason, 
prospects for passage of G/TIP harmonization legislation will 
be better in 2004.  Efforts to pass such legislation in 2003 
would depend on the willingness of the National Republican 
Front (FRG), which has a simple majority in Congress, to 
support it.  That willingness is not assured -- the GOG and 
FRG are smarting from the recent U.S. counter-narcotics 
decertification decision. 
 
b)  Openness of legislature and government to work with 
neighboring 
governments, NGOs, and IOs to achieve harmony of anti-TIP 
legislation: 
 
-- We believe the GOG and ruling FRG are open to regional 
cooperation in this area with other governments and 
international organizations.  In general, the 
GOG has more hesitation working with regional NGOs. 
 
c)  Prospects for passage of an harmonized anti-TIP bill: 
 
-- Prospects for passage of legislation in 2003 is fair.  We 
estimate that prospects for passage in the new Congress in 
2004, with substantial USG lobbying and support, would be 
good. 
 
d) impact of a legislative debate on TIP in Guatemala, 
regardless of passage: 
 
-- Congressional debate would raise awareness among 
legislators, but the issue could also be distorted (e.g. from 
TIP to USG interference) by some for political considerations 
related to the 2003 political campaign. 
MCFARLAND 
"
"5940","2/25/2003 16:53","03GUATEMALA496","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE47493|03STATE47832","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2013 
TAGS: PREL, IZ, GT, NAM 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA COOPERATIVE ON IRAQ AT NAM SUMMIT 
 
REF: A. STATE 47493 
     B. STATE 47832 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) DCM raised ref A points with Foreign Minister Edgar 
Gutierrez on February 21.  In a brief discussion, DCM urged 
Guatemalan support for a constructive outcome regarding Iraq 
at the NAM Summit in Malaysia.  Gutierrez said he would 
instruct Vice Minister Aguilera, heading Guatemala\'s 
delegation in Kuala Lumpur, to insist that any statement 
include a reference to Iraq\'s unconditional need to comply 
with UNSCR 1441. 
 
2. (C) PolOff followed up by making appropriate ref B points 
to the Foreign Ministry\'s Acting Director General for 
Multilateral Affairs, Sylvia Corado, on February 25.  Corado 
confirmed that the Guatemalan delegation to the NAM Summit 
had received Gutierrez\'s instructions and would do what it 
could. 
 
3. (C) Post would appreciate any information Embassy Kuala 
Lumpur can provide regarding the Guatemalan delegation\'s 
actual performance at the Summit. 
HAMILTON 
"
"5965","2/26/2003 16:15","03GUATEMALA511","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000511 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/26/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, CU, ELAB, PHUM, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 25 DINNER WITH PRESIDENT PORTILLO 
 
 
Classified By: JOHN R. HAMILTON for reason 1.5(b) 
 
Subject:  February 25 Dinner with President Portillo 
 
1. (S) Summary:  In a one-on-one dinner, President Portillo 
committed to making his decision on the UNHRC Cuba issue  \"in 
a calm moment,\" promised to energize his Labor ministry on 
issues of labor justice, issued instructions to his 
Agriculture Minister (by phone during dinner) to get the 
Mediterranean Fruit fly program moving, sounded positive (not 
altogether convincingly) on the proposal to create a 
commission to investigate clandestine groups, and discussed 
drug issues extensively.  He said General Rios Montt appears 
determined to be the FRG presidential candidate and gave an 
inside account of the state of play on the month-long 
teachers, strike that shut down Guatemala\'s ports and 
international airport February 25.  End summary. 
 
2. (S) The dinner was in Portillo\'s home, at his invitation. 
 The meeting took place against a backdrop of Portillo having 
been absent from public view for the better part of a month, 
generating rumors that he has either effectively abdicated 
his responsibilities for governing to Vice President Reyes or 
that he has been on a drinking binge.  Portillo was sober, 
and looked well, however, and well informed on all the issues 
the Ambassador raised.  To wit: 
 
Teachers, Strike 
-------------------- 
3. (S)  Portillo ran down the issues at play knowledgeably: 
the government cannot afford the pay raise being demanded, as 
it would break the IMF standby agreement.  Negotiations, 
suspended since February 21, had resumed late in the day 
February 25, and had \"gone well a much improved atmosphere.\" 
The government had made an extensive presentation on the 
state of public finances, to which the teachers had 
reportedly listened.  Portillo said the government would not 
back off on an innovative pilot program of educational reform 
that the teachers feel threatened by (the PRONADE program, 
which USAID has supported) but felt there were some other 
areas of teachers, demands where the government could give 
ground.  The Ambassador told him that his absence from view 
was generating rumors that no one was in charge and had 
combined during the day February 25, when ports, border and 
international airport were shut down, to produce a sense that 
events were spinning out of control.  Portillo said he 
recognized the need to surface soon, commenting that he had 
almost done so the weekend before, before reconsidering when 
the negotiations took a bad turn. 
 
Drugs 
-------- 
4. (S)   The Ambassador briefed the President on the state of 
the Embassy,s engagement on narcotics issues with the 
Guatemalan team headed by Foreign Minister Gutierrez.  This 
produced nothing new, but Portillo showed himself to be well 
briefed by Gutierrez and engaged.  He was still pushing his 
idea of ceding at least partial control of Guatemalan ports 
to U.S. authorities; the Ambassador encouraged him to 
consider a port concession, in which he showed interest. 
Portillo mentioned that he had spend last weekend in Mexico 
with the Mexican Attorney General, who agreed to train a 
first tranche  of 25 civilian intelligence agents as part of 
a long-term plan to supplant military intelligence. 
 
Labor issues 
---------------- 
5. (S)  The Ambassador said the USG would decide on/about 
April 15 whether to accept an AFL-CIO GSP labor petition.  He 
said the key issues are several unresolved cases of murder 
against labor leaders, severe backlogs in the system of labor 
justice, and the inability of the system of labor justice to 
enforce its decisions to impose fines and to order workers 
illegally fired to be rehired.  Portillo said he would get on 
his Labor Minister to address these areas. 
 
Clandestine Groups Investigation 
------------------------------------------ 
6. (S)  Portillo said he had invited Human Rights Watch 
director for the Americas Jose Miguel Vivanco to facilitate 
agreement on a proposal to stand up a mixed commission to 
investigate so-called clandestine groups because of 
Vivanco,s demonstrated probity and commitment to human 
rights.  He expected to receive a proposal from Vivanco 
momentarily and said he would \"make it his own.\"  He also 
said he had that day signed a letter giving the Human Rights 
Ombudsman (the official sponsor of the proposal) a response, 
thus meeting a February 28 deadline that the Ombudsman has 
made public.  The proposal would respond more on process than 
it would on substance, he admitted.  At the Ambassador,s 
suggestion, he said he would make personal contact with the 
Ombudsman to see if they could overcome mutual mistrust. 
 
Cuba 
------- 
7. (S)  The Ambassador asked, \"what in the world is going on 
with Cuba?\" alluding thus to the bizarre admiration that the 
normally rightist Vice President Reyes expressed for the 
Cuban system on returning from a weeklong visit to Havana. 
Portillo said \"two things:  resentment over de-certification 
and the impression that the U.S. is going all out to prevent 
a Rios Montt presidency.\"  The view is the (ruling) FRG is 
that \"we gave the U.S. loyal support (on Cuba) and this is 
how they repay us.\"  The Ambassador replied that pique is 
exactly what it looks like and that that is not a posture for 
a serious government to be caught in.  Is Guatemala, he 
asked, really going to throw away the hard-earned respect it 
won for taking the right stand on a human rights issue of 
real importance because of resentment over unrelated issues? 
Explaining our position on the Rios Montt candidacy (that 
Rios Montt,s reputation is such that bilateral relations 
would become unmanageable if he were elected and that the FRG 
should know this in advance of making a decision on its 
candidate), the Ambassador asked if it would help for him to 
engage senior FRG congressional leaders directly.  Portillo 
said no, to leave the issue to him and FM Gutierrez, 
promising that they would make a considered decision \"when 
things calm down.\"  The Ambassador said that, out of 
consideration for the political difficulties it could 
generate, we would not be pressing the GOG to co-sponsor the 
Cuban resolution, but that we wanted a \"yes\" vote.  In 
response, Portillo was officially non-committal but the body 
language and tone were more encouraging than we had expected. 
 
Moscamed Go-ahead 
--------------------------- 
8. (S)  The Ambassador briefed Portillo on the delay in the 
startup in this year,s spraying of the Mediterranean fruit 
fly bait (an insecticide), expecting that he would have to 
lay out the facts in some detail.  Portillo was up to date on 
this issue, too, however, commenting that it had been 
discussed in a cabinet meeting the day before.  A bit for 
show, but hopefully for real, Portillo phoned his Agriculture 
Minister on the spot, giving him instructions to &cut 
through the  BS, and get the program moving.8  The AG 
minister could be heard saying \"si senor Presidente.\" 
Comment:  We\'ll see. 
 
9. (S) Meeting of Central American Presidents with the 
President:  Portillo confirmed that an April 11 date works 
just fine for him. 
 
Politics and personalities 
------------------------------- 
10. (S)  Portillo is convinced that Rios Montt will seek to 
run. Whether he will succeed is another question, but his 
intention to be President is genuine.  Rios Montt has told 
me, Portillo laughed, that he is not about to repeat the 
\"Portillo experience,\" by which he meant that creating 
another president who then asserts his independence. 
Portillo said that he feels a lot of respect, affection and 
gratitude toward Rios Montt, who is more flexible, moderate 
and more of a democrat than generally believed.  &It is his 
wife and daughter who are the authoritarians,8 Portillo 
said, recalling how the two of them drew up the cabinet that 
they wanted him to name five days before he took office. 
Life with the two Rios Montt women has been an ordeal, he 
said. 
 
11. (S) Inserting a caveat to the forgoing, however, Portillo 
said that Rios Montt is impetuous, and conceivably could, for 
reasons of health and general fatigue, decide suddenly not 
run.  But he repeated that all signs point toward a Rios 
Montt candidacy. 
 
12. (S) Comment:  In ending the evening, Portillo expressed 
interest in getting together informally every two to three 
weeks.  That may amount to too much of a good thing, but the 
Ambassador is on the hook to host the next such occasion. 
 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"5990","2/27/2003 18:02","03GUATEMALA533","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA317","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000533 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, CU, GT, UNCHR 
SUBJECT: VICE PRESIDENT\'S VISIT TO CUBA SPURS SPECULATION 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 317 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 511 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5(b). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  A glowing press conference by Vice President 
Reyes after an official visit to Cuba fueled speculation that 
some in the GOG are reconsidering Cuba policy.  Reyes hinted 
that Guatemala would abstain on the Cuba vote at the UNCHR, 
did not rule out voting with Cuba, and said that he brought 
an invitation from Castro for an official visit by President 
of Congress Rios Montt.  The Ambassador had two separate 
conversations with the Foreign Minister and President 
Portillo (ref B).  Portillo said the FRG was reacting to 
decertification; he promised a calm, rational decision on the 
CUBA HR vote.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) After a seven-day official visit to Cuba and a 
four-hour meeting with Castro, Vice President Reyes told 
reporters on February 19 that Guatemala would do well to 
emulate Castro\'s policies on education, medicine, tourism, 
and agriculture.  Cheerfully handing out Cohiba cigars, the 
Vice President spent nearly an hour extolling the virtues of 
the Cuban system.  Although the Cuban budget for education is 
smaller than Guatemala\'s, Reyes said Cuba accomplishes three 
times as much with it.  Reyes went so far as to say that what 
he had seen in Cuba almost made him want to move there 
(opposition press cartoons depicted people taking up a 
collection to pay his airfare).  Even before his departure, 
Reyes recorded a national address that was broadcast during 
his trip in which he expressed gratitude for the work of 
Cuban doctors in Guatemala.  Reyes said Guatemala could solve 
its medical problems if Guatemalan doctors were more like 
their Cuban counterparts (Comment: Ex FonMin Orellana told 
DCM that Cuba had asked Reyes to increase the GOG\'s payment 
for Cuban Doctors). 
 
3.  (U) Reyes was vague on the UNCHR vote.  In response to 
direct questions, he refused to rule out voting with Cuba, 
but hinted that an abstention would be a more likely outcome. 
 Reyes insisted that Castro never mentioned the issue in 
their meeting. 
 
4. (U) Reyes said he found Rios Montt open to the possibility 
of an official visit to Cuba when he conveyed Castro\'s 
invitation.  Aristides Crespo, Secretary General of the FRG 
party and right-hand-man to Rios Montt, has avoided the issue 
except to deny speculation that a Cuba visit would hurt the 
FRG\'s electoral prospects in the eyes of its largely 
anti-Communist support base.  Reftel reports Crespo, on the 
floor of Congress, calling for support of Cuba at the UNCHR. 
 
5. (C) We recently heard from the Foreign Ministry that a 
March bilateral, usually held at the Vice-Minister level, has 
been upgraded by the Ministry to a full Ministerial.  The 
agenda will review \"all aspects of the relationship.\" 
 
6. (C) At a February 20 dinner that included Foreign Minister 
Edgar Gutierrez, the Ambassador asked what is going on with 
Vice President Reyes and his remarks praising the Castro 
regime.  The Foreign Minister said he, too, had been 
surprised by Reyes Lopez\' comments, and met with him to hear 
about his trip to Cuba.  The Ambassador told Gutierrez that 
the Vice President\'s remarks, especially about the UNCHR 
vote, looked like an intentional poke in our eye driven by 
pique over decertification.  He added that a Guatemalan 
abstention in Geneva would undermine Guatemala\'s hard-won 
credibility on human rights, and asked if the GOG was willing 
to throw this away simply to annoy us.  Gutierrez 
acknowledged that Reyes\' statements had been unhelpful, and 
assured us that the GOG would consult us on the human 
rights situation in Cuba before President Portillo makes any 
decision on the UNCHR vote. 
 
7. (C) The Ambassador reiterated these arguments to President 
Portillo on February 25 (ref B).  Portillo candidly said the 
FRG was flirting with CUBA to annoy the USG, due to 
decertification (which hurts the FRG\'s electoral chances) and 
perceived USG blocking of a Rios Montt candidacy.  The 
Ambassador\' urged Portillo not to squander the prestige the 
GOG had acquired in the last two years on Cuba and said the 
USG would ask the GOG to vote yes on a Cuba human rights 
motion.  Portillo was non-committal, but said the GOG would 
make a decision after things had calmed down. 
 
8. (C) Comment: Cuba is not a significant domestic issue.  VP 
Reyes\' flirtation with Cuba probably is in fact a poke in the 
eye of the USG.  We will continue to engage the GOG on this 
issue. 
HAMILTON 
"
"5991","2/27/2003 18:13","03GUATEMALA534","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/ PPC (LYNN) AND PM/B (WESTMORELAND) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2013 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MARR, MCAP, GT 
SUBJECT: PROGRESS TOWARD REGIONAL ARMS INVENTORY 
 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b). 
 
1. (C) Summary: On February 19, Central American Foreign 
Ministers ratified a model format for providing each other 
with information about the composition, armaments, material 
and equipment of their military and police forces.  The 
measure removes another hurdle in establishing a \"reasonable 
balance of power\" in the region--a fundamental objective of 
the 1995 Framework Treaty on Democratic Security in Central 
America.  The measure is also required as a confidence 
building measure and will serve to shore up the Central 
American Integration System (SICA), which was created by the 
Framework Treaty and will oversee implementation of the 
inventories.  Guatemala Foreign Minister Gutierrez said 
ratification was a tough sell among some of his counterparts. 
 Once implemented, however, Gutierrez believes the measure 
will strengthen arguments for reducing the size of the 
Guatemalan military.  The Ambassador mentioned the measure 
during recent consultations with SouthCom Commander General 
Hill, and suggested that if the inventories appear to be 
going forward, there could be a substantial USG interest in 
enlisting an entity, such as the Inter-American Defense 
Board, to verify them.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The Foreign Ministers of Guatemala, El Salvador, 
Honduras, Panama, and Nicaragua, as well as the Vice Foreign 
Minister of Costa Rica and Ambassador Moises Cal of Belize 
met in Panama City on February 19, inter alia, to ratify the 
model format for arms inventories.  Ratification was the 
major hurdle in the approval process for the arms inventories 
begun in August 2001.  The model format requires disclosure 
of information about the composition of naval, land, air and 
security force units as well as their installations, weapons, 
material and equipment.  The model format provides official 
definitions for the types of weapons, vehicles, ships and 
aircraft to be inventoried.  In some cases, such as 
ship-borne radar, the model format requires very specific 
information.  If this initiative goes forward, the resulting 
disclosures among Central American neighbors could greatly 
enhance mutual confidence on the isthmus.  There are 
exemptions in the agreement, however, from providing any 
information that by its nature is reserved in the 
Constitutions of member states.  In the case of Guatemala, 
Ministers of Defense routinely cite article 30 of the 
Constitution when refusing to provide a wide array of 
military information, even to the Guatemalan Congress. 
 
3. (C) Foreign Minister Gutierrez told the Ambassador that 
ratifying the model format was very difficult and that four 
of the Ministers in the meeting almost refused to sign. 
Gutierrez was surprised and pleased with the positive 
outcome. 
 
4. (C) Comment: This appears to be a step forward in the 
initiative of Honduran President Maduro as reported by 
Ambassador Palmer and as discussed December 2002 and February 
2003 during the Chiefs of Mission Conferences.  Whether or 
not the Guatemalan military hides behind its Constitution, 
the value of the inventories as confidence building measures 
would be greatly enhanced if they could be independently 
verified.  Ambassador Hamilton mentioned the model format in 
discussions with Combatant Commander Hill of Southern Command 
February 23, and raised the possibility that the 
Inter-American Defense Board or a similar entity could verify 
the inventories. 
HAMILTON 
"
"5992","2/27/2003 18:56","03GUATEMALA537","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA507","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

271856Z Feb 03
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000537 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DRL/IL WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, KDEM, ASEC, CASC, GT 
SUBJECT: TEACHERS STRIKE DEEPENS, TESTING GOG 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 507 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 473 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  February 26, Day 38 of the national 
teachers strike affecting 80,000 public schoolteachers and 
over 2 million students, saw blockades of major airports, 
ports, border crossings, and oil refineries, and the 
indefinite suspension of Congress due to the protests.  After 
receiving a conciliatory message from President Portillo 
later that day, however, strikers abandoned protests blocking 
Guatemala\'s two international airports on February 27. 
Wrangling between strikers and the GOG now appears back to 
the bargaining table, mediated by Archbishop Quezada Toruno. 
The Archbishop told the Ambassador early on February 26 that 
the GOG\'s ability to increase the budget is constrained. 
Strike leaders told LabAtt they are committed to non-violence 
and do not seek to destabilize the GOG by collaborating with 
opposition groups including the organized private sector. 
Nevertheless, the teacher strike occurs at a moment of 
vulnerability for the GOG and governing FRG, and could spur 
additional protests if it continues.  End Summary. 
 
Teachers Give Their Side of Conflict 
------------------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) On February 26 LabAtt met with a group of strike 
leaders including Nery Barrios, Secretary General of the 
Unity of Social and Popular Action (UASP) labor federation, 
and Teachers Association leaders Roberto Madrid, Romualdo 
Maldonado, Joviel Acevedo, and Julio Solano.  LabAtt stated 
USG concerns over the blockage by protesters of airports, 
ports and border crossings, which we do not view as 
legitimate means to impel dialogue in a democracy.  Strike 
leaders responded that throughout a long and frustrating 
process that originated over a year ago, they have strictly 
maintained a policy of non-violence and has striven mightily 
to prevent their members from responding in kind to 
intimidation, threats and provocations from anti-strike 
agents.  Acevedo said he had received threats explicitly 
sourced to the Presidential Guard (EMP), and that his home 
has been invaded and family members threatened.  Solano said 
he had also suffered similar threats.  Strike leaders agreed 
to keep this meeting with LabAtt confidential, and did not 
ask for any public Embassy role in their conflict.  Madrid 
suggested, however, that the Consultative Group might 
helpfully address the issue of educational reform directly in 
its May meeting resolutions. 
 
3.  (SBU) Strike leaders said that strikers had received and 
rejected many offers by opposition political parties and 
other groups including university students, campesinos and 
the private sector to join the teachers\' protests.  The 
teachers said they rejected these offers, most recently from 
the president of the main employer association (CACIF) 
because the do not want to lose control, be used for partisan 
political ends, or for the situation to threaten the 
democratic stability of the country.  LabAtt praised this 
stance.  Madrid summarized the origins and motivation of the 
teachers\' demands, which the GOG and media have distorted by 
portraying the conflict as essentially about salaries/budgets 
instead of the educational reforms blocked by the FRG in 
Congress in August 2002, which provoked the current 
escalation of direct action by teachers.  However, key 
demands that must be addressed for the teachers to return to 
class include an agreement on the budget increase for the 
education ministry, and a GOG commitment to desist from 
reprisals against strikers.  (Note: A labor court judge 
declared the strike illegal on February 20 and gave strikers 
five days to report to work, which was promptly appealed by 
strikers.  If upheld, strikers who refuse to return to work 
could be legally dismissed.  End Note.) 
 
CACIF Denies Meddling 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Upon hearing of teachers\' allegations of CACIF 
offers to support teachers with a \"general strike,\" 
EconCouns, on Ambassdor\'s instructions, expressed concern to 
Roberto Castaneda, current Chamber of Agriculture President 
and CACIF Vice President,  who will be named CACIF\'s new 
President starting March 3.  Castaneda agreed that, if true, 
Nuetze was \"out of line,\" and he reconfirmed what CACIF 
leaders told the Ambassador on February 25:  they are 
concerned over apparent escalation of agitation against the 
government and have the perception that situation could 
spiral out of control.  Calm and leadership, not inciting 
passions, was what the country needed, they told the 
Ambassador.  Castaneda promised to look into this and get 
back to us. 
 
Archbishop Sees Difficult Negotiations Ahead 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Archbishop Rodolfo Quezada Toruno told Ambassador 
in a courtesy call on February 26 that it would be very 
difficult to resolve the conflict, which he was called upon 
to mediate by both sides.  Three early rounds of meetings 
during the week of February 14 were getting nowhere, so on 
February 24, Quezada told both sides that without a shift in 
positions, he saw no reason to continue.  When the GOG, 
represented at the dialogue table by the Ministers of 
Education, Labor, and Finance, expressed willingness to 
consider an increase to the education ministry\'s budget, 
Quezada asked strike leaders to reconsider their demand for 
2.8 billion queztals and submit a more realistic proposal. 
He had not received a response when Ambassador and LabAtt 
called on him, but confided that he believed the most the GOG 
could offer would be an increase of 1 billion, without having 
to raise the consumption tax, which would be politically 
impossible.  That would permit a salary raise of 2-300 
quetzals per month ($25-38) and money left over to improve 
schools.  Quezada Toruno noted that the Education Ministry 
budget currently comprises 11% of the budget, the highest 
amount after payment of government debt.  Minister of Finance 
Eduardo Weymann publicly defended the level of that budget, 
saying it was now 40% higher than in 1999. 
 
6.  (SBU) On other issues, Quezada thanked the Ambassador 
(three times) for his early visits to human rights defenders, 
including the Archbishop\'s Office on Human Rights (ODHAG), 
for the important signal that sent of U.S. interest. 
Quezada\'s most difficult decision, he said, since taking 
office in June 2001, was to continue the Church\'s status as a 
plaintiff in the Gerardi case.  The Ambassador praised that 
decision as the right one, and asked whether Quezada believed 
the justice system had revealed the truth of the Gerardi 
killing.  Quezada said no, but expressed confidence in the 
Supreme Court ruling that the appeals (but not the original 
verdict) be re-done.  Asked by the Ambassador for his view on 
the complicity of Mario Orantes, the priest sentenced to 20 
years for his role in the crime, Quezada said he believed, 
with the vast majority of the clergy, that Orantes knows more 
than he is saying. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The teachers\' strike occurs at a moment of weakness 
for the GOG and the governing FRG: 
 
-- GOG intervention to save another failed bank (supposedly 
to protect cronies) and continued efforts to pay off the 
ex-PACs (former civil defense patrols whose votes the FRG 
wants) contrast with its inability to meet teachers\' demands. 
 
-- The GOG seeks to stay in the good graces of the IMF, in 
large part so it can attract more foreign bond buyers 
(proceeds will go to projects that help the FRG\'s 2003 
campaign), so its budget options are limited. 
 
-- Just as the GOG\'s cave-in to ex-PACs in 2002 probably 
encouraged the teachers to strike, a perceived capitulation 
to the teachers would make it difficult to fend off a 
transport strike (due to shrinking profits on bus fares due 
to fuel price increases). 
 
-- Portillo has hitherto absented himself from the strike 
issue, fueling unfounded speculation and uncertainty. 
 
-- With the election campaign to begin formally in May, there 
is no incentive in other parties to oppose the strike. 
 
8.  (SBU) While strike leaders now tell us that the GOG\'s new 
flexibility had brought dialogue \"back from the brink,\" deep 
divisions over money and many other issues remain on the 
bargaining table, including the issue of lost wages for 
strikers during this month out of class.  Portillo\'s overdue 
intervention to mollify protesters is typical of his crisis 
management, and follows a similar move with campesino groups 
earlier this week.  Unfortunately, Portillo\'s history of 
dealing with protests by announcing half-measures and 
unfulfilled commitments have deepened skepticism and 
prolonged protests to the point where they reach the crisis 
point, as in this instance.  This strike, which enjoyed broad 
popular support, could prove the most politically costly to 
Portillo and the FRG, alienating left-leaning teachers who 
help shape public opinion in the provinces. 
 
9.  (SBU) While a major inconvenience to travelers and 
serious drain on commercial activity, this conflict has not 
to date directly threatened U.S. citizens nor has it risen to 
a level of a threat to Guatemalan democracy.  We will 
continue to monitor protests with a view to U.S. citizen 
security and other U.S. interests. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6031","2/28/2003 18:06","03GUATEMALA551","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA471","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000551 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT, UN, OAS 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S CALL ON HUMAN RIGHTS OMBUDSMAN 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 471 
 
1. SUMMARY:  The Ambassador met with Human Rights Ombudsman 
Sergio Morales on February 27 to support the Ombudsman\'s 
proposal for the commission to investigate clandestine groups 
(CICIACS).  Morales was encouraged by President Portillo\'s 
recent official response and believes Vivanco\'s recent 
memorandum was also positive.  The press gave the meeting 
ample, positive coverage.  End Summary. 
 
2.  The Ambassador, Acting PolCouns, and HROff visited Human 
Rights Ombudsman (PDH) Sergio Morales in his offices on 
Thursday, February 27.  The Ombudsman thanked the Ambassador 
for his overwhelming support of the human rights community 
and the proposal for the CICIACS.  Morales said while the 
Embassy has been a strong PDH ally, the Ambassador\'s public 
support exceeded his expectations.  The Ambassador said 
support for Morales\' work is fundamental to US policy and 
that he can count on our continued support. 
 
CICIACS update 
-------------- 
 
3.  The Ambassador told Morales he discussed the CICIACS with 
President Portillo recently and had asked Portillo to respond 
formally to Morales.  Portillo subsequently sent Morales a 
letter on February 27 explaining GOG support for the ideas 
behind the CICIACS proposal and expressing the GOG\'s desire 
to negotiate the proposal through Jose Miguel Vivanco. 
Morales appreciated Portillo\'s formal response, which was the 
first word he had received from the GOG since his public 
release of the proposal on January 16.  Morales confessed 
that he was \"still analyzing\" Portillo\'s prose but viewed it 
as generally positive. 
 
4.  According to Morales, a letter from FM Gutierrez on 
Vivanco\'s departure had raised Morales\'s concerns about 
over-broadening the commission\'s mandate to include crimes 
linked to private security forces.  This new Portillo letter, 
however, returned to the CICIACS\'s original, narrower scope 
on crimes linked to state agents.  The Ambassador and Morales 
agreed that Vivanco\'s memorandum and Reed Brody\'s inclusion 
in upcoming negotiations were other positive developments. 
Morales said he is eager for Vivanco and Brody to come in 
March to push the GOG and the human rights community toward a 
consensus. 
 
Resource Request 
---------------- 
 
5.  Morales said he appreciates the Embassy\'s moral support, 
but that the PDH also needs resources in order to continue 
expanding its work.  The Ambassador pledged to strengthen the 
PDH through USAID assistance, especially since it will be 
assuming many of MINUGUA\'s functions in the coming years. 
Morales thanked the Ambassador and said the USG \"brings good 
luck\" to his institution. 
 
Security 
-------- 
 
6.  The Ambassador asked if Morales had been receiving 
threats and Morales responded that he had not, but many of 
his auxiliary Ombudsmen had, including those in 
Huehuetenango, Solola, Zacapa, and Quiche.  The Ambassador 
and Morales talked about ways to improve the \"culture of 
lawfulness,\" as they agree that many human rights problems 
have cultural roots.  Morales said threats reported by the 
human rights community have dropped off since public 
discussion of the CICIACS began in mid-January.  The 
Ambassador said we will remain engaged on human rights 
workers\' security and asked Morales to let him know if the 
situation worsens. 
 
Press Coverage 
-------------- 
 
7.  The Ambassador\'s brief session with the press following 
the meeting was widely documented and produced the following 
quotes in leading daily Prensa Libre: 
 
-CICIACS: It is an encouraging sign that the President 
responded to the Ombudsman and demonstrated his willingness 
to form a commission. 
 
-(Upon his return in March) We hope that (Vivanco) can obtain 
agreements quickly.  It is because of this dialogue that we 
have reason to be cautiously positive. 
 
-Decertification: We have seen improvement, but there is 
still much work to be done.  What we see as important is that 
all the institutions involved are ready to cooperate.  It is 
probable that the government will form a commission devoted 
to this topic.  It is difficult to talk about advance steps 
at this time; we will probably review the counternarcotics 
efforts in September. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  Morales was more optimistic than we expected about the 
GOG response and Vivanco\'s mission.  He will be an important 
ally in our efforts to moderate NGO skepticism so as to 
prevent the \"perfect from becoming enemy to the good\" on 
CICIACS.  End Comment. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6079","3/3/2003 16:48","03GUATEMALA555","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, SNAR, PHUM, GT, CACS 
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH ATTORNEY GENERAL DE LEON 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  In a dinner conversation February 28, De 
Leon told the Ambassador that he would seek to energize 
investigations of murdered American citizens and labor 
leaders, to beef up his office on money laundering 
investigations and said that, if invited, he would attend the 
next high-level meeting on counter-narcotics cooperation with 
the Ambassador.  He professes to be a big supporter of the 
proposal to investigate clandestine groups, but opposes the 
human rights, ombudsman,s key role in the selection of 
members.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) De Leon and his wife hosted the Ambassador and Mrs. 
Hamilton to dinner February 28.  This was mostly a social 
occasion, but covered the following substantive topics: 
 
Murdered American citizens 
------------------------------------ 
3. (SBU)   The Ambassador briefed De Leon on his meeting, 
February 27, with the special prosecutor assigned to American 
citizen cases (septel), commenting that she and her two 
assistants seemed sincere and well-intentioned, but 
over-whelmed by the difficulty of the cases (to which she was 
assigned after initial investigations were bungled or 
non-existent).  Would it be possible to take her out of the 
normal duty rotation, in order to lighten her caseload?  De 
Leon avoided saying yes, but did agree to another suggestion, 
that he meet with her to review progress in the cases every 
month or two.  The Ambassador said he would continue to meet 
with her every two months, noting that progress in these 
cases is a high priority for us and that they could figure 
prominently in Congressional debates on CAFTA approval and 
the like. 
 
Labor rights 
--------------- 
4. (SBU)  The Ambassador briefed De Leon on the AFL-CIO GSP 
petition, telling him that unresolved cases of threats and 
violence against labor leaders figure centrally in the 
petition.  To date, none of the cases of the last two years 
has been resolved.  Could he take an interest in these cases 
and seek to energize the prosecutors handling them?  De Leon 
said he would. 
 
Clandestine Group Investigation Proposal 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
5. (SBU)  De Leon professed to be a strong supporter of the 
need to investigate and prosecute clandestine groups but, 
toward the end of the evening, returned to this topic to say 
he opposed having the Human Rights Ombudsman produce the 
slate of names for three members (as proposed by Human Rights 
Watch official Jose Miguel Vivanco).  De Leon was so adamant 
about this seemingly innocuous feature of the proposal that 
it belied his claim to favor it. 
 
Counter-narcotics meeting 
--------------------------------- 
6. (SBU)  The Ambassador tweaked De Leon for pledging 
personally to attend the February 21 high-level meeting on 
drug cooperation only not to be represented at all.  Looking 
sheepish, De Leon said he had meant to come but got tied up 
in the teachers, strike and that, in any event, the public 
ministry had not been invited this time.  The Ambassador said 
we would check with the foreign ministry about participation. 
 
Money laundering investigations 
----------------------------------------- 
7. (SBU)  The Ambassador told De Leon frankly that his office 
on money laundering investigations is seriously understaffed, 
that the financial analysis unit in the tax superintendency 
is raring to go but has a weak partner in the public 
ministry.  De Leon acknowledged the point and promised to 
beef up the office significantly, when he gets a total of 150 
new auxiliary prosecutors in about another month. 
 
8. (SBU) In an unsolicited comment, De Leon gave our visa 
revocation of Attorney Fernando Linares a big thumbs up. 
 
Bio note 
----------- 
9. (SBU)  De Leon,s wife, Maria del Maria Carpio Nicole, is 
the daughter of former vice president Roberto Carpio Nicole 
(1985-1990) and the niece of politician and newspaper editor 
Jorge Carpio Nicole, who was assassinated in 1993.  Her first 
cousin, Jorge Carpio,s son, was married to Karen Fischer, De 
Leon,s special prosecutor on corruption.  The De Leon,s 
have a 15-year-old daughter, Michelle, who lives with Mrs. De 
Leon\'s sister and two cousins in Boston, attending high 
school there, out of the De Leons, concern that his job puts 
her security at risk in Guatemala.  The De Leons spent a year 
at the Kennedy School at Harvard in the late 1980s; he was a 
classmate of Jose Maria Figueres, who was subsequently 
(1994-1998) President of Costa Rica.  The  De Leon\'s live in 
a modest home 15 kilometers outside Guatemala City. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6102","3/4/2003 15:32","03GUATEMALA571","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA191|03GUATEMALA221|03GUATEMALA414|03GUATEMALA511|03GUATEMALA555","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000571 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
USDOL FOR ILAB:ROBERT WHOLEY 
DEPT FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN AND DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PGOV, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR PRESSES LABOR AGENDA WITH NEW LABOR 
MINISTER, UNION LEADERS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 555 
     B. GUATEMALA 511 
     C. GUATEMALA 414 
     D. GUATEMALA 221 
     E. GUATEMALA 191 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador told Labor Minister Victor 
Moreira during a courtesy call March 3 that there is 
heightened USG interest in labor rights in Guatemala in the 
context of CAFTA negotiations, and urged Moreira to address 
cases in outstanding GSP petitions.  Moreira said that his 
priorities include steps to prevent similar cases of labor 
rights violations from arising in future, but that more 
ambitious reforms will not be possible in an election year. 
Investigating violence against union leaders, reforming the 
labor justice system, and reinstating illegally fired workers 
are not directly under the labor ministry\'s jurisdiction. 
Nevertheless, at President Portillo\'s insistence, Moreira 
said he would use the urgency of CAFTA negotiations to spur 
what progress he could.  In a separate meeting, labor union 
leaders urged the Ambassador to include strong labor 
protections in CAFTA.  We will continue to press for GOG 
measures that respond to GSP conditions and report on 
progress before April 15.  End Summary. 
 
Our Labor Rights Agenda 
----------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The Ambassador told Moreira that the GSP review 
decision is pending, and there is heightened interest in the 
petition in the context of CAFTA negotiations.  USG concerns 
include: 1) the urgent need for more effective investigation 
of violence against unionists, especially cases of killings 
of labor leaders, to end the climate of impunity for 
anti-union violence; 2) the need to streamline and strengthen 
the labor justice system; and 3) the need for better 
enforcement of labor court rulings.  Should Guatemala be put 
under review, the Ambassador said, Guatemala\'s labor rights 
protections will come under intense scrutiny by U.S. 
officials; loss of GSP privileges would affect prospects for 
a successful CAFTA negotiation. 
 
3.  (SBU) The Ambassador acknowledged that some of these 
issues fall outside the jurisdiction of the labor ministry, 
and mentioned his own efforts to enlist the cooperation of 
other GOG leaders on labor rights, including President 
Portillo (Ref b), the Attorney General (Refs a & d) the 
President of the Supreme Court (Ref c), and the Economy 
Minister (Ref e).  The Ambassador also raised with Morales 
the case of workers at Finca Maria Lourdes, which is 
highlighted in the AFL-CIO GSP petition.  This case involves 
a coffee plantation in Quetzaltenango department where 55 
workers were illegally fired in 1995 after organizing a 
union.  The labor courts ruled in favor of the workers and 
ordered reinstatement of the workers.  Finca owners have 
repeatedly refused entry to police attempting to serve the 
court order.  LabAtt expressed appreciation for the efforts 
by Moreira\'s predecessors to resolve difficult cases, and 
urged that he consider doing so in this case. 
 
Moreira\'s Priorities 
-------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Moreira said that he intended to use the attention 
to labor rights in the CAFTA talks to justify his own planned 
initiatives to meet ILO standards, as follows: 
 
--  Resolve the teachers strike.  (Note: The GOG made the 
teachers an offer on February 28 and teachers have rejected 
the offer but will meet with GOG negotiators (Moreira, the 
Education and Finance Ministers) under the facilitation of 
Archbishop Quezada Toruno on March 4.  End Note.) Moreira 
said that his predecessor, ex-minister Victor Hugo Godoy, was 
dismissed at the Vice President\'s request over collusion 
between ministry workers and the leaders of the teachers\' 
strike. 
 
--  Legislation:  Introduce new child labor protections; 
unprecedented sexual harassment legislation; a universal 
\"no-fault\" severance system (which would help unclog the 
labor courts, where workers unjustly fired must petition for 
severance);\" and reforms to permit social security coverage 
for domestic workers (paid for by workers, not employers); 
 
--  Labor Justice:  Moreira said that President Portillo had 
just called and asked him to emphasize the need for all three 
branches of government to cooperate to address labor rights 
issues.  Moreira is seeking a meeting with the Supreme Court 
president to discuss the need for labor justice streamlining 
(which will require legislation) and cooperation on specific 
cases cited by the GSP petitions (e.g. Finca Maria Lourdes); 
 
--  Minimum Wage-Setting Process:  Review the current system 
for fixing the minimum wage, which has been criticized by the 
private sector as being unilateral on the part of the 
Executive; 
 
--  Internal Reforms:  He has named a third vice minister, 
for administrative affairs, and plans new internal 
regulations.  Also hopes to achieve a collective bargaining 
agreement with ministry workers.  He wants to develop a 3-5 
year plan which includes budgetary needs to address the needs 
of the informal sector, CAFTA and longer-term necessary 
reforms to the labor code; 
 
--  Civil Service Reform:  Analyze the problems of multiple 
government personnel systems, and recommend reforms for the 
next government to consider; 
--  Public Employee Recreation Fund:  He hopes to spin this 
off to an autonomous institute; and, 
 
--  Union Registration:  He will offer an amnesty for fines 
during a six-month transition period. 
 
5.  (SBU) Moreira agreed that the Finca Maria Lourdes case, 
like the DYMEL case resolved in 2002, is emblematic of 
egregious non-enforcement of court decisions.  Responsibility 
for addressing these cases lies in the jurisdiction of the 
courts.  He will discuss the case with the president of the 
Supreme Court.  Moreira said his goal as Labor Minister is to 
make key reforms to prevent similar cases from arising in the 
future.  Vice Minister Antonio Monzon told the Ambassador 
that there had been an agreement between local authorities, 
fired Maria Lourdes workers and the plantation owner for 
talks about how to resolve the situation, in which the labor 
ministry is participating. 
 
Biographic Information and Comment 
---------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Moreira is a former labor leader (Secretary General 
of the state electricity utility union, STINDE, in the 
mid-90\'s) who was named on January 30 to replace ex-minister 
Victor Hugo Godoy, now rumored to be named Guatemala\'s next 
Ambassador to the OAS.  Like Godoy, Moreira owes his 
allegiance directly to Portillo.  (Note:  Godoy resigned 
under pressure from the Vice President, after enduring 
constant potshots from the VP inside the Cabinet.  End Note.) 
 Moreira\'s relations with Reyes Lopez and Rios Montt are not 
known. 
 
7.  (U) Prior to becoming minister, Moreira was serving as 
Portillo\'s private sub-secretary after being named in June 
2001 as GOG Commissioner for the Promotion of Transparency 
and Against Corruption (he complained publicly about lack of 
funding for that commission in February 2002, but retains the 
title).  At the outset of the Portillo Administration Moreira 
served as sub-secretary of Strategic Analysis under 
now-Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez.  He is a close friend 
of the First Lady. 
 
8.  (SBU) In May 2002, Moreira was arrested and jailed for 
contempt of court after failing to appear at an earlier 
hearing on charges which dogged him from his position as head 
of the business department of the electricity institute (he 
pleaded illness).  He was released on bail after three weeks 
and later acquitted.  (He joked to the Ambassador that given 
the difficulty of resolving the teachers\' strike, he was 
better off in jail.)  Moreira is reportedly a former member 
of the Guatemalan Workers Party (PGT) and a former member of 
a Marxist group called \"January 6th.\"  An economist and 
social scientist by training, Moreira worked on the 
Historical Memory Project under assassinated Bishop Gerardi 
and also worked for the Myrna Mack foundation.  Moreira is 38 
years old and his wife is half-British. 
 
9.  (SBU) Moreira\'s feisty ministerial approach has already 
raised hackles in both CACIF and organized labor.  CACIF is 
privately furious that, after giving lip service to dialogue, 
he referred to management\'s representatives on the board of 
the national training institute (INTECAP) as hypocritical for 
being \"bloodily repressive\" to their own workers and 
characterizing the private sector in general as a \"genocidal 
oligarchy.\"  An intense man, Moreira gives the impression 
that he is spoiling for the fight with the private sector, 
which seems inevitable in an election year.  His earlier, 
more ambitious legislative package, outlined to LabAtt on 
February 4, seemed designed to provoke that fight, and CACIF 
vows to reverse anything the FRG passes that it does not 
like. 
 
10.  (SBU) Meanwhile, Moreira\'s relations with organized 
labor are not looking much better.  Union leaders believe he 
was named to replace Godoy because Godoy refused to use tough 
tactics to bring the striking teachers to heel:  the ministry 
has processed thousands of penalties against individual 
teachers for absenteeism during the strike, and labor courts 
have ruled the strike illegal, making strikers liable to lose 
their jobs and even pay damages (unlikely to enforced).  Top 
labor leaders are also unhappy with Moreira\'s autocratic 
manner and lack of respect in tripartite meetings, and are 
particularly concerned about his inclusion of \"no-fault\" 
severance pay in his legislative priorities.  They worry that 
management will use this tool to rid employee ranks of union 
members. 
 
11.  (SBU) Moreira strikes us as serious about protecting 
labor rights, but politically vulnerable and wholly dependent 
on Portillo\'s support.  Clearly smarting from the bruising 
(and ongoing) teachers\' strike and the cool reception from 
organized labor and private sector members of the tripartite 
labor policy commission, Moreira has already scaled back his 
agenda in the short time since taking office.  We will 
continue to press the minister to take steps to meet GSP 
labor conditions, but will also need to look elsewhere for 
stronger allies to be assured of progress. 
 
Union Leader Concerns 
--------------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) The Ambassador also discussed labor rights and the 
GSP petitions February 13 with four prominent labor leaders: 
Jose Pinzon, Secretary General of the CGTG industrial union 
and leader of the main labor federation (UGT); Nery Barrios, 
Secretary General of the other main federation (UASP); Julio 
 
SIPDIS 
Coj, Secretary of the independent UNSITRAGUA federation, and 
Carlos Mancilla, Secretary General of the CUSG federation, 
also a member of the UGT.  The union leaders complained about 
the lack of political will to support freedom of association; 
urged the USG to incorporate strong labor protections into 
the CAFTA to replace those under GSP, and thanked the USG for 
applying GSP conditions to leverage progress from the GOG in 
the past.  In response to the Ambassador\'s question, the 
union leaders said U.S. multinational firms are no better 
than local ones at respecting the right to association (he 
cited the maquila sector, Coke, and Pepsi, specifically). 
(Note:  Working conditions, including salaries, are 
significantly better than average in U.S. operations than 
elsewhere here.  End Note.) 
HAMILTON 
"
"6113","3/4/2003 21:42","03GUATEMALA577","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE42535","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KNNP, GT, NPT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA NOT FOCUSED ON REINFORCING THE NPT TREATY 
 
REF: STATE 42535 
 
1.  PolOff conveyed reftel points to Sylvia Corado, Acting 
Director General for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign 
Ministry, on February 19.  Corado agreed that the DPRK\'s 
announced intention to withdraw from the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was worrisome but 
had no official response.  PolOff followed up with Corado on 
February 24 and again on February 28, when Corado candidly 
said that the NPT is not a priority for the GOG.  However, 
Corado said the MFA would look for appropriate opportunities 
to make public statements underlining the importance of the 
NPT, as requested reftel.  Corado was not able to speculate 
about the timing or venue for such statements. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6197","3/7/2003 13:17","03GUATEMALA605","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE22225","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 GUATEMALA 000605 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT--GUATEMALA 
 
REF: STATE 22225 
 
1.  (U) The following are responses to questions in Ref A. 
Additional information on Embassy projects and strategies to 
combat trafficking can be found in Ref B. 
 
2.  (SBU) Country Overview: 
 
A.  Is the country a country of origin, transit or 
destination for international trafficked men, women or 
children?  Are there any estimates of numbers of victims? 
Are certain groups more at risk of being trafficked?  What is 
the source of information? 
 
-- According to reports by the International Organization on 
Migration (IOM), Casa Alianza, and an October 2002 report 
from the DePaul University International Human Rights Law 
Institute, Guatemala is a country of origin and transit for 
international trafficking of persons and, in some instances, 
is also a destination.  The trafficking is by land, air, and 
sea, and it does occur within Guatemala,s borders.  Reliable 
statistics do not exist on the magnitude of the problem. 
Other than Guatemalans, other Central and Latin Americans 
(notably Ecuadorians) are also being trafficked.  Victims 
trafficked to Guatemala are usually young women or children 
who are often brought in for sexual exploitation.  Those 
trafficked from Guatemala for sexual exploitation are usually 
minors, both boys and girls, from poor families.  Trafficking 
is intimately related to international migration issues, as 
the promise of arrival in the U.S. is often used to attract 
desperate Latin Americans. 
 
B.  Where are the persons trafficked from?  Where are the 
persons trafficked to? 
 
-- Trafficked persons come mainly from other Central American 
countries and Ecuador.  Most are destined for the United 
States or Mexico.  Some are destined for Guatemala.  In 
addition to the trafficking of Latin Americans, smuggling of 
Chinese, Afghans, Egyptians, Pakistanis and Syrians has been 
noted in the past, and probably includes some cases of 
trafficking. 
 
C.  Have there been any changes in the direction or extent of 
trafficking? 
 
-- Not to Embassy\'s knowledge.  Trafficking may have been 
affected by a general slowdown in illegal migration into 
Mexico after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the 
U.S., economic decline in the U.S., and Mexican efforts to 
prevent illegal entry from Guatemala.  Press reported that 
Mexico deported 120,000 Central Americans from Chiapas state 
in 2002. 
 
D.  Are any efforts or surveys planned or under way to 
document the extent and nature of trafficking in the country? 
 Is any additional information available from such reports or 
surveys that was not available last year? 
 
-- The July 2001 National Plan of Action to Combat Sexual 
Exploitation of Minors included the goal of developing more 
information on this problem related to trafficking.  To date 
no survey or report has been produced, however.  The IOM in 
2002 published results of a survey profiling the composition 
of Guatemalan migrants, 92% of whom were destined for the 
U.S.  It also features data on where come from, where they 
settle in the U.S., remittances to Guatemala, and age and 
social data.  IOM also produced a report on Sexual 
Exploitation of children and adolescents in Guatemala in 
cooperation with ECPAT International and Casa Alianza. 
 
E.  If the country is a destination point for trafficked 
victims:  What kinds of conditions are the victims trafficked 
into? Are they forced to work in sweatshops, agriculture, 
restaurants, construction sites, prostitution, nude dancing, 
domestic servitude, begging, or other forms of labor or 
services? What methods are used to ensure their compliance? 
Are the victims subject to violence, threats, withholding of 
their documents, debt bondage, etc.? 
 
-- Conditions are pitiful.  Victims are subject to violence 
and threat, but lack funds to return to their home countries. 
 Victims are often young women or children, brought here for 
sexual exploitation and paid low salaries.  A study done by 
the NGO \"Pro Nino y Nina Centroamericanos\" (PRONICE) in 1999 
suggests that fraud and threats are common forms of 
recruitment.  Usually traffickers choose pretty girls from 
poor families, and the most common \"contracting places\" are 
along the borders. Asians, primarily Chinese, have also been 
brought to Guatemala, though they are mainly being smuggled. 
Those brought in have had to pay exorbitant rates for the 
voyage and for false documents. 
 
F.  For countries of origin:  Which populations are targeted 
by the traffickers?  Who are the traffickers?  What methods 
are used to target the victims?  (Are they offered lucrative 
jobs, sold by their families, approached by friends of 
friends?)  What methods are used to move the victims (e.g., 
are false documents being used?)? 
 
-- Sources in Guatemalan immigration indicate that victims 
trafficked from Guatemala are generally poor people looking 
for a better life for themselves and their families.  The 
traffickers quite often approach these individuals and offer 
them jobs that would allow them to make regular remittances 
back to the family in Guatemala.  The main target population 
for sexual exploitation is minors, both boys and girls, from 
poor families or orphans.  The methods of approach include 
promises of economic rewards, jobs in cafeterias or beauty 
parlors, or jobs in other countries.  The means of promotion 
include flyers, newspaper advertisements, and verbal/personal 
recommendations.  The DePaul University study \"In Modern 
Bondage: Sex Trafficking in the Americas\" cites evidence of 
the following principal forms and agents of trafficking in 
Guatemala:  1) \"deceptions/false promise of employment\" by 
recruiters, intermediaries, and bar/brothel owners; 2) 
\"misadventure\" with alien smugglers and truck drivers; 3) 
abduction by common criminals; and, 4) \"peer-influenced\" 
(primarily domestic) trafficking by friends and adolescents. 
 
G.  Is there political will at the highest levels of 
government to combat trafficking in persons? Is the 
government making a good faith effort to seriously address 
trafficking?  Is there a willingness to take action against 
government officials linked to it?  In broad terms, what 
resources is the host government devoting to combat 
trafficking in persons (in terms of prevention, protection, 
prosecution)? 
 
-- The Attorney General\'s Office is currently investigating 
allegations of abetting illegal migration against the 
director of Migration and other immigration employees for 
possible alien smuggling.  A former director was replaced 
after similar charges surfaced.  Neither has yet been charged 
with a crime. 
 
-- The GOG has shown some will to combat trafficking, but 
much remains to be done.  To combat both smuggling and 
trafficking, an ambitious plan was designed by the Central 
American Commission of Migration Directors.  The plan aims to 
address the problem of migration, and it includes assistance 
to Guatemalans in foreign nations, assistance to Guatemalan 
victims who return, reinsertion into society, local 
development to diminish migration problems, protection of 
human rights of immigrants, and educational and informational 
campaigns.  The new agreement was signed in March 2001.  In 
July 2001, the Cabinet approved a Plan of Action against 
Sexual Exploitation of Minors and Adolescents.  The Ministry 
of Foreign Relations also announced a special commission to 
advise the President on the general issue of migration, and 
has engaged in regular dialogue with Mexico on migration 
enforcement issues. 
 
-- On enforcement, the GOG is using the immigration service 
and the national police force to combat trafficking and has 
had some victories.  A new computerized entry and exit system 
has yielded some positive results with respect to combating 
alien smuggling and should help fight trafficking as well. 
However, no statistics exist for cases involving trafficking 
per se.  Most deportations were of Ecuadorians in transit to 
the U.S. who were probably victims of smuggling, rather than 
of trafficking. 
 
H.  Do governmental authorities or individual members 
of government forces facilitate trafficking, condone 
trafficking, or are otherwise complicit in such activities? 
If so, at what levels? Do government authorities (such as 
customs, border guards, immigration officials, local police, 
or others) receive bribes from traffickers or otherwise 
assist in their operation?  What punitive measures, if any, 
have been taken against those individuals complicit or 
involved in trafficking?  Please provide numbers when 
available, of government officials involved, accused, 
convicted and/or prosecuted. 
 
-- The involvement of government officials in trafficking has 
not been documented.  However, credible press accounts allege 
that corruption in the Guatemalan immigration service is 
widespread and involves the acceptance of bribes to allow 
individuals and groups to enter the country without proper 
documentation.  Embassy believes some of this corrupt 
activity involves cases meeting the definition of trafficking 
in persons. 
 
-- No immigration officials have yet been prosecuted under a 
2000 law against alien smuggling. 
 
I.  What are the limitations on the government\'s ability to 
address this problem in practice?  E.g., is funding for 
police or other institutions inadequate? Is overall 
corruption a problem? Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
 
-- Lack of resources, both manpower and money, is a major 
limitation on combating this problem, as with 
narco-trafficking and other trans-border problems.  With 
unlimited crying needs and acute politically charged demands 
on scarce resources, providing important resources to combat 
trafficking is very difficult.  There is also the problem of 
overall corruption that is pervasive throughout the GOG. 
 
3. (SBU) Prevention: 
 
A.  Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in that country? If no, why not? 
 
-- In bilateral discussions about Migration Issues with 
Mexico since 1996, the GOG has publicly acknowledged the need 
to strengthen its efforts to combat the trafficking of 
migrants.  The GOG has also acknowledged a related problem, 
the sexual exploitation of minors.  In July 2001, the Cabinet 
approved a National Plan of Action Against the Sexual and 
Commercial Exploitation of Children and Adolescents in 
Guatemala.  The Plan\'s strategic objectives include:  1) 
survey social, economic, political, and social conditions 
contributing to the problem, 2) assist and rehabilitate 
victims, 3) apply justice and eliminate corruption 
facilitating exploitation, and 4) increase awareness of the 
problem and advance the plan.  The Presidential Secretariat 
for Social Welfare developed the plan in cooperation with 
other government agencies. 
 
-- The Director General of Guatemalan Migration has 
acknowledged that trafficking in persons is a problem.  The 
government does not have statistics, but every day Mexican 
authorities deport approximately 400 people from Central and 
South America through the border at El Carmen.  Many of these 
people claim they had been taken with the promise that they 
would be able to enter the U.S.  In Mexico, they are either 
obligated to work with no pay or else they are prostituted. 
Most of these people are probably victims of alien smuggling 
rather than trafficking. 
 
B. Which government agencies are involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts? 
 
--The following government agencies are involved in the 
anti-trafficking efforts:  The Director General of Migration, 
Immigration Defense from the Office of the Ombudsman, 
Ministry of Foreign Relations, Presidential Secretariat of 
Social Welfare, National Civilian Police, Labor Ministry, 
Public Ministry, and the judiciary. 
 
C.  Are there or have there been anti-trafficking information 
or education campaigns? If yes, briefly explain the 
campaign(s), including their objectives and effectiveness. 
 
-- In December and January (2000-2001) the Embassy Public 
Affairs Office, with $40,000 from INS, had three radio ads 
and three television ads produced.  The ads ran heavily 
during these two months, which INS had described as a high 
traffic period.  In June 2000, Public Affairs sponsored 
visits by two Guatemalan journalists on an INS \"border tour\" 
to report on the dangers of trusting alien smugglers 
(\"coyotes\").  A 10-day training program for four radio 
journalists from the border province of Huehuetenango in 
January 2002 had a similar emphasis.  The journalists have 
helped to spread Embassy\'s message discouraging travel with 
smugglers. 
 
D.  Does the government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking? (E.g., To promote women\'s participation in 
economic decision-making or efforts to keep children in 
school).  Please explain. 
 
-- The Human Rights Ombudsman\'s office maintains an Office in 
Defense of Displaced and Migrant Populations which 
investigates cases of trafficking.  They investigated one 
case in 2002 involving possible trafficking of a Salvadoran 
children, but determined that the children had parental 
permission and were not victims of trafficking.  The 
Ombudsman\'s Office also sponsored public information 
campaigns during 2002 warning intending migrants of the risks 
of illegal immigration and trafficking.  Other governmental 
offices are dedicated to the Defense of Indigenous Women, 
which provides legal advice to indigenous women victims of 
domestic violence and abuse, Children\'s Rights, and Women\'s 
issues, but none reported involvement in cases of trafficking 
during the period of this report.  The GOG\'s Presidential 
Secretariat of Social Welfare coordinated GOG cooperation 
 
SIPDIS 
with civil society groups including religious, private, and 
international NGOs under the National Plan of Action to 
Combat Sexual Exploitation of Minors. 
 
E.  Is the Government able to support prevention programs? 
 
-- Government resources are severely strained and inadequate 
in many areas, including combating trafficking. 
 
F.  What is the relationship between government officials, 
NGOs, other relevant organizations and other elements in 
civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
-- Many NGOs are working on gathering information, providing 
assistance, and preventing trafficking.  There are NGOs 
working at the Guatemala-Mexico border, and human rights 
organizations working with women, children, and migrants. 
The government has provided some space for cooperative 
programs through the immigration offices and the Office of 
the Ombudsman. 
 
G.  Does the government adequately monitor its borders? Does 
it monitor immigration and emigration patterns for evidence 
of trafficking? Do law enforcement agencies respond 
appropriately to such evidence? 
 
-- Guatemala,s borders are poorly policed and corruption is 
rampant along both sides.  The computerized entry-exit system 
is helping at the legal crossing points, but there are many 
illegal crossing points available.  Mexico deported 120,000 
Central Americans from Chiapas in 2002.  Central American 
deportees from Mexico are transported by USG-funded bus 
service to the borders of El Salvador and Honduras under a 
cooperative program between U.S., Mexican and Guatemalan 
immigration authorities.  According to the local press, the 
main deterrent to the flow of migrants is the poor treatment 
of people who are detained in Mexico. 
 
H.  Is there a mechanism for communication and coordination 
between various agencies, such as a multi-agency working 
group or a task force? Does the government have an 
anti-trafficking in persons task force? Does the government 
have a public corruption task force? 
 
-- In order to provide a common forum for migration issues, 
the National Association for Guatemalan Migrants has been 
created.  This and other groups work together on human rights 
issues with the Presidential Coordinator of Human Rights in 
Guatemala.  Since April 2000 the government formed a 
prosecutor\'s office for investigation and prosecution of 
public corruption cases. 
 
-- In 2002 President Portillo named a new Anti-Corruption 
Commission to implement a government initiative consisting of 
corruption prevention, control, and sanctions.  Prevention 
efforts will include efforts at professionalization of the 
public service, reducing discretion, improving access to 
information on public spending, and financial reform 
legislation.  Control efforts will include improved internal 
regulations, full implementation of financial administrative 
systems, modernization of the Office of the Comptroller 
General of Accounts, and greater citizen participation in 
monitoring public spending.  Sanctions efforts are intended 
to end impunity within and outside the government. 
 
I.  Does the government coordinate with or participate in 
multinational or international working groups or efforts to 
prevent, monitor, or control trafficking? 
 
-- Yes.  The Regional Commission of Central American 
Migration Directors meets regularly to discuss issues 
including trafficking.  The International Migration 
Organization (IOM) has a regional office in Guatemala, and 
cooperates with the government on several bilateral projects 
to combat trafficking.  Guatemala is a member of the 
11-member Regional Conference on Migration, and hosted a 
meeting of the Conference in March 2002. 
 
J.  Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons? If so, which agencies are 
involved in developing it? Were NGOs consulted in the 
process? What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
the action plan? 
 
-- No, but it does have a National Action Plan to Combat the 
Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents, as explained 
above. 
 
K.  Is there some entity or person responsible for developing 
anti-trafficking programs within the government? 
 
-- No, but this task falls under the general responsibilities 
of the Director of Migration under the Interior Ministry. 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is also committed to 
addressing the problem. 
 
4.  (SBU) Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers: 
 
A.  Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons? If so, what is the law? If not, under 
what laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, are 
there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of coercion or fraud? Are there laws 
being used in trafficking cases? Are these laws, taken 
together, adequate to cover the full scope of trafficking in 
persons? 
 
-- Guatemala has several laws that specifically prohibit the 
trafficking and smuggling of persons, including the Law of 
Immigration of 1998 (Legislative Decree 95-98), Article 194 
of the Criminal Code, and several articles of the migration 
code.  In addition, there are other laws in the penal code 
that could be applicable. Guatemala has signed several 
international declarations regarding slavery.  The penal code 
also regulates coercion and the sexual abuse of women against 
their will. 
 
B.  What is the penalty for traffickers? 
 
-- The penalty for traffickers is 1-3 years in prison, plus a 
fine of 2,500-15,000 quetzals ($320-1,923 at current exchange 
rates).  Penalties are increased by 2/3 if the victim is 
under 12, if the act was done with the intention to make a 
profit, or if the act included use of deceit, violence or 
abuse of authority. 
C.  What are the penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault? How do they compare to the penalty for trafficking? 
 
-- The penalty for rape is 6-20 years, and the penalty for 
forcible assault is 2-5 years. The penalties for trafficking 
are less severe and it is easy for traffickers and smugglers 
to buy their way out by paying a prosecutor or judge. 
D.  Has the government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers? If yes, provide number of arrests, indictments, 
plea bargains, fines and convictions.  What were the 
penalties actually imposed in each case?  Are the traffickers 
serving the time sentenced?  If not, why not?  Please 
indicate whether the government can provide this information, 
and if not, why not. 
 
-- According to the DePaul Univ. report, \"immigration and 
police have increased arrests for smuggling, but further 
identification of trafficking cases is not done.\"  A possible 
exception to this statement are cases against illegal 
adoption, or baby trafficking.  In February 2003, four 
persons were reportedly arrested and accused of trafficking 
in persons in two separate cases.  However, to date, we know 
of no convictions. 
 
E.  Is there any information or reports of who is behind the 
trafficking? 
 
-- There have been rumors that in cases involving the illegal 
adoption of minors, both lawyers and notaries are directly 
involved.  The Embassy believes that in some cases these 
rumors are true. 
 
F.  Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking? Does the government use active investigative 
techniques in trafficking in persons investigations? To the 
extent possible under domestic law, are techniques such as 
electronic surveillance, undercover operations, and mitigated 
punishment or immunity for cooperating suspects used by the 
government?  Does the criminal procedure code prohibit the 
police from engaging in covert operations? 
 
-- The GOG will investigate cases of trafficking, but the 
victims usually do not press charges.  Usually, the victims 
of these crimes are women or minors, poor, and uneducated. 
Access to the justice system for these people, while 
improving, is still low.  One problem with criminal justice 
in Guatemala is that the adversarial system is very new.  In 
addition, lack of resources, and lack of training limit the 
ability of the National Civilian Police and the prosecutors 
to perform investigations.  Undercover agents are not allowed 
under current law, and the surveillance of communications was 
declared unconstitutional.  This makes investigations of 
trafficking organizations more difficult. 
 
G.  Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in how to investigate and prosecute 
incidences of trafficking? 
 
--No, the GOG does not provide specialized training for 
government officials in investigating incidents of 
trafficking. 
 
H.  Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? If 
possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations of trafficking? 
 
-- In order to cooperate with the governments of other 
countries, the GOG and most neighboring countries have signed 
mutual legal assistance agreements.  In theory, this should 
facilitate cooperation between countries in carrying out 
investigations. 
 
I.  Does the government extradite persons who are 
charged with trafficking in other countries? If so, can post 
provide the number of traffickers extradited? Does the 
government extradite its own nationals charges with such 
offenses? If not, is the government prohibited by law from 
extraditing its own nationals? If so, what is the government 
doing to modify its laws to permit the extradition of 
nationals? 
 
-- Extradition, including the extradition of Guatemalan 
nationals, is allowed under the Guatemalan Constitution and 
in various treaties and conventions.  We are unaware, 
however, of any extradition requests for trafficking in 
persons. 
 
J.  Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If yes, please explain in detail. 
 
-- There is no evidence to suggest that the Guatemalan 
Government is involved in trafficking.  There are allegations 
of individual corruption by government officials in relation 
to orphan adoptions.  The United States and Canada have 
instituted strong controls to decrease the possibility that 
orphans go to those countries against the true desires of 
their biological mothers.  There are several initiatives 
within the Government of Guatemala, UNICEF, NGOs, and the 
U.S. Embassy to reduce further the possibility of fraud and 
coercion in international adoptions.  Most notably, on March 
4, 2003, the Guatemalan Congress ratified the Hague 
Convention on International Adoption. 
 
K.  If government officials are involved in trafficking, what 
steps has the government taken to end their participation? 
Have any government officials been prosecuted for involvement 
in trafficking or trafficking related corruption? Have any 
been convicted?  What actual sentence was imposed?  Please 
provide specific numbers, when available. 
 
-- The GOG has attempted to curb large-scale corruption and 
collusion with prostitution rings along its western border 
with Mexico by rotating police there every three months. 
 
L.  Has the government signed and ratified the following 
international instruments? Please provide the date of 
signature if appropriate. 
 
-- The ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for elimination of the worst forms of child 
labor was approved and ratified on August 21, 2001, and the 
instrument of ratification was deposited on October 5, 2001. 
It entered into effect internationally for Guatemala on 
October 11, 2002. 
 
-- The \"Sale of Children Protocol\" supplementing the rights 
of the child convention, was approved by decree 76-2001 of 
the Congress of Guatemala on December 11, 2001. 
 
-- The \"Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, Especially Women and Children,\" supplementing the 
UN convention against transnational crime, is currently in 
the process of being reviewed by GOG agencies and 
institutions. 
 
-- Guatemala signed (September 7, 2000) and ratified (April 
30, 2002) the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution and Child Pornography. 
 
-- Guatemala ratified the Hague Convention On Protection of 
the Child and Cooperation in International Adoption on March 
4, 2003. 
 
5.  (SBU) Protection and Assistance to Victims: 
 
A.  Does the government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If yes, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care facilities? 
If so, can post provide the number of victims placed in these 
care facilities? 
 
-- The government has announced plans to construct shelters 
for deportees along the Guatemala-Mexico border, but those 
shelters are not functioning.  The Public Ministry assists 
victims of crime through offices in all provincial capitals 
and major cities.  Assistance to victims of sexual assaults 
consists of medical, psychological, and social counseling and 
assistance.  The Criminal Investigative Division of the 
National Police also provides referral services to victims, 
and investigates sex crimes that may involve trafficking.  In 
2002, the USG provided support totaling $110,000 to the NGO 
\"Casa de la Mujer\" for occupational training to trafficked 
women along the Mexican-Guatemalan border. 
 
B.  Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? 
Please explain. 
 
-- We are not aware of GOG funding to foreign or domestic 
NGOs for services to victims. 
 
C.  Are the rights of victims respected, or are they also 
treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, fined or 
deported?  If detained or jailed, for how long? Are victims 
prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as those 
governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
-- Undocumented foreigners are deported and given 72 hours to 
depart, but many stay in Guatemala.  Victims of trafficking 
are not prosecuted. 
 
D.  Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May victims 
file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victim\'s access to such 
legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against a former employee, is the victim permitted to 
obtain other employment or to leave the country?  Is there a 
victim restitution program? 
 
-- Victims are not actively encouraged to file civil suits or 
to seek legal action against traffickers.  However, they are 
free to do so. 
 
E.  What kind of protection is the government able to provide 
for the victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice? 
 
-- If witnesses choose to come forward, the government does 
not normally provide any protection for them.  However, in 
exceptional cases involving threats against witnesses, the 
Public Ministry provides police protection during and for a 
period after trials. 
 
F.  Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, including the special needs of trafficked 
children? Does the government provide training on protections 
and assistance to its embassies and consulates in foreign 
countries that are destination or transit countries? Does it 
urge those embassies and consulates to develop ongoing 
relationships with NGOs that serve trafficked victims? 
 
-- The government provides specialized training for police 
and Public Ministry officials serving victims. Training for 
embassies and consulates in foreign countries is also being 
contemplated, but is not yet in place.  The GOG does not 
prohibit its embassies and consulates from developing ongoing 
relationships with NGOs that serve trafficked victims. 
 
G.  Does the government provide assistance, such 
as medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its 
repatriated nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
-- The Public Ministry, with assistance from USAID, opened 
pilot victims\' assistance centers in the capital in 2000 and 
expanded the program to include all provincial capitals and 
major cities in 2001.  The centers are staffed by a social 
worker training in victim assistance, with access to medical 
care, rape test kits, evidence preservation, and follow-up 
legal and psychological counseling.  The centers are 
available to victims of trafficking as well as other crimes. 
The Criminal Investigative Division of the National Police 
also provides services to victims and investigates crimes of 
trafficking. 
H.  Which NGOs, if any, work with trafficking victims? What 
types of services do they provide? What sort of cooperation 
do they receive from local authorities? 
 
-- The major NGOs that work with trafficking victims are 
\"Pastoral del Migrante\" from the Catholic Archbishop\'s 
office, \"Casa Del Migrante\" in Tecun Uman and \"Casa Alianza\" 
in the capital.  Studies about trafficking are being carried 
out in Tecun Uman by Guatemalan think tanks including FLACSO 
and AVANSCO and the University of San Carlos.  The NGOs 
provide shelter and medical and legal assistance. 
 
Embassy point of contact for trafficking in persons is PolOff 
Erik Hall.  He can be reached at (502) 331-1541, ext. 4635, 
and by fax at (502) 334-8474. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6205","3/7/2003 18:48","03GUATEMALA623","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GENEVA720","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000623 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GENEVA FOR JEFF DELAURENTIS 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, GT, UNHRC 
SUBJECT: NEW GUATEMALAN AMBASSADORS TO GENEVA, TOKYO, AND 
OAS 
 
REF: GENEVA 720 
 
1. (SBU) An excellent MFA source confirmed that Ricardo 
Alvarado was sworn in at noon on March 4 as Guatemalan 
Ambassador to Geneva.  Ambassador to the OAS, Arturo Duarte, 
will move to Tokyo and will probably be replaced by Victor 
Godoy.  Bio information below.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Ricardo ALVARADO Ortigoza is a lawyer specializing 
in constitutional law and human rights.  He also holds a 
masters degree in public administration from San Carlos 
University.  He is a member of the ruling FRG party and 
became Executive Director of the Presidential Human Rights 
Commission (COPREDEH in Spanish) when the Portillo 
Administration came to power in January 2000.  Alvarado 
resigned in the wake of the Vice President\'s dismissal of 
COPREDEH President Victor Godoy (see para 4) in May, 2001. 
Alvarado has been in the press recently for his role 
representing the government of Guatemala before the 
Inter-American Court for Human Rights in its hearing of the 
Myrna Mack case.  The GOG committed a major tactical error at 
the hearing, withdrawing its defense inexplicably at the 
outset of the hearing. 
 
3. (SBU) Arturo DUARTE Ortiz is a highly successful career 
diplomat.  He won a Fullbright and holds a master\'s degree in 
Anthropology from State University of New York as well as a 
graduate certificate in Latin American Studies.  Duarte also 
holds a graduate certificate in International Relations from 
the University of Brazilia.  Duarte\'s diplomatic career 
includes high-profile postings such as Counselor to the 
Guatemalan Embassy in Washington, Alternate Representative to 
the OAS, Director General for Multilateral Affairs and 
Permanent Representative to the OAS.  As Director General for 
Multilateral Affairs, Duarte was a reliable Embassy contact, 
capable of speaking with authority on a wide range of policy 
issues.  Duarte is an accomplished vocalist and expert on 
religious music from Guatemala\'s colonial period. 
 
4. (SBU) Victor Hugo GODOY Morales is a friend of President 
Portillo and a career politician with leftist roots.  He 
served as a member of Congress from 1985 - 1990 with the 
now-defunct Revolutionary Party.  He holds a degree in 
Sociology from San Carlos University.  From January 2000 to 
May 2001, Godoy headed the Presidential Human Rights 
Commission.  He was dismissed after being accused of leaking 
Guatemala\'s position on the 2001 Cuba Resolution at the UN 
Human Rights Commission.  Godoy denied the accusation and was 
appointed by Portillo to several Presidential advisory 
positions before being named Minister of Labor in February 
2002.  Godoy continued reform of the Inspectorate at Labor, 
began new worker training initiatives, encouraged social 
dialogue between labor and business leaders (so much so that 
some believe he lost his job for this reason), and 
(half-heartedly) pursued legislative changes to the labor 
procedural code dealing with labor rights violations.  Labor 
leaders believe Godoy was replaced for refusing to take a 
hard line against striking teachers. Godoy does not speak 
English well. 
 
5 (SBU) Comment: Our MFA source commented that despite 
Alvarado\'s background in Human Rights, convention wisdom 
within the Ministry holds that he will be far less 
independent than was his predecessor in Geneva.  Asked how 
she thought Alvarado might address the lack of fundamental 
Human Rights protections for four Guatemalans tried and 
sentenced in 2002 in Cuba, our source stated that no one in 
the Foreign Ministry knew what Alvarado\'s appointment would 
mean for the Cuba vote but added that she felt relations with 
Cuba will deepen with the arrival of the Cuban Foreign 
Minister.  She also speculated that the decision would be 
made by President Portillo alone with little or no input from 
the Ministry and that Alvarado would probably carry out 
Portillo\'s instructions precisely. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6253","3/10/2003 22:04","03GUATEMALA636","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA511","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, MOPS, BEXP, GT, CU, KICC 
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH FOREIGN MINISTER GUTIERREZ 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 511 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR JOHN R. HAMILTON, AMERICAN EMBASSY GUATEMALA. 
  REASON: 1.5 (d) 
 
 1. (SBU) Ambassador met one on one for a few minutes with FM 
Gutierrez March 7 on the heels of the fourth high-level 
working group meeting on narcotics, which the two had just 
chaired.  That meeting is being reported septel.  Following 
is a quick rundown: 
 
Gutierrez in Washington 
------------------------------- 
2. (SBU)  The FM is making a proposal to the OAS Permanent 
Council to charge the Unit for Promotion of Democracy with 
managing a system of early warning for developing situations 
of ungovernability.  He describes it as a proposal for a 
pilot program.  Gutierrez hopes to schedule appointments in 
the Department (WHA only) the afternoon of March 17; the 
Guatemalan embassy in Washington will seek the appointments. 
Gutierrez is traveling on to Geneva after that. 
 
Cuba 
------- 
3. (SBU) The Ambassador raised the Cuba resolution again, 
briefing Gutierrez on his conversation with President 
Portillo (reftel) and making the point again that pique over 
unrelated issues is not a posture for a serious government to 
be caught in.  Gutierrez pledged that his recommendation to 
President Portillo would be based on &Guatemalan national 
interest and international relations,8 including the 
importance of Guatemala,s relations with the U.S.  The 
Ambassador told him that this resolution is the way in which 
the international community keeps faith with the democratic 
opposition in Cuba, brave individuals who endure incredible 
hardship to keep the democratic aspirations of the Cuban 
people alive.  They deserve the support of people, like 
Gutierrez himself, who know what it means to suffer under 
undemocratic regimes.  Gutierrez said this was a good point 
and, recalling a report from Guatemalan ambassador to the 
U.S. Arenales on his lunch with NSC,s Emilio Gonzalez, said 
that the visit here this week of the Cuban FM reflected a 
programming decision made months ago, before he became FM, 
and is not UNHRC-related. 
 
4. (C) Comment:  This last should not be taken seriously. 
 
Article 98 
------------- 
5. (SBU)  The Ambassador asked if the latest feedback from 
MFA staff (asking to reorder some text but not to change it) 
indicated that a political decision had been made to reach an 
Article 98 agreement.  The FM said no, not yet, as he had not 
yet really pushed the issue with President Portillo. 
Reminded of the approaching July 1 cutoff of IMET absent an 
agreement, he said he would jack up the priority of this 
issue. 
 
New Horizons 
------------------- 
6. (SBU)  The FM took note of the Ambassador,s brief on 
plans for a NH exercise next year and the need for an 
exercise-specific SOFA agreement. 
 
Human Rights case 
------------------------ 
7. (C)  The Ambassador raised the case of journalist 
Mariellos Monzon, who has reported middle-of-the-night 
menacing phone calls and like harassment.  When Monzon met 
with the DCM March 5, she had heard nothing from the 
government about her situation (amply reported in the press). 
 Gutierrez said he had raised her situation with Government 
Minister Reyes only the day before, and thought she would be 
getting a call offering support. 
 
Railroad Development Corporation (RDC) complaint 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
8. (C) The Ambassador raised with Gutierrez a complaint of 
RDC, which has a US$10 million investment here in a 50-year 
concession granted in 1997, that they are being extorted for 
$500,000 over a legally bogus usufruct issue.  Gutierrez said 
he would take the issue to President Portillo and phoned 
March 10 to say he had done so and that the President, 
concerned, wanted more details.  We are providing a non-paper 
based on information provided by RDC. 
 
Clandestine Groups Commission 
----------------------------------------- 
9. (SBU)  Gutierrez said he had already sent invitations to 
UN and OAS Secretaries General Annan and Gaviria, 
respectively, asking that they name a Commission member. 
Although there is not yet overall agreement on the scope, 
size and mandate of the commission, Gutierrez said there is 
no disagreement on UN and OAS participation and he thought 
extending the invitations would help build confidence with 
the Guatemalan NGO community.  Pressed on the issue of size 
(five versus three members), which is the most contentious, 
Gutierrez stuck to a repetition of the Government,s thinking 
behind its preference for a larger commission.  He 
nonetheless expressed confidence that agreement should be 
possible during the visit of Human Rights Watch executive 
Jose Miguel Vivanco the week of March 10 and said the MFA has 
prepared  legislation authorizing the Commission for 
Congressional consideration. 
 
Presidential meeting 
-------------------------- 
10. (SBU)  In a follow-on phone call, Gutierrez asked if the 
April 11 meeting between the President and the Central 
American presidents is now &official,8 i.e., public.  The 
Ambassador said no and that it is the prerogative of the 
White House to make the announcement.  Gutierrez pledged not 
to confirm the meeting to the press which, because  word 
appears to have filtered out elsewhere in the region, is 
asking. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"6276","3/11/2003 23:14","03GUATEMALA648","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA370|03STATE63629","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000648 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/11/2013 
TAGS: PREL, IZ, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA NOT LIKELY TO ASSIST ON IRAQ RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 63629 
     B. GUATEMALA 370 
 
Classified By: Rob Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Although the GOG has informally indicated support for 
Iraq\'s unconditional need to comply with UNSCR 1441, it has 
remained non-committal on US/UK/Spanish resolution on Iraq. 
Were we to press Guatemala we believe it might play an 
unhelpful role.  We therefore did not urge GOG participation 
in the Security Council session mentioned in Ref A. 
 
2.  (C) Ambassador Hamilton discussed Secretary Powell\'s UNSC 
presentation of the case against Iraq with then-Acting 
President Reyes on February 6 (Ref B).  In that meeting Reyes 
chose not comment substantively on the GOG\'s position on 
Iraq.  The DCM twice raised the issue of Iraqi non-compliance 
with Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez after the February 7 
and 14 presentations by Secretary Powell to the U.N. Security 
Council.  On both occasions Gutierrez expressed appreciation 
for translated transcripts of the Secretary\'s presentations 
but studiously avoided any comment as to GOG policy towards 
Iraq. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6301","3/12/2003 16:55","03GUATEMALA651","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA623","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000651 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: MACK CASE MISSTEP INCREASES SUSPICION 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 623 
 
1. (U) Summary: The case against the GOG on behalf of the 
family of murdered anthropologist Myrna Mack was presented 
February 18-20 in the Inter-American Court in San Jose, Costa 
Rica.  In the days leading up to the trial, FM Gutierrez 
attempted to short-circuit this hearing by publicly accepting 
state responsibility for Mack\'s death and withdrawing GOG 
representative Ricardo Alvarado Ortigoza from the trial.  The 
court would have none of this.  GOG lawyers returned for the 
closing arguments and Gutierrez, a co-founder of the Myrna 
Mack Foundation, took responsibility for the misstep.  Mack\'s 
sister, human rights activist Helen Mack, pushed the case 
forward despite Gutierrez\'s antics.  In the wake of the 
public audience, both sides await the IACHR\'s decision, 
expected in about three months. End summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2. (SBU) Before Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez was 
appointed by President Portillo as head of the GOG 
Secretariat for Strategic Analysis, he was one of the 
 
SIPDIS 
co-founders, along with Helen Mack, of the Myrna Mack 
Foundation (FMM).  The Mack Foundation was established in 
1993 in memory of Myrna Mack, a slain anthropologist who was 
a close friend (and by some accounts an intimate) of 
Gutierrez\'s.  Gutierrez worked at the Mack Foundation until 
1998, when he left to work at the Archbishop\'s Office of 
Human Right\'s Historical Memory Project (RHEMI).  In 2000, 
Portillo offered Gutierrez the senior GOG advisory position 
because of the close personal relationship they developed at 
the University of San Carlos in the 1970s.  As a colleague of 
Gutierrez\'s put it, \"Gutierrez thought this was an 
opportunity to do some good within the government,\" after a 
career of working on civilian security issues from an NGO 
perspective. 
 
3. (SBU) Human rights leaders tell us that while many were 
suspicious of Gutierrez after he joined the GOG in 2000, 
Helen Mack was initially his constant defender.  That 
relationship soured in recent years, as trust turned to 
suspicion.  Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales still 
professes confidence in Gutierrez, but many other human 
rights leaders now see the divide between Gutierrez and his 
former colleagues in the human rights movement as 
insurmountable.  The misstep in San Jose made the breach 
final, according to our human rights contacts. 
 
Confused Correspondence 
----------------------- 
 
4. (U) On February 17, the day before the trial at the IACHR 
in Costa Rica was set to begin, Gutierrez announced that the 
Government of Guatemala admitted responsibility for the 
murder of Myrna Mack Chang in September 1990.  Gutierrez had 
sent a letter on February 14 to the IACHR accepting state 
responsibility.  The GOG did not, however, address the other 
charges (including delayed justice and the involvement of the 
Presidential Guard (EMP) in the murder).  The IACHR and the 
Mack family, which appeared as the plaintiff in the case, 
considered the admission of state responsibility in the 
murder insufficient, and pushed forward with the trial on 
February 18.  On February 19, the GOG removed its 
representatives, including Ricardo Alvarado Ortigoza, since 
appointed as Ambassador to Geneva (reftel), from the 
proceedings. 
 
5. (U) With the GOG representatives absent, the Mack team 
presented their evidence against the state and concluded the 
proceedings on February 20.  The GOG team returned for the 
final arguments, after the presentation of evidence phase 
concluded.  Both sides are waiting for the IACHR to present 
its conclusion, which Helen Mack told us could take up to 
three months.  What is unknown at this point is whether the 
GOG\'s partial withdrawal from the proceedings will influence 
the court\'s decision. 
 
6. (U) Gutierrez has argued that his ministry\'s actions were 
well-intentioned but misunderstood.  Gutierrez has responded 
to criticism by stating that the GOG\'s intent was not to 
limit state\'s responsibility for the murder, but instead to 
clarify state involvement in Mack\'s murder.  Gutierrez 
claimed that the GOG, under President Portillo, supports full 
investigation of human rights crimes of the internal 
conflict.  Gutierrez publicly lamented the fact that his 
first letter to the IACHR caused skepticism about the GOG\'s 
motives and denied he was \"covering up\" for the EMP or other 
GOG entities charged with human rights abuses, as his critics 
claim. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. (SBU) This debacle at the IACHR further undermines 
Gutierrez\'s credibility with former friends in the human 
rights community and will make achieving consensus on a 
CICIACS all the more difficult.  Time will tell if Gutierrez 
can make it up to civil society, but we see reconciliation as 
highly unlikely before Portillo and Gutierrez leave office. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6329","3/13/2003 14:30","03GUATEMALA1254","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA73","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001254 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND PM/B 
DEFENSE FOR CHAIRS, USDP-DSCA 
JOINT STAFF FOR J-5 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MASS, MARR, GT, MACP 
SUBJECT: URC-119 RADIO TRANSFER TO GUATEMALAN MILITARY 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 0073 
 
     B. STATE 14774 
     C. STATE 15656 
     D. SECDEF USDP-DSCA CABLE DTG 131430Z MAR 03 
 
1. This is an action request.  See paragraph 4. 
 
2. Ref A was Post\'s request for authorization to transfer one 
URC-119 High Frequency (HF) Radio Set to the Guatemalan 
Military through the Excess Defense Articles (EDA) Program. 
The transfer is part of a region-wide upgrade to provide an 
Automatic Link Establishment (ALE) capability to the HF radio 
network used by participants in the System of Cooperation 
Among the American Air Forces (SICOFAA).  The transfer will 
significantly enhance the ability of the U.S. Air Force to 
communicate and coordinate with the Guatemalan Air Force in 
the event of a large-scale natural disaster.  The radio is 
not well suited for communications within Guatemala and the 
possibility that it could be used for purposes other than 
intended is remote.  Department approved the transfer in Ref 
B, but recalled approval in Ref C pending Congressional 
notification.  Ref D informed Post that the Congressional 
notification period was complete and requested confirmation 
that Guatemala would accept the equipment. 
 
3. The Government of Guatemala will accept, in accordance 
with Section 516 of the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA), a grant 
transfer of the URC-119 radio system.  The radio system is 
already physically located in Guatemala.  The Government of 
Guatemala understands that the equipment will be provided 
\"as-is\" and accepts responsibility for maintenance and repair. 
 
4. Post requests Department concurrence to transfer the radio 
set. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6379","3/14/2003 16:27","03GUATEMALA673","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA191|03GUATEMALA221|03GUATEMALA414|03GUATEMALA511|03GUATEMALA537|03GUATEMALA555|03GUATEMALA571","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 000673 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC AND DRL/IL 
USDOL FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
USTR FOR A/USTR CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ECON, PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: LABOR UPDATE #2-2003 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 537 
     B. GUATEMALA 571 
     C. GUATEMALA 555 
     D. GUATEMALA 511 
     E. GUATEMALA 414 
     F. GUATEMALA 221 
     G. GUATEMALA 191 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: The following is an update of significant 
recent developments in the labor sector.  Topics include: 
 
-- Teachers Back in School 
 
-- Ambassador Raises GSP with GOG 
 
-- Ambassador Flags Labor Rights in AmCham Speech 
 
-- MOL Coordinating GOG Response to GSP 
 
-- GOG CAFTA Team Meeting with Unions/Employers 
 
-- GOG Announces Aid to Campesinos 
 
-- Labor Snippets (Pepsi, Failing Banks, Employment) 
 
 
Teachers Back in School, Brother of Teacher Union Murdered 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
2.  (U) Teachers returned to class on March 12 after 51 days 
of work stoppage (Ref A).  An accord was reached on March 11 
and signed on March 12 by the National Teachers Assembly 
(ANM) with the GOG after 11 negotiating sessions mediated by 
Archbishop Quezada Toruno.  The accord includes the 
following: a wage increase of Q150 ($19.23/month); 
participation by teachers in 2004 education budget planning; 
a commitment by the teachers to work an extra hour per day to 
make up for time lost during the strike (which the labor and 
appeals courts declared illegal); an increase of annual 
working hours from 900 to 1000; 22,000 new scholarships for 
students to defray costs; and creation of a joint committee 
to discuss the issues of pay for February and disciplinary 
sanctions against strikers. 
 
3.  (U) President of Congress Efrain Rios Montt publicly 
declared that funds for the wage increase would come from the 
existing education budget, and backed off an earlier pledge 
by President Portillo and Rios Montt to apply the raise (then 
at only Q100) to all public and private employees. 
Meanwhile, teachers celebrated and students returned to 
class.  If implemented, the raise would cost the ministry 
Q163 million ($21 million), and brings teachers salaries to a 
new range, depending on experience, of Q2,032-4,446 
($260-570)/month.  As the strike wore on, President Portillo 
had threatened to expand the National Program of 
Self-Management for Educational Development (PRONADE), which 
provides resources to communities which wish to organize and 
participate in the management of a new local school, and 
currently serves 3,648 schools (which operated during the 
strike) and 310,000 students.  Teachers in PRONADE schools 
are contracted annually and do not receive benefits. 
 
4.  (SBU) In a meeting with the Ambassador on March 12, 
Education Minister Mario Torres was upbeat about the accord 
with the teachers, calling it a \"win-win\" situation.  Torres 
downplayed the seriousness of the strike action, saying 
teachers are \"prone to strike in the final year of an 
administration,\" and that the GOG had successfully averted a 
strike through negotiations in the previous years of the 
Portillo Administration.  Torres estimated that only 20,000 
of the 80,000 public school teachers ever participated in the 
demonstrations at any one time.  (Comment:  The timing of 
this strike cost Torres the chance to run for Congress in 
November.  To do so, he was required by election law to 
resign his executive branch position in January, six months 
before the beginning of the campaign period.  End Comment.) 
 
5.  (SBU) Torres said that the GOG is not willing to pay the 
strikers for the lost month of February.  The GOG is also 
firm about firing 10,000 of the strikers.  The minister said 
that in response to the strike, the ministry will publicize 
the fact that GOG spending on education goes well beyond the 
education ministry budget figure (e.g. school-building under 
the Social Funds Institute) and is equivalent to nearly 4% of 
GDP.  Teacher-training will continue but classes will be held 
on Saturdays instead of during the school week.  The joint 
committee to discuss unresolved issues will meet daily and an 
agreement will be signed only after all issues are 
negotiated.  Torres said that President Portillo will issue a 
Governmental decree instituting a gradual decentralization 
strategy to put school management (including hiring) in the 
hands of parents.  (The President did so on March 13.) 
 
6.  (U) The 51-day teachers strike reportedly cost the lives 
of four teachers; three in traffic accidents during marches 
or mobilizations, one of suicide.  Carlos Fuentes, brother of 
Moises Fuentes, one of the principal strike leaders, was 
reportedly murdered by unknown assassins in Mazatenango 
province sometime during the week of March 4.  Fuentes told 
press on March 8 that he was not sure whether his brother\'s 
murder had any connection to his participation in the strike. 
 As of March 12, the case had not been transferred to the 
Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Unionists. 
Ambassador Raises GSP with GOG 
------------------------------ 
 
7.  (SBU) On March 11, Ambassador Hamilton raised the need 
for more vigorous investigation of unresolved crimes against 
labor leaders with Attorney General de Leon and Minister of 
Government Reyes Calderon.  The Ambassador warned that 
languishing investigations of violent crimes against labor 
leaders will come under increasing scrutiny as a decision on 
GSP petitions looms in mid-April.  The GOG must start 
focusing on specific cases and arresting and prosecuting 
those responsible.  The Ambassador cited the three most 
recent murder cases (of Carlos Francisco Guzman Lanuza, on 
November 27, 2002; Baudilio Cermeno Ramirez, on December 21, 
2001; and Oswaldo Monzon Lima, in June 2000).  Both ministers 
promised to work together (the National Civil Police are 
responsible for early stages of an investigation, and the 
Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Unionists for the 
latter, including warrants for arrests) to make progress on 
cases in the short run.  De Leon said he would activate the 
Public Ministry\'s Special Prosecutor\'s office to resolve 
these cases. 
 
8.  (SBU) RefTels B-G report on the Ambassador\'s meetings 
with President Portillo on February 25, with Labor Minister 
Victor Moreira on March 3, the Attorney General on January 23 
and February 28, and Economy Minister Ramirez on January 21. 
In each meeting, the Ambassador raised USG concern over labor 
rights and the need for the GOG to make additional efforts to 
respond to GSP petition cases and concerns.  The Ambassador 
will discuss the petitions with AFL-CIO and International 
Labor Rights Fund representatives on March 24. 
 
Ambassador Cites Importance of Labor Rights in AmCham Speech 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
9.  (U) The Ambassador used the occasion of a public speech 
before the Guatemala-American Chamber of Commerce on the 
challenges and opportunities facing Guatemala to highlight 
the importance of labor rights in the context of negotiations 
on a U.S.-Central Amercia Free Trade Agreement.  Earlier 
remarks to the press by the Ambassador after he met with 
Labor Minister Moreira on March 3 were reported the next day 
in prominent daily \"Prensa Libre\" under the headline \"He 
Brings Petition for Labor Improvements.\"  Though the reporter 
misquoted the Ambassador saying \"Guatemala continues to 
violate the right to association\" (this conclusion should 
have been ascribed to the GSP petitions).  However, the 
article accurately stated USG concerns about violence against 
union leaders and labor rights and gave background 
information about pending GSP petitions against Guatemala. 
 
MOL Coordinating GOG Response to GSP 
------------------------------------ 
 
10.  (U) In an interview televised on March 5, Labor Minister 
Moreira stated that the USG is concerned about progress on 
the cases included in GSP petitions.  He said the Labor 
Ministry is seeking the cooperation of the Public Ministry 
and the judiciary to prepare an official response to the GSP 
petitions by the end of April.  (LabAtt subsequently urged 
the ministry to complete its report sooner, in time for the 
April 15 interagency review of GSP petitions.)  An officer of 
the Supreme Court later called LabAtt asking for Spanish text 
of the GSP petitions, which the MOL later provided. 
 
GOG CAFTA Team Meeting with Labor Sector 
---------------------------------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) On the trade front, GOG CAFTA negotiator Salomon 
Cohen invited labor sector representatives (from unions and 
employer organizations) to a discussion with negotiators on 
March 12.  This is the second such forum since CAFTA talks 
began, and is sponsored by AID\'s regional trade capacity 
program.  Labor Vice Minister Antonio Monzon is currently 
leading the GOG CAFTA team on labor issues, and attended the 
session with Cohen.  (Note: Luis Fernandez, lawyer for DYMEL 
Corp., has resigned as GOG CAFTA negotiator for labor issues. 
 End Note.)  Homero Fuentes, Guatemala\'s foremost (pro-union) 
labor expert, told LabAtt that the session was hampered by 
low union attendance and a preoccupation with particular 
union interests.  Fuentes said the Danish Aid Council and 
Friedrich Ebert Foundation will attempt to bring the key 
labor federations together to focus on the CAFTA negotiation 
in coming months.  A conference of Central American unions 
(ORIT) will meet in Guatemala the week of March 24 to share 
views on the CAFTA negotiations. 
 
12.  (SBU) CACIF Labor Commission Chief Carlos Arias 
requested an urgent meeting of the Commission with EconCouns 
and LabAtt on March 12 to discuss what he perceived as 
Cohen\'s intention to \"railroad through\" an ill-considered 
plan to establish duplicative forums among the GOG, labor and 
employer representatives to discuss four labor themes as part 
of the CAFTA labor talks:  1) child labor, 2) occupational 
health and safety, 3) freedom of association, and 4) 
discrimination.  EconCouns said that Cohen had told him that 
his efforts were part of an outreach strategy to labor, not 
an attempt to put specific labor issues onto the CAFTA 
negotiating table.  LabAtt and EconCouns encouraged CACIF to 
work with the GOG CAFTA negotiating team to address 
perceptions of Guatemala\'s weakness protecting fundamental 
labor rights.  Any CAFTA agreement must include a binding 
labor clause.  The Chile agreement reportedly includes an 
innovative mechanism to sanction labor rights violators. 
LabAtt noted that Guatemala still has much work to do to 
comply with its ILO commitments.  Arias said CACIF would 
support an agreement which binds each member country to 
enforce its own labor laws and international conventions it 
is party to, and would also support a mechanism to punish 
violators rather than sanctioning sectors or countries 
wholesale, as under GSP. 
 
GOG Announces Aid to Campesinos 
------------------------------- 
 
13.  (U) On February 10 and March 3, campesino groups blocked 
highways and marched to demand relief for effects of the 
coffee crisis, and in support of the teachers\' strike.  On 
March 10, President Portillo promised Q100 million ($12.8 
million) in response to demands from the Agrarian Platform, 
the ad-hoc umbrella organization of campesino groups which 
has been in dialogue with the GOG since last year.  Campesino 
demands include food aid to 50,000 families; additional 
resources for FONTIERRAS, the government land bank, to 
purchase land for the landless; a subsidy and program to rent 
land to campesinos; an end to efforts to dislodge squatters; 
publication of the names of plantations with labor problems; 
and support to small and medium-sized coffee producers. 
 
15.  (U) In February, the Committee for Campesino Development 
(CODECA) reported results of a survey of 7,507 workers on 86 
coffee, sugar, rubber, ranch and banana plantations showing 
that only 13% of these workers received the legally-mandated 
minimum wage ($4.00/day) or more.  The lowest-paid twenty 
percent of the workers received less than $2.50/day.  Coffee 
and sugar producers complained in February of the lack of 
workers in Guatemala, who are increasingly seeking better 
wages across the border in Mexico.  (In Mexico, a worker is 
paid up to $5 for 100 pounds of coffee beans picked, while in 
Guatemala the rate is closer to $2.50.)  In addition to 
increased emigration, press reported that many coffee pickers 
stayed home this harvest season falsely expecting payment for 
their services as members of the civil self defense patrols 
during the 36-year internal conflict.  Coffee sector 
employment declined from 655,267 in the 1999/2000 harvest to 
588,332 in 2000/2001, and was only 463,859 this year. 
 
Labor Snippets 
-------------- 
 
16.  (U) FESTRAS, the sectoral union for beverage workers, 
has appealed for international solidarity in support of its 
efforts to compel collective bargaining at Pepsi\'s local 
bottler, Mariposa.  Unlike at Coke\'s bottler, which is 90% 
unionized and recently reached a new collective bargaining 
agreement with its union, Mariposa\'s rate of unionization is 
less than 5%.  The labor code requires 25% union membership 
to compel collective bargaining.  FESTRAS argued (and lost in 
court) that the 25% membership requirement should not apply 
in companies which had entered into previous collective 
bargaining agreements.  It also believes that Mariposa fired 
100 workers in 2002 to rid itself of unionized workers. 
Mariposa management denied this allegation and told LabAtt 
that the reduction was due to closure of a line of production 
(of mostly non-unionized workers) due to efficiencies in its 
plastic bottling line.  Mariposa executives refuse to meet 
with FESTRAS (but have met with Mariposa\'s own (weak) union) 
and believe a conspiracy exists to discredit Mariposa 
supported by Coke and the local beer monopoly, which is 
resisting Mariposa\'s diversification into beer production. 
17.  (U) Employment Figures:  Newly-released survey data from 
the National Institute of Statistics from May-June 2002 shows 
that of the population aged 10 and above (8,089,785), 59% are 
employed, 10% are unemployed, and 9.1% are under-employed. 
 
18.  (U) Failing Banks and Labor Strife:  Reynaldo Gonzalez, 
Secretary General of the Bank Workers Union (FESEBS) and 
 
SIPDIS 
leaders of union of workers of the National Mortgage Bank 
told LabAtt on March 11 that despite reinstallation orders 
from the courts, bank management has refused to reinstate two 
illegally-fired workers.  Bank lawyers are fighting similar 
legal petitions for 150 others who were illegally fired, 
according to the union.  Union members believe the illegal 
firings under the guise of streamlining (CHN is absorbing 
other failing banks) are intended to reduce union membership. 
 This case is one of those highlighted in the AFL-CIO GSP 
petition. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6384","3/14/2003 17:27","03GUATEMALA678","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE64728","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000678 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/12/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT, UNHRC-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN RESPONSE TO 59TH UNHRC DEMARCHE: 
POSITIONS MAY CHANGE FROM PREVIOUS YEARS 
 
REF: STATE 64728 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  In response to reftel points, MFA 
Multilateral Affairs Director Castillo told us Guatemalan 
positions at the UNHRC this year might differ from previous 
years.  On Cuba, Castillo repeated that President Portillo 
would ultimately decide how the GOG will vote, but said the 
decision would take into account improved GOG relations with 
Cuba and recent U.S. decertification of Guatemala.  On Iraq, 
Castillo said Guatemala is highly vulnerable to oil shocks 
and although the GOG understands that a peaceful solution may 
not be possible, it fears the negative repercussions of 
military action.  On Middle East resolutions, Castillo said 
the GOG was concerned about perceptions from past UNHRC 
sessions that it is anti-Arab, and said votes at this session 
would be more \"balanced.\"  Foreign Minister Gutierrez will 
travel to Geneva after visiting Washington on Monday March 
17.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Polcouns and Poloff discussed U.S. priorities for the 
upcoming UN Human Rights Commission with Ministry of Foreign 
Relations Director General for Multilateral Affairs, 
Ambassador Giovanni Castillo on February 13.  Castillo said 
that the GOG shares the priority the USG places on human 
rights and agrees with many of our priorities at the UNHRC. 
He added that when we must disagree, we do so as friends.  He 
used this opening to point out that we may find less 
agreement this year on Cuba, Iraq, and the Middle East 
resolutions.  Castillo expressed appreciation for information 
on our positions but stated frankly that Guatemala did not 
have the personnel resources to focus on all the issues, 
citing the Zimbabwe resolution as an example. 
 
3.  (C) On Cuba, Castillo said the GOG has not yet decided on 
its position, which will be determined by President Portillo 
himself.  Castillo pointed out that GOG cooperation with Cuba 
has improved markedly in recent months.  He mentioned the 
Vice President\'s recent trip to the Island, the 
just-concluded Ministerial with Cuban Foreign Minster Perez 
Roque, and said that Portillo had received an invitation to 
visit Cuba.  Castillo stated that these closer ties with Cuba 
were bound to have an impact on the President\'s decision, and 
added that the USG decision to decertify Guatemala on 
narcotics cooperation may also be a factor in the decision. 
 
4.  (C) On Iraq, Castillo said Guatemala hoped for a peaceful 
resolution, though he said this did not mean the GOG would 
oppose a military solution.  He stressed that Guatemala 
understood that military action might be inevitable, and 
commented that the GOG is concerned about the possible 
economic impact of hostilities on Guatemala.  Castillo said 
Guatemala is vulnerable to oil shocks and was already feeling 
the strain of higher prices. 
 
5.  (C) On the Middle East resolutions, Castillo said the 
GOG\'s position is evolving.  He stated that the GOG was 
increasingly worried about the perception that Guatemala is 
anti-Arab and blindly supports Israel.  Castillo said that 
Arab delegations at the NAM summit in Malaysia had exerted 
enormous pressure on the GOG representative to that meeting, 
and that the Guatemalan delegation had returned concerned 
that Guatemala is overly exposed on these issues.  Castillo 
hastened to add that the Ministry had been analyzing its 
votes at the 58th UNHRC for some time.  Castillo said that 
Guatemala had paid a high price for some of its earlier 
votes, and that its votes in the upcoming UNHRC would be more 
\"balanced.\"  Polcouns commented that Guatemala\'s record at 
the last UNHRC had been very positive, and had been noticed 
by many in Washington as forward leaning on promoting human 
rights in Cuba and the Middle East.  This had earned the GOG 
significant recognition in Washington, and we hoped that the 
GOG could preserve that balance. 
 
6.  (C) Castillo identified North Korea as the issue where 
our interest most fully overlap.  Pressed for other issues of 
interest to Guatemala at the UNHRC, Castillo said that three 
reports related to Guatemala are scheduled to be presented 
and added that the rights of indigenous peoples and migrants 
are of perennial interest to Guatemala.  Castillo informed us 
that Foreign Minister Gutierrez would be traveling to Geneva 
for the opening week of the UNHRC.  He also noted that the 
new GOG Ambassador Ricardo Alvarado would represent Guatemala 
at this session.  Castillo indicated that President Portillo 
trusted Ambassador Alvarado fully, and Alvarado would have 
significant discretion on many of the votes.  He indicated 
that on the more important votes (e.g. Cuba, Middle East, 
Iraq), President Portillo was likely to make the decisions 
himself, in consultation with Foreign Minister Gutierrez, UN 
Permrep Rosenthal and Ambassador Alvarado. 
7.  (C) Comment:  The decision on the Cuba vote will probably 
be made at the very last minute by President Portillo 
himself, and it is too soon to predict what factors will 
ultimately influence that vote (the Ambassador has engaged 
the Foreign Minister repeatedly on Cuba, most recently at the 
CICIACS human rights announcement on March 13).  Guatemala\'s 
shift away from solid support for Israel may well be 
influenced by new Foreign Minister Gutierrez\'s 
pro-Palestinian sympathies.  In the past Guatemala\'s votes 
for Israel have not been driven by requests from us, but 
rather were related to Israel\'s influence with the GOG.  We 
will engage the Israeli Embassy in Guatemala to seek a common 
strategy for retaining GOG support for responsible votes on 
the Middle East, and would welcome the engagement of others 
to shore up Guatemala\'s traditional support for our positions 
on resolutions involving the Middle East. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6438","3/17/2003 20:59","03GUATEMALA696","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000696 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2013 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, PGOV, GT, OAS, BZ 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN MFA DISCUSSES FUTURE OF BORDER TALKS 
WITH BELIZE 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) In a March 11 meeting with PolCouns and PolOff, the 
Belize Border Commission of the Guatemalan MFA said that 
resolution of the long-running border dispute would be passed 
along to the new Guatemalan government that will take office 
in January, 2004, and said the new government will have to 
decide if it submits the Facilitators\' recommendations to a 
national referendum, or if it opts for seeking an opinion 
from the ICJ or an arbitration.  The Guatemalan diplomats 
believe that a referendum now would fail, and said 
Guatemalans\' \"spiritual\" attachment to Belize will make this 
referendum \"a challenge\" even for a new government.  They 
said that the MFA will try to keep the Belize issue from 
becoming part of the partisan political debate during this 
electoral year, and would focus its efforts in the remainder 
of the year on implementation of the confidence and security 
building measures.  The Guatemalans were pleased with the 
decision of the OAS to place a permanent observer on the 
border, and believe this will help reduce incidents that lead 
to border tensions.  They noted that many of the incidents 
are driven by pervasive poverty in the border areas, and 
argued for international assistance to address poverty 
concerns in those zones. 
 
2. (C) Poloffs noted that the international community had 
placed a lot of hope in the OAS Facilitators\' process, and 
were disappointed when no action was taken on the 
recommendations.  In an era of growing globalization, it is 
critical that countries overcome the obstacles to greater 
integration, such as Guatemala\'s border differences with 
Belize.  Greater integration brings benefits for both sides, 
and delaying the resolution of differences -- as would occur 
if the matter is referred to the ICJ -- would needlessly 
delay Guatemala and Belize reaping the profits of greater 
economic integration.  The Guatemalans acknowledged the 
point, and said the GOG would seek an expedited process at 
the ICJ or from arbitrators in the event the new government 
should not believe it could win a national referendum on the 
Facilitators\' recommendations. 
 
3. (C) In a separate meeting with the local OAS office 
Director, Ambassador Jose Felix Palma, Poloffs discussed 
implementation of the permanent observer mission.  Palma said 
installation of the office was taking more time than 
anticipated.  All sides have agreed that bringing in a 
pre-fabricated structure will be necessary due to lack of 
suitable infrastructure and facilities in the border area. 
Palma estimates the observer mission will be operational by 
mid-April, but cautioned that the date could slip if a 
suitable director and assistant cannot be found.  Palma said 
the candidate pool was somewhat limited since the director 
would need to be someone senior enough to command respect, 
but willing to live in the relatively remote border area. 
Palma also said the director would probably have to be from 
South America.  He expects that the observer mission will 
eventually be made up of 4 - 5 people. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6477","3/18/2003 17:51","03GUATEMALA705","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA471","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000705 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, GT, OAS, UN 
SUBJECT: AGREEMENT ON CLANDESTINE GROUP COMMISSION 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 471 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The human rights community, Human Rights 
Ombudsman, and FM Gutierrez agreed on the make-up and mandate 
for an international commission to investigate recent attacks 
on human rights defenders in Guatemala.  Helen Mack invited 
the Ambassador to attend the public signing ceremony on March 
13 and expressed appreciation for strong USG support for the 
proposal.  That support will be tested as the commission 
moves toward formation in September.  We believe the proposal 
is worthy and was strengthened by the facilitation of Human 
Rights Watch facilitator Jose Miguel Vivanco.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) The accord on formation of a Commission to 
Investigate Illegal and Clandestine Security Groups (CICIACS) 
is for three commissioners, with subpoena powers, a witness 
protection program, a one-year term (renewable, in six month 
increments, for up to 12 months more), focused on the 
1994-2003 period, to begin its operations in September 2003. 
The GOG pledged $256,000 in initial financial support and 
committed to solicit funding from the international 
community, to be managed by UNOPS.  A copy of the full text 
of the agreement (5 pages) was forwarded to WHA/CEN on March 
14. 
 
3.  (U) The agreement includes a broad mandate to investigate 
illegal and clandestine groups, with special emphasis on 
those responsible for attacks on human rights defenders, 
justice workers, witnesses, journalists, union members and 
others.  It is also charged with investigating illegal or 
clandestine activities of state security forces and private 
security forces since the signing of the Peace Accord on 
Human Rights on March 29, 1994 (relevant antecedents may also 
be investigated).  The goal of this investigation is to 
dismantle criminal groups with links to the state and 
prosecute responsible individuals, and end attacks and 
threats on groups listed above.  A final report on the 
structure, organization, and financing of groups or networks 
responsible for attacks and threats will include 
recommendations to the government.  An annex to the report 
will include information necessary to initiate administrative 
action against state agents and another for criminal 
prosecution. 
 
4.  (U) During a March 10-13 visit to Guatemala, Jose Miguel 
Vivanco of Human Rights Watch reassured skeptical NGO\'s and 
rallied GOG and international support, culminating in the 
March 13 agreement.  Ombudsman Sergio Morales announced on 
March 14 that his office had compiled 77 complaints of 
attacks, threats, crimes and intimidation of justice system 
workers, witnesses, and citizens which will be submitted to 
the commission in September. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5.  (SBU) With Department concurrence, the Ambassador has 
been actively supportive of the CICIACS proposal, which has 
now cleared its first major hurdle.  NGOs are elated by 
Vivanco\'s success.  However, many other obstacles remain to a 
fully functioning commission.  The Executive must now draft a 
decree, negotiate agreements with the UN and OAS, submit 
those agreements to Congress for ratification, select a 
notable Guatemalan member of the commission.  We will monitor 
and report these steps closely. 
6.  (SBU) We may not receive an official request for 
financial support immediately, but would like to be in a 
position to indicate the approximate amount that we are 
likely to commit in order to aid planning and to encourage 
other donors.  Can we informally and unofficially advise that 
we are likely to commit $500,000? 
 
7.  (SBU) We can also anticipate requests, once the 
Commission is established, for information, including 
declassified documents.  The Ambassador has worked to lower 
expectations of a special declassification project but urges 
the Department to consider standing up now an effort to 
compile an all-source report that we could provide the 
Commission at the onset of its work in September.  There may 
be better ways to be responsive but, knowing that the 
requests will come, we should prepare now to be as responsive 
as possible. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6481","3/18/2003 18:17","03GUATEMALA706","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE70678","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000706 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, IZ, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON POSSIBLE UNGA AND UNCHR SESSIONS ON 
IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 70678 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) In the absence from Guatemala of Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez, the Ambassador spoke with senior Presidential 
Advisor Arturo Montenegro on March 18 to express USG concern 
over the possible convocation of a special UNGA or a special 
session of the UNCHR to condemn possible coalition military 
action against Iraq.  The Ambassador asked that Guatemala 
oppose any proposal to convoke an emergency session of the 
General Assembly, drawing on talking points in reftel. 
Montenegro responded that Guatemala has been following 
developments on the Iraqi situation, and promised to relay 
our request immediately to President Portillo. 
 
2. (C) Deputy Foreign Minister Jorge Perez called the 
Ambassador to say that the President had directed the Foreign 
Ministry to support the USG.  Advised by the Department that 
there was a specific NAM meeting at 1500 hours, DCM McFarland 
followed up by speaking again with Deputy Foreign Minister 
Perez (who is also a close friend and advisor of President 
Portillo) and repeating our concerns.  Perez said Guatemala 
would attend a March 18, 1500 hours NAM meeting in New York, 
and would oppose the holding of an emergency UNGA on Iraq. 
Perez promised to inform Foreign Minister Gutierrez (who is 
traveling to Geneva to participate in the first week of the 
UNCHR) as well as President Portillo. 
 
3. (C) Comment/Action Request:  Given the absence from New 
York of Ambassador Rosenthal, we recommend that the 
Department confirm these instructions with the Guatemalan UN 
Delegation. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6484","3/18/2003 21:03","03GUATEMALA708","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000708 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, IZ, GT 
SUBJECT: PORTILLO PLEDGES UNCONDITIONAL SUPPORT IN 
DIFFICULT TIMES 
 
 
1.  (SBU) President Alfonso Portillo sent the Ambassador a 
letter (text below) on March 17 expressing consideration for 
the difficult situation facing the U.S. and offering 
Portillo\'s personal unconditional support for the Ambassador 
and Embassy staff.  Written without explicit reference to 
Iraq, we interpret the letter to offer GOG cooperation to 
ensure the safety of U.S. mission employees in Guatemala, 
should it be necessary.  SepTel discusses Portillo\'s 
conversation in which he told the Ambassador Guatemala would 
issue a specific statement of support on Iraq.  In that 
conversation, Portillo said he had sent President Bush a 
letter similar to the March 17 letter to the Ambassador. 
 
2.  (U) Text of Letter:  Dear Ambassador: 
 
I am very aware of the difficult moment facing the world, and 
the heavy and historic responsibility that the United States 
of America has shouldered.  We are all gravely concerned but 
we have faith in God that all will pass according to your 
plans. 
 
As President of the Republic and as a citizen, I offer my 
services in any instance in which I can be useful.  Above all 
I would like you to know that you will have my unconditional 
support for anything you or your staff require. 
 
With faith in God, I hope we do not arrive at a situation of 
insecurity in Guatemala, but regardless, I pledge the 
unconditional support of my Government for you and your staff. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Alfonso Portillo. 
 
End Text. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6485","3/18/2003 21:06","03GUATEMALA710","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IZ, GT 
SUBJECT: GOG TO SUPPORT CENTAM SUMMIT ON IRAQ AND TO ISSUE 
UNILATERAL STATEMENT 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d0. 
 
1.  (C) The Ambassador urged President Portillo on March 18 
to join the Central American Summit Statement on Iraq or to 
issue a unilateral statement along the same lines.  As 
Portillo is not attending the Summit in Roatan, Honduras, he 
told the Ambassador he would instruct Vice Minister Aguilera 
(who is representing Portillo there) to support the 
declaration and said he would issue a unilateral statement 
consistent with the statement issued at the Summit. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6486","3/18/2003 21:10","03GUATEMALA711","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE50110","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, GT, USOAS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL CONSIDER OAS BUDGET INCREASE IN JUNE 
 
REF: STATE 50110 
 
1.  Poloff delivered reftel demarche to Acting Director 
General for Multilateral Affairs, Sylvia Corado, at the 
Foreign Ministry on February 28.  Corado said she would have 
to consult internally before she could speak officially. 
However, she speculated that, given \"severe\" budget 
constraints, the MFA would be hard-pressed to find an 
additional $5,000 for the OAS.  On March 4, Poloffs spoke to 
Jose Felix Palma, Director of the OAS office in Guatemala 
City.  Palma indicated his discussions with the MFA were 
proceeding positively.   Corado told us on March 5 that while 
the MFA understood the symbolic importance of Guatemala\'s 
small increase, her internal consultations had indicated it 
was unlikely Guatemala would be able to increase its 
contribution.  PolCouns raised the issue with Giovanni 
Castillo, Director General for Multilateral Affairs, upon 
Castillo\'s return from the NAM summit.  Castillo said that 
due to the MFA\'s budget cycle, it would be June before the 
proposal to increase the contribution to the OAS could be 
considered. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6548","3/19/2003 19:30","03GUATEMALA723","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA708","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN VIEWS ON IRAQ SITUATION 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 708 
 
1. (U) Summary. President Portillo told reporters on March 18 
that Guatemala \"stands beside the United States,\" but said 
Guatemala does not take a position for or against war with 
Iraq.  He added that he sent a letter of support to President 
Bush (reftel).  According to the MFA, the GOG delegation to 
the Roatan Centam Presidential Summit reportedly had 
instructions to sign a joint statement on Iraq, but it failed 
to achieve consensus.  Some opposition party leaders have 
expressed strong support for the U.S. while others have 
expressed concern over economic fallout due to rising energy 
prices.  Guatemalan public opinion is divided on Iraq.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) Speaking in his home town of Zacapa, President Alfonso 
Portillo told reporters that Guatemala has not taken a 
position on hostilities with Iraq.  However, he stressed that 
in this delicate time Guatemala \"will stand with its ally, 
the United States.\"  Portillo dodged questions about possible 
economic repercussions for Guatemala of any military action 
in Iraq.  He said that although the international situation 
is \"grave,\" Guatemala understands the responsibility of the 
U.S. to respond to it.  Portillo described his recent letter 
to President Bush (reftel) as a further example of his 
support and told the crowd the letter was intended to 
\"encourage U.S. authorities because they are living through 
difficult moments.\"  Political cartoons lampooned Portillo\'s 
indecision on the potential hostilities, depicting him as a 
chicken buffeted by the winds of war but insisting that \"we 
are not for or against, in fact just the opposite...\" 
 
3. (SBU) Deputy Foreign Minister Abiu told us on March 19 
that Guatemala had instructed its representatives at the 
Centam presidential summit in Roatan, Honduras, to sign a 
Central American Summit statement on Iraq.  He said that 
there had been no consensus on the statement, however, and 
said ultimately the statement was withdrawn. He said that 
President Portillo\'s statement was intended to make clear 
that, without taking a position for or against hostilities, 
the GOG will stand by the United States. 
 
4. (U)  Opposition party leaders have publicly and privately 
expressed a wide range of reactions to events in the Persian 
Gulf.  Some have strongly endorsed U.S. military action, 
while others have limited themselves to expressing concern 
over the potential of economic consequences to Guatemala of 
any war. 
 
5. (U) Public opinion appears divided.  There have been a 
number of small, peaceful demonstrations outside the Embassy 
in recent weeks against the possibility of war in Iraq.  The 
demonstrators tend to be student or religious groups and have 
not attracted large numbers of protesters.  Despite fairly 
regular press coverage implying that Guatemala will suffer 
from higher energy prices and reduced tourism, most average 
Guatemalans are more concerned with daily problems than with 
events in the Middle East.  The media has also devoted 
detailed coverage to the 860 active duty and 650 reservists 
of Guatemalan origin who are currently serving with the U.S. 
military, reporting in some cases anxiety about the 
possibility of war and in others, patriotic pride in serving 
their adopted country. 
 
6 (SBU) Comment: We see Portillo\'s statement as trying to 
have it both ways. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6550","3/19/2003 20:25","03GUATEMALA724","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000724 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, SP, GT 
SUBJECT: MENCHU CASE ADVANCES IN SPAIN 
 
 
1. Summary: With broad coverage in the Guatemalan press, the 
Spanish Supreme Court reportedly accepted Spanish 
jurisdiction for Nobel Laureate Rigoberta Menchu\'s case 
against six Guatemalan military leaders and two civilian 
officials linked to torture and murder of Spanish citizens in 
Guatemala in the 1980\'s.  The Court reportedly rejected 
jurisdiction for Menchu\'s allegation of genocide, however. 
The Menchu Foundation here called the court decision a step 
in the right direction, but vowed to appeal again.  The 
accused, including President of Congress Efrain Rios Montt, 
reacted calmly to the court decision and seem unconcerned 
about standing trial.  End Summary. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
2. Rigoberta Menchu filed the case upon which the Supreme 
Court decision was based in the Spanish courts in December 
1999.  She accused ex-military and police officials Benedicto 
Lucas Garcia, Romero Lucas Garcia, Efrain Rios Montt, Angel 
Anibal Guevara, Oscar Mejia Victores, German Chupina 
Barahona, Pedro Garcia Arredondo, and Donaldo Alvarez Ruiz, 
with genocide, torture, and terrorism, and the deaths of 200 
thousand people between 1962 and 1996.  In early 2002, says 
the Menchu foundation, the Spanish National Court ruled it 
would not hear the case, a decision that Menchu appealed.  In 
June 2002, the Spanish Supreme Court accepted the appeal, 
which argued for universal jurisdiction for crimes against 
humanity under Spanish law. 
 
3. Menchu\'s case included the attack by Guatemalan security 
forces on the Spanish Embassy on January 30, 1980, where 
indigenous and guerrilla leaders, and 14 Spanish nationals 
and diplomats, were killed. (Note: Menchu\'s father was among 
those killed.)  The case also includes the murders of four 
Spanish priests between July 1980 and August 1981.  These 
events all occurred during the reign of President Romeo Lucas 
Garcia. 
 
4. The Spanish Supreme Court reportedly ruled in an eight to 
seven decision on March 3, 2003, to return the case to a 
lower court for consideration. However, the Supreme Court 
stipulated that the Spanish domestic courts should only 
concern themselves with the crimes committed against Spanish 
nationals.  The Menchu foundation issued a statement that 
said they were \"partially satisfied\" the \"door to justice was 
left open\" but they would appeal the decision to restrict the 
case to Spanish subjects.  Gustavo Meono, Director of the 
Menchu Foundation, said that the Foundation would argue in 
the appeal that \"authors of genocide are common enemies of 
all humanity.\" 
 
ACCUSED TAKE NEWS IN STRIDE 
--------------------------- 
 
5. President of Congress Rios Montt is the only one of the 
accused still serving in a public position.  Upon hearing of 
the court decision, Rios Montt told the press he would 
analyze the case with his lawyers, but that he did not \"have 
anything to do with genocide\" and that he has disproved 
repeated accusations of misdoing.  Benedicto Lucas Garcia, 
chief of staff of the Army under his brother\'s regime, also 
publicly claimed innocence. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6. Press coverage of the Spanish Supreme Court\'s decision 
could negatively affect Rios Montt\'s ongoing campaign for the 
Presidency, but much will depend upon the speed the Menchu 
Foundation\'s appeals move through the Spanish courts. 
Justice for Guatemalan war crimes has moved at a snail\'s 
pace; Menchu and her colleagues are prepared for a long legal 
battle. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6604","3/20/2003 22:36","03GUATEMALA746","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000746 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PINR, GT, IZ 
SUBJECT: MARCH 17 LETTER FROM PRESIDENT PORTILLO TO 
PRESIDENT BUSH ON IRAQ 
 
1. (U) President Alfonso Portillo sent President Bush a 
letter on March 17 (delivered by the Guatemalan Embassy in 
Washington to the White House and Department of State) saying 
that Guatemala stands by the United States during the current 
difficult international situation.  Following is the 
Embassy\'s translation of the text of the Portillo letter: 
 
2. (U) Begin text: 
Guatemala, March 17, 2003 
Mr. George W. Bush 
President of the United States of America 
 
Mr. President: 
 
I have the honor to address you to express my solidarity 
(with you) during this difficult moment in the international 
situation.  My government shares your concern over the 
persistence of international actors that represent a serious 
risk to international peace and security, as well as the need 
for the community of nations to act with determination to 
confront these risks. 
 
Of those risks, the most virulent is terrorism, while so 
violently has attacked your country as well as many others in 
the world.  All of the nations and peoples of the world have 
an obligation to act in concert to prevent, attack and, if 
possible, eradicate this threat. 
 
At the same time, we remember the need to maintain the great 
achievements that humanity has gradually built over the past 
century, in particular, the multilateral organizations such 
as the United Nations, which are the best guarantee that we 
will continue to build a world founded on the values of 
democracy and peace. 
 
Mr. President, permit me to repeat my desire that our nations 
conserve their friendship and shared visions for better 
societies. 
 
(complimentary closing) 
Alfonso Portillo (signed) 
end text. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment:  Like his public statements, in which 
Portillo has not wanted to comment on his position on 
hostilities with Iraq but has wanted to appear on the side of 
the U.S., the letter to President Bush is another attempt by 
Portillo to have it both ways. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6639","3/21/2003 18:30","03GUATEMALA758","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE74254","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000758 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, IZ, GT, UNSC, HNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: KEEPING THE IRAQ ISSUE IN THE SECURITY COUNCIL 
 
REF: STATE 74254 
 
1.  In the absence of the Director General for Multilateral 
Affairs, PolOff discussed reftel points with his assistant, 
Sylvia Corado on March 21.  Corado said the MFA had 
anticipated our position on this issue and agreed that the UN 
Charter gives responsibility for international peace and 
security to the UNSC.  She was noncommittal, however, to our 
points that other UN bodies such as the General Assembly or 
Commission on Human Rights would be inappropriate fora for 
discussions on Iraq.  Corado said the Foreign Minister and 
his Vice Ministers were consulting on our points, but 
discussions were going slower than she would like due to the 
Foreign Minister\'s travels.  Corado added that input from the 
Guatemalan PermRep in New York would probably be decisive. 
Corado could not comment on whether Guatemala would try to 
influence the NAM to prevent efforts to introduce the Iraq 
issue, but said she did not think the US had much to worry 
about from the NAM. 
 
2.  FonMin Gutierrez has just returned from abroad and 
Ambassador will endeavor to reach him. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6640","3/21/2003 18:47","03GUATEMALA759","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","02GUATEMALA3003|03SECSTATE43119","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 000759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/PPCP, WHA/EPSC AND DRL/IL 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EAID, KSUM, ECON, SOCI, GT 
SUBJECT: TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE ON LABOR ISSUES 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 43119 
     B. 02 GUATEMALA 3003 
 
1.  Ref A requests information about current or recently 
completed technical cooperation activities in the labor 
field.  That information was included in Ref B and is 
included in Paras 2-9 below.  Information about USAID 
bilateral projects in the labor sector is included in Paras 
10-11, and USAID regional labor programs in Paras 12-13.  We 
hope this information is useful to the Department in the 
context of CAFTA and FTAA negotiations. 
 
2. Project Sponsor:  ILO 
Project Title:  RELACENTRO (union rights, negotiation, and 
labor relations in Central America) 
--project goal:  to improve union rights and labor relations 
in the years 2001-2002, run by the Labor Ministry of 
Guatemala, Central Unions, and the umbrella chamber of 
business chambers (CACIF).  Has received 1.5 million US 
dollars from US Dept. of Labor. 
Project Title:  IPEC (International Program for the 
Elimination of Child Labor in Latin America) 
--project goal:  to eliminate the worst cases of child labor, 
run by the Labor Ministry of Guatemala, Central Unions, and 
CACIF.  Funded by the US Dept. of Labor and Spain. 
Title:  PRODIAC 
--project goal:  promotion of tripartite ideals, social 
dialogue, and strengthening of democracy, in the years of 
2001-2002, run by the Labor Ministry of Guatemala, Central 
Unions, and CACIF.  Has received $1.75 mil from Norway. 
Title:  Legal Empowerment of Indigenous Peoples of the 
Central American Isthmus 
--project goal:  to strengthen the legal abilities of the 
indigenous villages, helping to preserve indigenous identity 
and protect their rights, in the years of 1999-2002, run by 
the justice system and indigenous organizations.  Has 
received 1.5 million US dollars from UNFIP. 
Title:  MATAC (Modernization of the labor administrations in 
Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) 
--project goal:  To modernize the labor administrations of 
these countries in years of 1997-2002.  Has received $2.93 
million from Spain.  (Comment:  MOL contacts tell us that 
there has been little or no MATAC activity in Guatemala.  End 
Comment.) 
Title:  Education about Labor and Internalization of Peace in 
Guatemala 
--project goal:  to educated university students about labor 
rights since 1999.  Funded by OIT and EPAZT. 
 
3.  Project Sponsor: UNDP 
Project Title:  International Labor Organization 
Representation 
--project goals:  representation of ILO, to advise the 
resident coordinators of the UN and of UNDP about labor 
topics.  Run by the Guatemalan Ministry of Labor, other 
participating groups include:  union organizations, the 
business sector, and universities. 
Title:  Labor Justice 
--Project goals:  to advise and facilitate reform of labor 
judicial processes. 
 
4.  Sponsor: MINUGUA 
Title:  Labor Justice 
--project goals:  research and workshops to come up with 
ideas to improve the administration of justice from June 2000 
to December 2001, run by The Judicial Organism and the 
Ministry of Labor of Guatemala.  Other participating groups 
include:  Unions, CACIF, Universities, Guatemalan Institute 
of Labor rights 
Title:  Academic Training 
--project goals:  to offer conferences, publication 
opportunities and a documentation center starting in June 
2000 (until present), run by USAC and IDHUSAC.  Other 
participating groups include:  The University of Rafael 
Landivar, and the University of Mariano Galvez. 
 
5.  Sponsor:  The Friedrich Ebert Foundation 
Title: Empowerment 
--project goals:  offer conferences to increase institutional 
 knowledge and the ability to articulate interest starting in 
2001, run by union organizations. 
Increasing female participation in union life through 
educational conferences starting in 2001, run by union 
organizations. 
 
6.  Sponsor: UNICEF 
Title:  Children,s Rights, Citizen Participation, 
Transformation of knowledge and values 
--project goals:  to protect children from labor and sexual 
exploitation. From 2002-2006.  Run by Ministry of Labor and 
Ministry of Education of Guatemala.  Other participating 
groups:  Civil society, NGO,s. 
 
7.  Sponsor:  International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
Title:  Monitoring Migrant workers and the emigration of 
Guatemalans to the south of Mexico 
--project goals:  to identify and register the workers, 
2002-2003, run by the Ministry of Labor and the Ministry of 
Foreign Relations.  Other participating groups include: 
workers, migrant worker recruiters. 
Title:  Investigation of the coffee crisis and its impact on 
employment.  Run by the Guatemalan Ministry of Labor in 
2001-2002. 
Title:  Improvement of worker qualifications, run by SEPAZ 
and INTECAP in 2001-2002. 
 
8.  Sponsor: Danish Central American Human Rights Program 
(PRODECA) 
Title:  Labor justice and academic formation 
--project goals:  promotion of projects and publications. 
Run by the Guatemalan Ministry of Labor and the Judicial Body 
in 2000-2001, other participants include:  universities and 
unions. 
Title:  Labor justice 
--project goals:  improvement of the ability of the defense 
and promotion of labor rights, legal assistance, judicial 
investigation.  Run by unions and NGO,s in 1999-2003. 
Title:  Project INTRAPAZ 
--project goals:  improvement and promotion of dialogue 
techniques and alternative conflict solutions.  Run by the 
Guatemalan Ministry of Labor, NGO,s, unions CACIF, and the 
University of Rafael Landivar in 2001-2002. 
 
9.  Sponsor: The Danish Council 
Title:  Union training to promote unity, strengthen 
organizations, and promote strategic formulation of union 
projects.  Run by unions:  CTC, CUSG, FESTRAS, IUTE, 
ANTRASPG, and UNSITRAGUA in 1999-2002. 
Title:  The promotion of women,s participation in unions and 
the education of union leaders.  Run by unions in 1997-2002. 
 
USAID Bilateral Programs 
------------------------ 
 
10.  As part of an ongoing effort to support the Labor 
Ministry, USAID/Guatemala engaged the services of IRM through 
a buy-in to the Interagency Agreement between USAID and the 
U.S. General Services Administration.   The modest 
project--$200,000--helps establish an information technology 
unit within the Labor Ministry and pilot projects (e.g., 
direct communications between regional offices and the 
ministry, labor inspection via palm pilots, and systems 
administration). 
 
11.  During 2001 USAID provided $70,000 to the Institute for 
Transforming Conflicts for the Construction of Peace in 
Guatemala (INTRAPAZ) through a cooperative agreement with 
Rafael Landivar University to provide in-country training in 
successful dialogue, relationship-building and 
labor/management conflict-resolution techniques.  Target 
groups included individuals from management, labor, the 
Ministry of Labor, and a corps of future trainers and 
mediators. 
 
USAID Regional Programs: PROALCA II Labor Component 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
12.  Project budget:  $6.3 m. 
Project duration:  July 20, 2002 ) September 30, 2007 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor of Central America, 
Panama, Belize and the Dominican Republic, Ministers, Vice 
Ministers, other labor officials, union organizations, civil 
society, among others. 
Implementing Unit:  Secretariat for Central American Economic 
Integration (SIECA) 
 
Project Goal: Supporting efforts to improve the functioning 
of regional labor markets while strengthening the protection 
of core labor standards. 
 
Justification:  Enhanced competitiveness in global markets 
requires that Central America improve the functioning of its 
labor markets while also strengthening the protection of core 
labor standards.  Improved labor-management relations are 
essential to achieve the total quality production required by 
a global marketplace.  Moreover, satisfactory protection of 
core labor standards is necessary to maintain access to 
important markets.  In addition, for Central America to take 
maximum advantage of the increased opportunities presented by 
more integrated regional and global markets, its labor force 
must be better trained and more productive and its labor laws 
and regulations must be harmonized.  Also, rigidities in the 
region%s labor market must be addressed by allowing for 
flexibility and sufficient labor mobility to permit the 
timely and voluntary reallocation of workers to newer and 
more competitive economic activities.  To achieve this 
result, the following interventions will be promoted: (a) 
labor ministries capacity enhanced, (b) competitiveness of 
the region\'s labor force increased, and (c) harmonization of 
labor laws and regulations in the region. 
 
At the end of the strategy period, the following achievements 
are expected: 
 
-- More active and effective leadership of labor ministries 
in economic policy-making relative to labor. 
-- Better functioning of labor markets in specific areas 
addressed by PROALCA II. 
-- Establishment of one or more Alternative Dispute 
Resolution Mechanisms in the region. 
-- The development of a corps of trained technical staffs in 
the labor ministries of Central America. 
-- Shift from public occupational training in public-private 
skills-based training. 
-- Harmonization of skills standards and standards of methods 
of certification. 
-- Initiation of skills certification program throughout 
region. 
-- Increased voluntary mobility of workers inside their 
countries. 
-- Changes in labor codes to incorporate policies that 
increase labor flexibility without weakening protection of 
core labor rights. 
-- Region wide respect for core labor rights. 
-- Changes in national legislation to conform to regional 
norms. 
-- Increased convergence of labor laws in the region. 
 
USAID Regional Programs: PROALCA I Results 
------------------------------------------ 
 
13.  Our regional Program in Support of Central American 
Participation in the Free Trade Area of the Americas (PROALCA 
I) Labor Component ran from 1995-2002 and had its objective 
\"More Equitable and Better Functioning Labor Markets.\"  The 
labor component expended $ 5.0 million.  This was 
accomplished through programs designed to support Central 
American efforts to strengthen the protection of 
internationally recognized core labor standards, improve 
labor-management relations, and modernize labor markets.  The 
activity also helped improve workplace conditions and better 
enable workers to receive their fair share of gains generated 
by trade expansion and productivity increases. 
 
PROALCA supported the Ministries of Labor of Central America, 
Belize and the Dominican Republic.  The program provided 
assistance for policy reform and for effective policy 
implementation, as needed.  The types of assistance provided 
included specialized technical assistance, horizontal 
(inter-ministerial) cooperation programs, short-term training 
programs, observational trips and support for regional 
seminars, workshops and fora. 
 
USAID-IDB-SIECA Labor Modernization Project:  This program 
was designed to assist Central American efforts to modernize 
labor markets by supporting regional and national dialogue on 
topics related to labor markets and hemispheric integration, 
globalization and trade policy, among others.  The project 
also provided opportunities for the region,s countries to 
participate in pilot activities in methods of alternative 
dispute resolution and occupational safety standards. 
 
The program financed technical assistance and consulting 
services for the eight Ministries of Labor in the formulation 
of national and regional policies, and the modernization of 
labor markets.  Thirty-six national seminars and workshops 
were developed in the region.  1,631 persons (478 women and 
1,153 men) from the public and private sector, trade unions 
and NGOs were trained on subjects related to social dialogue, 
information systems, alternative methods of dispute 
resolution, occupational health and safety, and modernization 
of the labor market. 
 
This subcomponent supported the development of a web-based 
labor information system.  This system facilitates the 
research of statistics on occupation, income and wages, 
vulnerable groups, labor legislation, agreements and 
ministerial meetings, international legislation, social 
dialogue, trade union information, economic and demographic 
data, and social standards, and provides a virtual library on 
labor topics.   Training on the use of the system and the 
necessary computer equipment and software were also provided 
to the ministries. This component finished on September 30, 
2001 (although a no-cost extension was approved for an 
additional year and activities continue with IDB financing). 
 
Labor Advisor: This consulting service provided the Ministers 
of Labor with advice on the status of the hemispheric 
economic and social integration process, and how labor issues 
are incorporated into that process, as well as advice on 
ministerial modernization processes.  It also helped the 
Ministers define appropriate social, economic and labor 
policies. 
 
This subcomponent facilitated the exchange of technical 
assistance, training, and best practices among the Central 
American Ministries of Labor and between Central America and 
those from outside the region through a horizontal 
cooperation program and site visits. A total of 82 labor 
officials participated in the hemispheric cooperation program 
in areas such as: modernization of labor markets, automation 
of labor information, labor relations, labor inspection, and 
certification of labor skills.   Five extraordinary 
ministerial meetings were supported as well as the XVI 
Council of Ministries of Labor of Central America.  Under 
this contract, a total of 866 (652 men and 214 women) Labor 
officials participated in 18 seminars and workshops on 
employment policies, productivity, and modernization of the 
labor markets. 
 
With the support of this subcomponent, the Secretary of Labor 
and Social Welfare of Mexico and the Ministers of Labor of 
the region signed an operational agreement on November 23, 
2001.  This agreement will allow the transference, at a 
minimum cost, of successful experiences that were accumulated 
by the participation of Mexico in the North American Free 
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in aspects such as labor skills 
certification programs and systems for the establishment of 
norms, among others.  Probably the most significant 
achievements of this subcomponent, however, have been the 
creation of an ad-hoc secretariat of the Central American 
Ministers of Labor and the successful garnering of assistance 
from other donors for the labor sector in Central America. 
 
Strengthening Labor Management Relations:  This program 
concluded in November 2000 and was developed through a US 
$1.6 million cooperative agreement awarded to FUNPADEM.  Its 
purpose was to support the modernization of the labor 
inspection departments in each ministry, and to strengthen 
ministerial abilities to resolve labor conflicts and enhance 
labor-management relations. 
 
This assistance included the design of a modern management 
system to enhance the inspection process through improved 
monitoring and quality control of inspections and 
establishing a database on businesses, workers, payrolls, 
frequency and geographic locations of violations. 
 
Training activities on inspection, ministerial operations, 
and labor issues in the context of economic globalization and 
hemispheric integration surpassed expectations.  1,230 (923 
men and 307 women) representatives from the labor ministries, 
unions and management participated in six workshops, fourteen 
courses, six seminars and six video conferences 
 
Child Labor Program: The Child Labor Eradication Program 
funded by USAID was successfully completed in September 2001. 
 FUNPADEM provided sub grants to and monitored the national 
NGOs, which implemented the pilot projects in each Central 
American country according to the selected high-risk areas 
identified by the Ministers of Labor (Guatemala-quick lime 
production). 
 
NGOs were provided with the equipment and furniture required 
to implement activities.  The program developed regional 
workshops, reinforcement school courses, seminars, 
socio-economic diagnosis, and provided technical assistance 
to encourage more than one thousand children (586 girls and 
624 boys), adolescents, families and teachers to participate 
in educational and training activities.  A total of 547 
children will stop working to study, 147 will not study, and 
the rest will combine both activities.  NGOs obtained 193 
scholarships, 100 from the IPEC-ILO project and the rest from 
the private sector and municipalities. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6642","3/21/2003 18:55","03GUATEMALA760","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE74254","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000760 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, IZ, GT, UNSC, UNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER ON KEEPING THE IRAQ ISSUE IN THE 
SECURITY COUNCIL 
 
REF: STATE 74254 
 
1.  Ambassador made reftel points to Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez by phone on March 21.  Gutierrez responded that the 
Government of Guatemala agrees that Iraq is an issue for the 
Security Council exclusively.  However, Gutierrez would not 
clearly commit to supporting us on substance. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6730","3/24/2003 18:31","03GUATEMALA770","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA735|03STATE66351","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000770 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2013 
TAGS: PREL, ELAB, PGOV, KTIA, MARR, SNAR, KDEM, PHUM, EFIN, ETRD, CU, IR, GT 
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH PRESIDENT PROTILLO 
 
REF: A) STATE 66351 B) GUATEMALA 0735 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR JOHN R. HAMILTON FOR REASON 1.5 (b) 
 
 1. (C) Summary: Over dinner at the residence March 22, 
President Portillo acknowledged that Guatemala ought to 
support a UNHCR resolution on Cuba but said he has a problem 
with General Rios Montt\'s resentment over U.S. opposition to 
his presidential candidacy.  Portillo said Guatemala agreed 
with us that Iraq should stay in the UNSC.  He promised to 
look into allegations reported by MINUGUA that a recent drug 
bust was facilitated by illegal detentions and torture, as 
the Ambassador warned him that such methods are totally 
unacceptable.  He also pledged greater protection of labor 
rights, particularly in areas highlighted by the AFL-CIO GSP 
petition.  On his agenda: neutralizing perceived USG 
opposition to a controversial bond issue and venting over 
last October\'s congressional testimony that \"did me 
irreparable harm.\"  End Summary 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador reciprocated March 22 Portillo\'s 
February 25 dinner for the Ambassador.  Like that dinner, 
this was a one-on-one that got down immediately to discussion 
of a (mostly) pre-agreed agenda. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
3. (C) Portillo said he had been watching CNN all day and 
agreed with the Ambassador\'s observation that U.S. forces 
were taking extraordinary precautions to minimize loss of 
life and damage to infrastructure.  He did not commit to 
coming any further toward support of our position in public 
but did agree that the UNSC is the appropriate venue for any 
further UN consideration of the issue. 
 
Cuba 
---- 
4. (C) Portillo said he completely agreed with the Ambassador 
that Castro has again showed his true colors in the arrests 
of the last week and mustered a seemingly genuine show of 
indigation.  To the Ambassador\'s observation that surely, 
after this, Guatemala would vote in favor of a resolution, 
Portillo acknowledged that a yes vote is in order.  After 
passing allusion to the views of FonMin Gutierrez (old line 
leftist reluctance to fall in with the U.S. to condemn 
Castro), however, Portillo said his main problem is with 
General Rios Montt, who resents U.S. opposition to his 
presidential ambitions.  The Ambassador again reviewed our 
position on this (up to the FRG and the Guatemalan 
constitutional court to decide whether Rios Montt runs but, 
as President, Rios Montt could not expect warm relations with 
the U.S.)  Portillo said he finds the U.S. position 
understandable and realistic and said he tried to make the 
General understand it but that Rios Montt is angry and the 
subject pops up whenever the Cuba resolution is raised.  The 
Ambassador was loaded for bear to refute the Guatemalan claim 
(made by FonMin Gutierrez during the visit of Cuban FonMin 
Perez Roque) that Cuban doctors here have achieved a \"70 
percent reduction in infant mortality\" but with Portillo 
candidly admitting that Rios Montt is the problem, the 
subject did not come up. 
 
Narcotics Certification 
----------------------- 
5. (C) The Ambassador went over re-certification criteria in 
detail with Portillo and gave him copy of the diplomatic 
note, drawn from ref a, that explains the entire process and 
sets forth the general and specific criteria.  Portillo made 
a pitch for funds to repair Guatemalan helos.  The Ambassador 
pointed him instead to quick adoption of asset forfeiture 
legislation, saying aid to the military would violate the 
spirit of U.S. legislative prohibitions on FMF.  Portillo 
appeared to accept this answer and was aware that the FRG 
caucus is busy on such an asset forfeiture bill.  The 
Ambassador told Portillo that we have received a report of 
testimony taken by MINUGUA to the effect that Guatemalan 
police illegally detained and tortured two individuals to 
extract information that led to the March 6 drug bust (ref 
b).  The Ambassador said such actions, if true (and he noted 
that we are checking) are totally unacceptable.  They would 
be, moreover, extremely prejudicial to Guatemala\'s 
possibiliies for re-certification, as one of the most 
damaging charges against Guatemala last year was the 
anti-drug police conduct at Chocon.  The Ambassador also 
noted that, in this instance, it is possible that military 
intelligence, not police, were responsible -- all the worse, 
if true, the Ambassador said, repeating that this has to stop 
immediately.  Portillo said he would find out immediately and 
make sure it stopped.  He said he had already fired one 
military intelligence official for a misguided effort to push 
anti-drug efforts forward (note: which takes credit for 
our/our insistence that this official be removed, but the 
Ambassador led that point pass). 
Article 98 
---------- 
6. (C) The Ambassador walked Portillo through this issue in 
some detail.  Portillo was vaguely aware of it and promised 
to consult with FonMin Gutierrez and get back to us. 
 
Labor Rights 
------------ 
7. (C) The Ambassador briefed Portillo on the AFL-CIO GSP 
labor petition, urging that he personally involve himself to 
push for rapid progress in the three areas of deficiency: 
lack of prosecution in cases of violence against labor 
leaders; a clogged system of labor justice, and the system\'s 
inability to force the re-hiring of illegally fired workers. 
Portillo is familiar with the most egregious case of fired 
workers (the Maria Lourdes finca case), said Labor Minister 
Moreira is pushing for reforms to the labor code that could 
clear up the backing of labor fines and other issues and 
pledged to push for more vigorous investigations. 
 
\"Eurobonds\" 
---------- 
8. (C) Portillo as expected made a strong pitch for the USG 
not to oppose the placing of a bond issue that includes US$63 
million for a first payment of US$225 compensation for 
wartime services rendered to each of some 250,000 ex-civilian 
patrol members.  He seemed to accept the Ambassador\'s reply 
that, despite our deep misgivings over the appropriateness of 
such compensation, especially in an election year, we had not 
opposed the bond issue.  Portillo spoke at some length and 
with some anxiety about the danger to public security and 
order that the so-called Ex-Pacs represent.  He claimed that 
their ambitions and resentments have been egged on 
irresponsible elements in the ruling FRG, by the URNG (former 
guerrillas) and by the PAN (center-right, leading 
oppposition) and that a march on Guatemala City, if they make 
one, could turn extremely violent.  Hence the importance of 
buying them off. 
 
The October Testimony 
--------------------- 
9. (C) At one point Portillo went off on a tear, prefaced 
only by \"the spirit of candor that informs our discussions\" 
to complain bitterly of State Department congressional 
testimony last October that he had links to organized crime. 
He seemed  particularly hurt by the criticism of then A/S 
Reich, with whom he thought he had had a strong personal 
relationship.  The Ambassador said we could understand how he 
felt, but what about financial contributions and his other 
ties to the Ortega Menaldo crime syndicate of ex-military 
officers?  Indignant (or with a good show of indignation), 
Portillo responded with some heat that his entire campaign 
was funded by banker Francisco Alvarado Maldonado.  Portillo 
pointed out that Alvarado is currently being prosecuted for 
the failure of his two banks, i.e., Portillo has not come to 
his aid despite the past political support.  The Ambassador 
let the subject drop without giving any indication that we 
accept that reply at face value. 
 
CONTIERRA 
--------- 
10. (C) Portillo assured the Ambassador that CONTIERRA, the 
government agency that seeks to resolve land tenure 
conflicts, would be funded and kept in operation (note: there 
has been doubt on this). 
 
Leadership of Guatemalan tax authority 
-------------------------------------- 
11. (C) The Ambassador told Portillo that the quality of 
performance at the Guatemalan tax authority (SAT) is 
deteriorating badly since Marco Tulio Abadio took over as 
Director in late 2002.  All the donor countries and the IFI\'s 
are losing confidence in the SAT and are backing away from 
their programs of support.  Portillo, showing no surprise, 
said he would take (unspecified) action.  (Comment: Portillo 
picked the mercurial Abadio to serve as an attack dog against 
Portillo\'s private sector opponents.  He has not been 
effective in his or other roles.) 
 
April 10 meeting with the President 
----------------------------------- 
12. (C) Portillo understands that CAFTA is the only issue for 
discussion in the meeting between the President and the 
Central American presidents, though he equally understands 
that Cuba, Iraq and narcotics cooperation will come up in any 
side meetings with senior U.S. officials. 
 
Comment 
------- 
13. (C) Even on the subject of Eurobonds and Ortega Menaldo, 
this was a civil exchange and it is clear that earning 
re-certification and avoiding other blows to Guatemala\'s 
image is high on Portillo\'s agenda in his final months. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6789","3/25/2003 21:15","03GUATEMALA781","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03SECSTATE66351","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 000781 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: RE-CERTIFICATION BENCHMARKS DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 66351 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 770 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton.  Reason 1.5 (B&D). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  As requested in Ref A, the Ambassador 
discussed counter-narcotics re-certification benchmarks in 
detail with President Portillo on March 22.  The Ambassador 
gave Portillo a copy of the diplomatic note on benchmarks 
(full text para 10), rebuffed a request for material 
assistance to the Guatemalan military, and warned that the 
use of torture against narco-traffickers is unacceptable to 
the USG and would be extremely prejudicial to Guatemala\'s 
chances for re-certification.  Portillo raised no objections 
to the benchmarks and promised to investigate MINUGUA\'s 
allegations of the use of torture and to stop any further use 
of torture in the war against narcotics trafficking.  DCM met 
separately with Vice Foreign Minister Jorge Perez and 
Secretary for Strategic Analysis Arturo Montenegro to discuss 
 
SIPDIS 
the benchmarks.  Perez proposed a follow-up meeting on 
benchmarks between GOG vice ministers and the DCM and NAS on 
March 26.  We anticipate that the GOG will formally agree to 
the benchmarks.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador\'s meeting with Portillo was reported 
in Ref B.  MINUGUA chief Koenigs had told the Ambassador on 
March 21 that there was strong evidence of the use of torture 
and illegal detention (for at least eight hours) against 
three narco-trafficking suspects on March 6, in Zacapa 
province.  MINUGUA\'s conclusions in this case were based on a 
joint investigation by its regional office in Zacapa in 
conjunction with the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s representative. 
 To compile its report, MINUGUA interviewed the 
suspects/victims, police and anti-narcotics (SAIA) police 
sources.  We have been unable to corroborate MINUGUA\'s report 
with official sources in the SAIA or the military, who deny 
any involvement with torture in this case.  Nevertheless, 
based on discussions with unofficial sources, MINUGUA\'s 
allegations appear credible. 
 
3.  (U) DCM met with Perez and Montenegro on March 19, 
accompanied by Acting NAS Chief and PolOff.  He provided 
Spanish and English versions of the benchmarks received from 
the Department, commenting that these benchmarks are not 
substantially different from what had previously been under 
discussion. 
 
4.  (SBU) The two GOG officials made the following comments 
in response to specific benchmarks: 
 
-- SAIA Institution Building:  Montenegro provided a copy of 
a general order from the National Civil Police establishing 
the Guatemalan Narcotics Police (SAIA) which outlined basic 
selection requirements for entry into the unit.  Montenegro 
asked if this order satisfied the benchmark requirements. 
Acting NAS chief noted that the order was a partial document 
of a larger regulation and that the requirement for periodic 
urinalysis and polygraph testing would be contained in 
another part of the regulation which was not presented. 
Perez distinguished between \"formal versus real\" compliance, 
noting that issuing an order may satisfy the formal 
requirement, but real compliance would involve verification 
of implementation.  Montenegro acknowledged this point, and 
added that the order indicated the GOG\'s intention to comply. 
 
-- Extradition:  Perez asked what time frame is implied in 
the phase \"over the coming year.\"  DCM replied that it was 
the next 12 months. 
 
-- Precursor Chemicals:  Montenegro confirmed that the 
regulations have already been passed. 
 
5.  (SBU) Perez noted that the benchmarks now total nine vs. 
the ten previously discussed, since the issues of seizures 
and prosecutions have been combined in the current document. 
Montenegro said the order of the benchmarks has apparently 
changed.  Previously, the first benchmarks under discussion 
were those under the direct responsibility of the Executive. 
Now they are mixed.  Perez said that is not a problem;  the 
benchmarks are a GOG, not solely Executive responsibility. 
He said he has not discussed this yet with the Foreign 
Minister, but he will propose that the GOG assign primary 
responsibility for completion of each benchmark to the 
responsible ministry, and name an individual responsible, 
thereby creating a matrix of goals and accountable 
institutions and individuals. 
 
6.  (SBU) Perez said the Portillo Administration has \"a 
mountain\" of demands on it in its last year, but wants to 
make substantial progress meeting the benchmarks by 
September, 2003.  Re-certification is important to the GOG\'s 
bilateral relationship with the U.S., the GOG\'s financial 
interests (Comment:  this is a reference to stalled efforts 
to float Eurobonds.  End Comment.), and also a national 
interest in combating narco-trafficking and related 
corruption. 
7.  (SBU) Perez acknowledged that the recertification effort 
will require coordinated action by the Executive, the Public 
Ministry and the judiciary.  Given shortage of prosecutors 
and resources, progress will be difficult, and will require 
shifting prosecutorial assets to this task in the next 
semester.  DCM asked if the Public Ministry and judiciary are 
willing to do so.  Perez said yes.  He said FM Gutierrez has 
two priority areas for transition to the next government: 
the Peace Accord Agenda and the Counter-narcotics Matrix.  He 
asked if the USG would object to the GOG sharing the matrix 
with other countries who might be able to provide support (he 
mentioned Japan in the context of better port management, and 
Spain to train police).  The DCM said we would have no 
objection to the GOG doing this once we have a formal 
agreement on benchmarks.  Perez proposed, and the DCM 
accepted, a meeting between GOG vice ministers, the DCM and 
NAS on March 26 to discuss the benchmarks further. 
 
8.  (SBU) Secretary Montenegro concluded by saying the new 
benchmarks offered \"no surprises\" and indicated general 
agreement on the substantive issues.  Montenegro said that he 
hopes to develop a national counter-narcotics strategy for 
Cabinet approval, to coordinate GOG policy and create a 
policy framework useful to this and the next government.  He 
is aware of the Government of Mexico\'s strategy document, and 
was told of the USG strategies.  He asked for NAS 
collaboration in this effort, which we to. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  (SBU) We anticipate no major roadblocks to formal 
Guatemalan agreement to these benchmarks.  End Comment. 
 
10.  (U) Text of Diplomatic Note on Benchmarks provided to 
GOG: 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Guatemala 
and has the honor to refer to conversations between our two 
governments on the matter of counter-narcotics cooperation. 
 
To comply with current United States law establishing the 
certification mechanism and to respond to calls for a more 
transparent process, the Embassy of the United States takes 
advantage of this opportunity to advise the Government of 
Guatemala of U.S. law governing the certification process and 
both generic and specific certification standards. 
 
The Embassy wishes to establish at the outset that the 
International Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR) and 
other U.S. policy documents on drug control underscore U.S. 
efforts to curb its own drug consumption problems.   Illegal 
drugs exact an enormous toll on U.S. society: 52,000 lives 
annually and some $160 billion dollars a year in economic 
costs.  Sixteen million Americans use drugs on a current 
basis, and 5.6 million meet the criteria for needing drug 
treatment.  United States National Drug Control Policy 
commits unprecedented resources to the treatment of drug 
abuse and the reduction of demand: some $5.2 billion in 
Fiscal Year 2002.  President Bush has announced the United 
States goal of reducing drug use by 10 percent in two years 
and 25 percent in five years.  Recent data from the 
University of Michigan\'s \"Monitoring the Future\" survey show 
the first significant downturn in youth drug use in nearly a 
decade, with reduced drug use noted among 8th, 10th, and 12th 
graders. 
 
No domestic policy of demand reductions can succeed, however, 
while the supply of drugs into the United States continues 
unrestrained.  For that reason, we also place enormous 
importance on cooperation with other countries.  The United 
States Government\'s aim in approaching the Government of 
Guatemala now is to establish a dialogue regarding the United 
States and Guatemala counter-narcotics objectives for the 
near term and to present clear objectives that, if met, will 
be given due consideration by the U.S. in evaluating 
compliance with the goals and objectives of the 1988 UN 
convention and the United States and Guatemala bilateral 
counter-narcotics program.  The Embassy of the United States 
is pleased with the exchanges held to date and will continue 
to dialogue with the Government of Guatemala on this subject 
throughout the year.  The United States Government is 
prepared to review the original decision regarding 
Guatemala\'s counter-narcotics cooperation in response to 
significant progress in all areas of the shared 
counter-narcotics agenda.  The benchmarks outlined in this 
diplomatic note are not \"all or nothing\" mandates but, 
rather, represent a series of concrete steps toward a 
definite target.  Significant progress on taking these steps 
would demonstrate the will of the Government of Guatemala to 
meet its international counter-narcotics obligations. 
 
The United States Government\'s assessment of a country\'s 
counter-narcotics performance is independent of levels of 
U.S. bilateral counter-narcotics assistance to that country. 
However, within budgetary limitations, the United States 
Government will seek to be as responsive as possible to the 
Government of Guatemala\'s requests for drug control 
assistance. 
 
Under U.S. law, each country identified by the President as a 
major illicit drug producing or drug- transit country is 
subject to the annual certification process.  Under this 
process, the President determines, based upon overall 
counter-narcotics performance, whether the country has 
\"failed demonstrably\" during the previous 12 months to make 
substantial efforts to adhere to their obligations under 
international counter-narcotics agreements and take the 
counter-narcotics measures specified in U.S. law.  The 
certification decisions are made by the President upon the 
recommendations of the Secretary of State, with input from 
other concerned United States Government agencies. 
 
In order not to be found as having \"failed demonstrably,\" a 
country must take meaningful and committed actions against 
narcotics trafficking and related criminal activity.  Key 
criteria considered in the certification process include: 
 
(1) Performance in areas identified in the 1988 UN drug 
convention: namely, cultivation/manufacturing; 
consumption/demand reduction; trafficking; illicit crop 
eradication/substitution; interdiction and law enforcement 
cooperation; asset seizure; extradition and mutual legal 
assistance; drug treatment; control of precursor/essential 
chemicals; and money laundering. 
 
(2) Performance in accomplishing goals described in any 
applicable bilateral narcotics agreement with the United 
States, or a multilateral narcotics agreement; 
 
(3) Performance in preventing and punishing public 
corruption, especially by senior government officials that 
facilitates the production, processing, or shipment of drugs 
and other controlled substances, or that discourages the 
investigation or prosecution of such acts; and 
 
(4) The United States Government is very interested in 
efforts to improve regional cooperation and regional 
activities to support the goals of the 1988 UN drug 
convention. The Government of the United States will consider 
such activities and initiatives as we evaluate performance. 
 
While the President makes his certification determinations 
based on a country\'s compliance with all aspects of the 1988 
UN drug convention, bilateral agreements, other multilateral 
agreements, and the elimination of corruption, there are 
specific areas of interest that we will highlight during the 
certification process.  The United States believes the 
following actions could be taken: 
 
1.   SAIA Institutional Building: Adopt formal regulations to 
govern SAIA activities and operations based on the 
regulations and policies used by the National Civilian 
Police. Policies should include regular polygraphs and 
urinalysis, as well as mechanisms to promote greater 
cooperation between the SAIA and the Anti-Narcotics 
Prosecutors. 
 
2.   Significant Increase in Seizures, Arrests and 
Prosecutions: Increased development and prosecution of cases 
against those involved in narco-trafficking and other types 
of organized crime.  Guatemala should increase security 
measures to protect judges and prosecutors.  Cocaine seizures 
should return to CY2000 levels, which averaged 800 kilos or 
more per month, with a significant seizure at ports of entry 
at least every two months. 
 
3.   Inventory and Destroy All Drugs Seized before 1999 and 
Increase Warehouse Security: Destroy all seized drugs not 
needed for evidence by April 30th, and develop and implement 
security measures for drug warehouses. Establish clear 
procedures for chain of custody, evidence handling, and drug 
destruction. 
 
4.   Sign the Counter-narcotics Bilateral Maritime Agreement 
with the U.S.: Guatemala should negotiate and sign a 
counter-narcotics bilateral maritime agreement with the USG. 
 
5.   Search Warrants: Guatemala should develop a mechanism 
that ensures that narcotics search warrants are issued in a 
timely and secure fashion. 
 
6.   Successful Completion of Extradition Requests: Guatemala 
should fully process all pending U.S. extradition requests. 
Over the coming year, the Government of Guatemala  should 
cooperate in identifying procedures to expedite extradition 
requests. 
 
7.   Successful Promulgation and Implementation of 
Regulations on Precursor Chemicals: Guatemala should 
promulgate the implementing regulations that are required by 
the precursor chemical law of 1999. 
 
8.   Seized Assets and Forfeited/Undeclared Cash: Guatemala 
should adopt and implement legislative and/or procedural 
reforms for seizing and utilizing in an efficient manner all 
assets of criminals acquired through criminal activity, and 
assign these assets to strengthen the Judiciary, the Public 
Ministry, and the Police, who are battling narco-trafficking 
and organized crime. Special emphasis should be placed on 
transferring seized cash into law-enforcement programs. 
 
9.   Money Laundering Efforts: Guatemala\'s money laundering 
legislation is the best weapon in the fight against 
corruption and organized crime. Guatemala should assign 
sufficient personnel who are qualified to the Money 
Laundering Prosecutor\'s Office and will make every effort to 
take cases to trial. The Financial Investigations Unit 
(IVE), that is part of the Superintendent of Banks (SIB), 
should share information with the Prosecutor\'s office in 
conformance with the Guatemalan money laundering law. These 
efforts will contribute to Guatemala coming off the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF) list of non-cooperating countries in 
anti-money laundering efforts.  Guatemala should take all 
necessary steps to improve inter-institutional cooperation 
that will allow for more effective compliance with the money 
laundering law. 
 
The efforts of U.S. and Guatemalan governments can do much to 
reduce the threat of drug addiction to the youth of the two 
countries.  The Government of the United States looks forward 
to continued discussions with the Government of Guatemala on 
strengthening counter-narcotics cooperation. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America takes the 
opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
the Government of Guatemala the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
Embassy of the United States of America, Guatemala City, 
March 21, 2003. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6790","3/25/2003 22:36","03GUATEMALA783","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE75379","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000783 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PARIS FOR U.S. UNESCO OBSERVER MISSION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, AORC, GT, FR, UNESCO 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO GOG ON U.S. INTENTION TO 
REJOIN UNESCO 
 
REF: A. STATE 75379 
 
     B. STATE 54900 
 
1. (SBU) Polcouns delivered talking points (reftels) on the 
USG\'s intention to rejoin UNESCO and our candidacy for the 
Executive Board to the MFA Director General for Multilateral 
Affairs Giovanni Castillo on March 25.  Castillo said that 
Guatemala welcomed the USG decision to rejoin UNESCO, and 
said that the GOG could understand the USG\'s interest in 
being on the Executive Board in view of the substantial 
financial contribution the USG would be making to UNESCO\'s 
budget.  He promised to inform us as soon as the GOG has a 
position on the U.S. candidacy. 
 
2. (SBU) Castillo also informed us that the GOG is 
considering proposing a candidate for the UNESCO Executive 
Board, current Minister of Culture Otilia Lux. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6791","3/25/2003 22:38","03GUATEMALA784","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE75175","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, CU, GT, UNHRC-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA RESPONSE TO CUBAN CRACKDOWN AGAINST 
OPPOSITION 
 
REF: A. STATE 75175 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 770 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) In a March 22 meeting with President Alfonso Portillo, 
the Ambassador raised USG concerns (Ref A) over the Cuban 
crackdown against the opposition.  As noted in Ref B, 
Portillo acknowledged that the arrests carried out by the 
Cuban Government were worrisome, but stopped short of 
committing the GOG to issuing a public statement condemning 
the arrests. 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador raised the matter again with Vice 
President Francisco Reyes Lopez on March 25, noting that 
failure by the international community to condemn these 
arrests would undermine those who are trying to bring about 
peaceful democratic change in Cuba.  The Ambassador added 
that the dissidents, who were simply exercising rights that 
all other inhabitants of the hemisphere have, look to the UN 
Commission on Human Rights as a forum where the international 
community calls on the Cuban Government to respect their 
basic human rights.  Failure by Guatemala to vote for a 
resolution calling on the Cuban Government to respect basic 
human rights, especially in view of the recent wave of 
arrests, would be a severe blow to these individuals who are 
paying for their defense of human rights with incarceration. 
The Ambassador asked the Vice President what arguments 
opponents of this resolution could possibly have to oppose a 
call on the Cuban Government to respect basic human rights. 
Vice President Reyes dodged the question and blamed \"the 
Congress\" for opposition to Guatemala voting with us in favor 
of a Cuba resolution.  He said, however, that no decision had 
been made regarding the vote, and did not rule out that the 
recent wave of arrests would be weighed at the moment 
Guatemala decided on its vote. 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador was to deliver the talking points to 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez on March 25, but the Foreign 
Minister canceled the meeting due to illness.  In his stead, 
the Ambassador spoke with Vice Foreign Minister Jorge Perez 
and raised the same concerns.  Perez promised to relay our 
views to the Foreign Minister and inform us of any response. 
 
4. (C) PolCouns met with MFA Director of Multilateral Affairs 
Giovanni Castillo on March 25 to deliver Ref A demarche and 
talking points.  Castillo said the GOG was aware of the 
arrest of dissidents by the Cuban regime, and said he would 
forward to the Foreign Minister our request for the GOG to 
make a public statement in support of the dissidents.  He 
asked if other countries in the hemisphere had made 
statements.  Castillo said he would inform us of any decision 
by the GOG in this regard. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6793","3/25/2003 23:19","03GUATEMALA786","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE76597","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000786 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2013 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, IZ, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN RESPONSE TO BLOCKING ARAB EFFORTS AT UN 
ON IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 76597 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) In the absence from the country of President Portillo, 
and the absence from the office of Foreign Minister Gutierrez 
(due to illness), the Ambassador spoke with Vice Foreign 
Minister Jorge Perez on March 25 and relayed reftel request 
that the GOG oppose any effort to convoke a special General 
Assembly session on Iraq.  Perez said he was not familiar 
with the issue but promised to raise it immediately with 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez.  He promised to inform us of the 
GOG\'s views as soon as he was able to get a response from the 
Minister.  At COB he called to say that the GOG would oppose 
a special session of the UNGA, and that if there were a 
special open session of the UNSC, Guatemala would speak in 
support of the U.S. 
 
2. (C) On a parallel track, PolOff spoke with Marco Tulio 
Chicas, Deputy Director of Multilateral Affairs at the MFA on 
March 25 and conveyed the same points.  Chicas promised to 
advise the Minister and Guatemala\'s permanent mission at the 
UN. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6867","3/27/2003 14:15","03GUATEMALA802","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE77740","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000802 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, IZ, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA DEMARCHED ON SECURITY COUNCIL OPEN 
SESSION ON IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 77740 
 
1. (SBU) The Embassy raised reftel talking points with MFA 
Deputy Director General for Multilateral Affairs Marco Tulio 
Chicas, in the absence of more senior officials.  Chicas took 
note of our concerns and promised to immediately relay our 
points to the Guatemalan PermRep in New York. 
 
2. (SBU) The Ambassador subsequently urged Guatemalan 
participation in the UNSC open session on Iraq.  Vice 
Minister Perez confirmed that Guatemala will speak in support 
of US/UK.  Guatemala is number 42 on the list of speakers. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6868","3/27/2003 14:16","03GUATEMALA803","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GENEVA979","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/26/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, IZ, GT, UNHCR-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL OPPOSE SPECIAL SITTING ON IRAQ 
 
REF: GENEVA 979 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) DCM McFarland called Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Jorge Perez on March 26 to reconfirm the GOG\'s commitment of 
March 25 to vote against a special sitting on Iraq at the 
59th Session of the UN Commission on Human Rights.  DCM noted 
that the Guatemalan Mission in Geneva had informed our 
mission that they did not have instructions on this vote. 
Perez said he had personally called their Ambassador in 
Geneva on March 26 to isntruct him to support the U.S. 
position.  Perez said he had reconfirmed this approach with 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez. 
 
2. (C) PolCouns carried out a parallel demarche on MFA 
Multilateral Affairs Director Giovanni Castillo on March 26. 
Castillo said that he would call the Guatemalan Mission in 
Geneva to ensure that they have Perez\'s instructions to 
oppose a special sitting on Iraq. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment:  We suggest the US Mission in Geneva 
confirm with the Guatemalan Mission that they do in fact have 
such instructions. 
HAMILTON 
"
"6985","3/31/2003 16:40","03GUATEMALA836","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE39114","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000836 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/B, L, T, P, D, IO, S/WCI, S/P, CWG/PM, 
PM/AT, WHA, OSD/ISP/NP LOOK AND DOD/OGC ALLEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DCL: 03/29/2013 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, KTIA, GT, KICC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN COUNTERPROPOSAL FOR ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 39114 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Robert E. Copley for reason 15. (b). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request: see paragraph 3. 
 
2. (C) Summary: The Guatemalan MFA has proposed 
an Article 98 Agreement that contains three 
additions to the modified text in reftel.  The 
additions consist of making reference to UNSCR 
1422 (the one-year exemption from the ICC for 
UN Peacekeepers), adding a requirement for each 
party to investigate and prosecute its own 
officials, and providing that the parties may 
cooperate with and provide evidence in 
investigations conducted by international 
tribunals, even against individuals protected 
from extradition by the agreement.  Our 
unofficial English translation of the 
counterproposal is at paragraph 4.  The 
Guatemalan proposal in Spanish is at paragraph 
5.  End Summary. 
 
3. (C) Action Request:  Post requests 
Department\'s review of the three additions 
proposed by Guatemala and an official U.S. 
response. 
 
4. (C) Begin unofficial English translation: 
Agreement between the Government of the United 
States of America and the Government of 
Guatemala regarding the Surrender of Persons to 
International Tribunals 
 
The Government of the United States of America and the 
Government of Guatemala, hereinafter \"the Parties,\" 
 
Reaffirming the importance of bringing to justice those who 
commit genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, 
 
Considering that the Parties have each expressed their 
intention to, where appropriate, investigate and prosecute 
war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide alleged to 
have been committed by their respective officials, 
employees, military personnel, and nationals, 
 
Taking into account Resolution 1422 (2002) issued on July 
12, 2002, by the Security Council of the United Nations, 
 
Hereby agree as follows: 
 
1. For purposes of this agreement, \"persons\" are current or 
former Government officials, employees (including 
contractors), or military personnel or nationals of one 
Party. 
 
2. Persons of one Party present in the territory of the 
other shall not, absent the expressed consent of the first 
Party, 
 
(a) be surrendered or transferred by any means to any 
international tribunal for any purpose, unless such tribunal 
is established by the UN Security Council, or 
 
(b) be surrendered or transferred by any means to any other 
entity or third country, or expelled to a third country, for 
the purpose of surrender to or transfer to any international 
tribunal, unless such tribunal has been established by the 
UN Security Council. 
 
3. Both Parties commit to investigate and, to prosecute, if 
appropriate, those presumed responsible, in the exercise of 
the internal jurisdiction of each of the Parties. 
 
4. Nothing established in this Agreement will impede the 
Parties from collaborating in an investigation by any 
international tribunal or from providing such evidence as 
may be in its power, even if these were solicited within a 
process initiated against one of the \"persons\" referred to 
in this agreement. 
 
5. When the United States extradites, surrenders, or 
otherwise transfers a person of the other Party to a third 
country, the United States will not agree to the surrender 
or transfer of that person by the third country to any 
international tribunal, unless such tribunal is established 
by the UN Security Council absent the express consent of the 
Government of Guatemala. 
 
6. When the Government of Guatemala extradites, surrenders, 
or otherwise transfers a person of the United States of 
America to a third country, the Government of Guatemala will 
not agree to the surrender or transfer of that person by the 
third country to any international tribunal, unless such 
tribunal is authorized or established by the UN Security 
Council, absent the express consent of the Government of the 
United States. 
7. Each Party agrees, subject to its international legal 
obligations, not to knowingly facilitate, consent to, or 
cooperate with efforts by any third party or country to 
effect the extradition, surrender, or transfer of a person 
of the other Party to any international tribunal, unless 
such tribunal has been authorized or established by the UN 
Security Council. 
 
This Agreement shall enter into force upon an exchange of 
notes confirming that each Party has completed the necessary 
domestic legal requirements to bring the Agreement into 
force.  The present Agreement will remain in force until one 
year after the date on which one Party notifies the other of 
its intent to terminate this Agreement. The provisions of 
this Agreement shall continue to apply with respect to any 
act occurring, or any allegation arising, before the 
effective date of termination. 
 
 
 
Done at (         ) on the (    ) day of (         ), 2003. 
 
 
 
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF               FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA        GUATEMALA 
 
End Unofficial English Translation. 
 
5. (C) Begin Original Spanish text: ACUERDO ENTRE EL 
GOBIERNO DE LOS ESTADOS UNIDOS DE AMERICA Y EL GOBIERNO DE 
LA REPUBLICA DE GUATEMALA RESPECTO A LA ENTREGA DE PERSONAS 
A LOS TRIBUNALES INTERNACIONALES 
 
 
El Gobierno de los Estados Unidos de America y el Gobierno 
de la Republica de Guatemala, en lo sucesivo \"las Partes\", 
 
Reafirmando la importancia de enjuiciar a los culpables de 
genocidio, delitos de lesa humanidad y crimenes de guerra, 
 
Considerando que cada una de las Partes ha expresado su 
intencion de investigar y enjuiciar, cuando sea oportuno, 
los crimenes de guerra, delitos de lesa humanidad, y 
genocidio supuestamente cometidos por sus funcionarios, 
empleados, personal militar u otros nacionales respectivos, 
 
Tomando en cuenta, la Resolucion 1422 (2002) emitida el 12 
de julio de 2002 por el Consejo de Seguridad de las Naciones 
Unidas, 
 
Por el presente, acuerdan lo siguiente: 
 
1.  A los efectos del presente acuerdo, por \"personas\", se 
entiende los funcionarios publicos, empleados (incluidos los 
contratistas), el personal militar o los nacionales de una 
Parte, actuales o antiguos, 
 
2.  Las personas de una Parte presentes en el territorio de 
la otra no seran, salvo con el consentimiento expreso de la 
primera Parte, 
 
a)  entregadas ni trasladadas por ningun medio a ningun 
tribunal internacional, para ningun proposito, a menos que 
tal corte sea establecida por el Consejo de Seguridad de la 
ONU, ni 
 
b)  entregadas ni trasladadas por ningun medio a ninguna 
entidad ni a un tercer pais, ni expulsadas a un tercer pais 
con el proposito de entregarlas o trasladarlas a ningun 
tribunal internacional, a menos que tal corte haya sido 
establecida por el Consejo de Seguridad de la ONU. 
 
3.  Ambas Partes se comprometen a investigar y, si ha lugar 
a la formacion de causa, enjuiciar a los presuntos 
responsables, en ejercicio de la jurisdicion interna de cada 
una de las Partes. 
 
4. Nada de lo establecido en el Acuerdo impedira que las 
Partes colaboren en la investigacion que realice cualquier 
tribunal internacional o que proporcionen las evidencias que 
se hallaren en su poder, aun si estas fueren solicitadas 
dentro de un proceso iniciado en contra de alguna de las 
personas a que se refiere el presente Acuerdo. 
5. Cuando los Estados Unidos extradite, entregue o, de otra 
forma, traslade a una persona de la otra Parte a un tercer 
pais, los Estados Unidos no convendra en que el tercer pais 
la entregue o traslade a ningun tribunal internacional, a 
menos que tal corte sea establecida por el Consejo de 
Seguridad de la ONU, salvo con el consentimiento expreso del 
Gobierno de Guatemala. 
6.  Cuando el Gobierno de Guatemala extradite, entregue o, 
de otra forma, traslade a una persona de los Estados Unidos 
de America a un tercer pais, el Gobierno de Guatemala no 
convendra en entregarla ni trasladarla a ningun tribunal 
internacional, a menos que tal Corte sea autorizada o 
establecida por el Consejo de Seguridad de la ONU, salvo con 
el consentimiento expreso de Gobierno de los Estados Unidos. 
 
7.  De acuerdo a sus obligaciones juridicas internacionales, 
cada Parte conviene en que, a sabiendas, no facilitar las 
gestiones de ningun tercer pais o Parte, ni consentir o 
cooperar respecto a las mismas para que se extradite, 
entregue o traslade a una persona de la otra Parte a ningun 
tribunal internacional, a menos que tal corte haya sido 
autorizado o establecido por el Consejo de Seguridad de la 
ONU. 
 
El presente acuerdo entrara en vigor mediante un canje de 
notas que confirmen que cada Parte ha cumplido con los 
requisitos legales nacionales necesarios para su entrada en 
vigor.  El presente acuerdo permanecera vigente hasta un ano 
despues de la fecha en que una de las Partes notifique a la 
otra su intencion de derogarlo.  Las disposiciones del 
presente acuerdo seguiran en vigor con respecto a todo acto 
que ocurra, o toda queja que surja, antes de la fecha de 
vigencia de la derogacion. 
 
Hecho en ____ el dia ____de 2003. 
 
 
 
 
Por el Gobierno de los Estados Unidos de America 
 
Por el Gobierno de la Republica de Guatemala 
 
End Original Spanish Text. 
"
"7084","4/3/2003 15:14","03GUATEMALA871","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE84320","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL, GT, IZ, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL OPPOSE GENERAL ASSEMBLY MEETING ON 
IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 84320 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador spoke with Foreign Minister Edgar 
Gutierrez on April 2 and raised reftel talking points, 
requesting that the GOG oppose ongoing efforts to convene a 
special UN General Assembly on Iraq.  Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez said that the GOG agrees with the USG position 
that debate of this issue should be held at the Security 
Council and not at a special UNGA.  He said that he would 
instruct GOG Ambassador Rosenthal to oppose any initiative 
to convene a special UNGA on Iraq. 
 
2. (C) PolCouns followed up by speaking with the acting 
head of Multilateral Affairs at the MFA to relay the same 
message.  They promised to seek guidance from the Foreign 
Minister and inform the GOG Mission in New York. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7085","4/3/2003 15:14","03GUATEMALA873","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE84179","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000873 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PARIS FOR US OBSERVER MISSION TO UNESCO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL, AORC, GT, IZ, UNESCO 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL OPPOSE UNESCO DEBATE ON IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 84179 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador called Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez 
on April 2 and relayed reftel talking points, urging the 
GOG to oppose attempts at the UNESCO Executive Board 
meeting to add to the agenda an item on Irak.  Foreign 
Minister Gutierrez said that, like us, the GOG opposed 
UNESCO discussion of Irak, and said he would so instruct 
the GOG mission in Paris. 
 
2. (C) PolCouns follwed up by speaking with the acting head 
of Multilateral Affairs at the MFA to relay the same 
message.  They promised to seek guidance from the Foreign 
Minister and inform the GOG Mission in Paris. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7092","4/3/2003 16:48","03GUATEMALA884","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA834","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000884 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, CASC, SNAR, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S MEETING WITH MINISTER OF GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 834 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 781 
     C. GUATEMALA 770 
     D. GUATEMALA 735 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton.  Reason 1.5 (B&D). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  Ambassador Hamilton met with Minister of 
Government Jose Adolfo Reyes Calderon March 31 to express 
concern about a recent case involving torture by security 
forces in an anti-narcotics raid in Zacapa.  The Ambassador 
also raised the murder of an American citizen on March 28, 
threats against USAID contractors, and property destruction 
by squatters at a ranch owned by AmCits in Alta Verapaz 
province.  Reyes Calderon implied that he suspected that the 
military was responsible for any use of torture in the Zacapa 
case and claimed to have recently reiterated his absolute 
rejection the use of torture to police and the anti-narcotics 
squad; said he believed ex-guerilla forces turned criminal 
were responsible for the murder of AmCit Edward Todd Fields; 
pledged to provide police protection requested by the 
Forensic Anthropology Foundation; and promised to act on the 
allegations of illegal entry and destruction of AmCit 
property by squatters in Alta Verapaz.  We will continue to 
monitor the progress of all these cases.  End Summary. 
 
Torture Case 
------------ 
 
2.  (C) RefTel D reports the circumstances of a 179 kg. 
seizure of cocaine and ephedrine (later confirmed as 
caffeine) from a ranch in Rio Hondo, Zacapa province, as 
reported to Embassy NAS by the Guatemalan Counter-Narcotics 
Police (SAIA).  Ref C reports the Ambassador\'s warning to 
President Portillo that information verified by MINUGUA 
indicating the use of torture to extract information from 
three of five trafficking suspects in this case was 
unacceptable and could severely prejudice Guatemala\'s 
prospects for counter-narcotics recertification.  Per RefTel 
B, according to MINUGUA, the victims were tortured by persons 
wearing National Civil Police and SAIA uniforms.  Unofficial 
Embassy law enforcement contacts have told us that the 
operation involved military operatives disguised as civilian 
police.  Our sources allege that drugs were planted on the 
three suspects before the larger seizure at the ranch, and 
that the military reported only half the total seizure. 
 
3.  (C) The Ambassador told Reyes Calderon that the use of 
torture in this or any case is unacceptable.  He informed 
Reyes Calderon of his earlier demarche to the President, and 
warned that the violation of human rights in any 
counter-narcotics cases would severely undermine any progress 
toward recertification.  \"We do not want to win the drug war 
this way,\" he said.  Reyes Calderon acknowledged and agreed 
with these concerns.  Reyes Calderon said that he had arrived 
by helicopter on the scene after the arrests were made.  He 
hinted that the military, not the policemen or SAIA agents 
present, were responsible if any human rights violations were 
committed in that operation, which he implied was organized 
(rather than simply supported) by the military.  The 
Ambassador asked if Reyes Calderon had spoken with Minister 
of Defense Moran about his suspicions.  Reyes Calderon said 
he had raised the case with Moran without making any 
accusations, and had been told by Moran that the head of the 
military intelligence unit (D-2) was being replaced 
(presumably for complicity in this case).  The Ambassador 
told Reyes Calderon that the Embassy is aware of the D-2 
chief\'s ouster and understands that his removal was for 
reasons that predated this incident.  Reyes Calderon agreed 
that any similar cases must be prevented, said he had made 
Ministry policy against the use of torture abundantly clear 
to his subordinates in the wake of this case, and said he 
would raise this case in a Cabinet meeting later that day. 
 
AmCit Murder 
------------ 
 
4.  (U) The Ambassador also raised with Reyes Calderon the 
brazen murder on March 28 of U.S. citizen Edward Todd Fields 
on the main highway to a popular tourist destination, 
reported in Ref A.  The Ambassador told Reyes Calderon that 
the Embassy was considering advising all Americans to avoid 
travel by road to Lake Atitlan.  He urged the minister to 
make every effort to catch those responsible for this 
outrageous crime, and pointed out that he passed by the same 
route an hour before the victim, and saw only one police 
cruiser on the road during his 100-mile trip on Guatemala\'s 
principal highway.  Reyes Calderon said he believed that 
members of the former guerrilla Organization of the People in 
Arms (ORPA) to be responsible for the murder and said the 
police will beef up patrols along the route immediately.  He 
acknowledged the importance of this case and the vital 
economic importance of security along major tourist routes. 
(Comment:  It is not clear why Reyes blamed ex-ORPA members 
for the killing, other than to give the impression that the 
government had some leads.  In a meeting the next day, 
National Police (PNC) Director Manchame also said the police 
suspect ex-ORPA elements.  End Comment.) 
FAFG Threats 
------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) The Ambassador then raised the case of recent 
threats against family members of workers at the Forensic 
Anthropology Institute (FAFG), the USAID-contracted NGO 
performing exhumations of massacres during the internal 
conflict.  Reyes Calderon said he was familiar with the 
group, its prior experience receiving threats, and the 
ministry\'s provision of special protection, voluntarily 
relinquished by FAFG after a period of concern in 2002.  The 
Ambassador provided Reyes Calderon with a request from FAFG 
for police security for five homes and the assignment of 
security agents to three individuals, including FAFG Director 
Fredy Peccerelli and his sister Bianka, who was recently 
accosted by armed men.  Reyes Calderon reviewed the list and 
agreed to provide the protection requested. 
 
Alta Verapaz Land Dispute 
------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Finally, the Ambassador raised the troubling case 
of the Ardebol family, U.S. citizens of Spanish origin whose 
ranches have been occupied by landless peasants in Alta 
Verapaz.  Carlos Ardebol, the owner of a ranch located in 
Coban district, has for several weeks been prevented by 
squatters from entering his home at the \"Esmeralda\" ranch for 
fear of attack by the squatters.  Ardebol, who has been in 
touch with the Embassy and GOG authorities about the land 
occupation, has relocated his family to the capital, but 
recently learned that squatters organized by the National 
Coordination of Campesino Organizations (CONIC) have 
destroyed personal property left behind.  The Ambassador told 
Reyes Calderon that Mr. Ardebol was willing to engage in 
dialogue with the squatters and their representatives.  The 
recent criminal destruction of property, which Ardebol has 
denounced to legal authorities, violates the law and the 
spirit of dialogue to which he had been committed.  Reyes 
Calderon said that police action in this case would be prompt 
if sanctioned by legal authorities. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (C) Reyes Calderon appeared nervous during this meeting 
requested by the Ambassador, and was quick to agree to all 
the Ambassador\'s requests.  The Ambassador has scheduled a 
meeting with Minister of Defense Moran to repeat our concerns 
about the alleged use of torture in counter-narcotics 
operations.  MINUGUA has told us it will decide when to go 
public with its findings sometime this week.  We will 
continue to follow GOG action on these cases closely. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7093","4/3/2003 16:48","03GUATEMALA886","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000886 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO A/LM/AQM/IT/COM FOR MARY DIXON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: DELIVERY OF SECURE PROCUREMENT 
TAGS: ASUP, AMGT, KSLG 
SUBJECT: SECURE PROCUREMENT FOR CAA 
 
REF: HALL/DIXON EMAILS 
 
Classified By: GSO, Sarah Hall for reason 1. 5 (b) 
 
1. (C) Please send by classified pouch the following 
equipment for the CAA in Embassy Guatemala: 
 
Brother ML300 Typewriter 
Estimated Cost: $180.00 
Fiscal Data: 19 30113 4122 4122331320 2140 3121 
POC: Sarah Hall, GSO 
 
2. Post appreciates department assistance with this matter. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7094","4/3/2003 16:53","03GUATEMALA890","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000890 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, ASEC, IZ, CU, GT 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY DISCUSSES IRAQ AND CUBA WITH HUMAN RIGHTS 
LEADERS 
 
 
1. Summary:  Embassy and USAID Officers met with Guatemalan 
human rights leaders Frank LaRue, Claudia Samayoa and Orlando 
Blanco on April 2 to discuss developments in the 
establishment of CICIACS (septel) and to express Embassy 
disappointment with the participation of members of their 
organizations in a March 27 flag burning in front of the 
Embassy, and their total silence in response to the arrests 
of human rights leaders, journalists and opposition spokesmen 
in Havana.  The human rights leaders took note of our 
concerns, acknowledged that flag burning was inappropriate 
and were non-committal on defending their Cuban brothers. 
End summary. 
 
2.  On March 27 a group of 40-50 demonstrators, carrying 
banners and flags from the major human rights organizations, 
protested in front of the Embassy.  Among other things, they 
burned an American flag and threw red paint on the Embassy 
building.  Banners of the \"Rigoberta Menchu\" Foundation and 
\"GAM\" flanked the spot where an unknown woman placed a U.S. 
flag, soaked it in a liquid and set it on fire.  The banner 
of the CALDH human rights group was on a pickup truck a few 
yards back (the pickup had the sound system and was used to 
block traffic). 
 
3.  At an April 2 meeting with leaders of the major human 
rights organizations, PolCouns told them, on instruction from 
the Ambassador, that the Embassy strongly defended their 
right to disagree with us in public and to participate in 
protests against U.S. policies they did not agree with. 
However, we view the American flag as a symbol of all 
Americans, not just the government, and we were all offended 
that our friends in the human rights community should choose 
this means of expressing their opposition to USG policies. 
Furthermore, we had received calls from members of the 
American community in Guatemala -- who are also supporters of 
the human rights groups -- who were outraged that these 
groups were burning our flag in front of the Embassy at a 
time when our troops are laying their lives on the line on 
the sands of Iraq.  PolCouns commented that perhaps for 
Guatemalans the desecration of their national symbols did not 
have the same seriousness Americans attached to such acts. 
Orlando Blanco responded that, indeed, national symbols are 
also important to Guatemalans and they can understand our 
reaction.  DCM and Ambassador reiterated our concerns to 
LaRue at an April 2 reception.  The GAM and Rigoberta Menchu 
Foundation were not present at the April 2 meeting at the 
Embassy. 
 
4. Frank LaRue responded with a defense of the human rights 
organizations\' opposition to hostilities in Iraq, and said he 
was unaware that his organization (CALDH) had been present 
with the organization\'s banners and flags.  He said that 
members of CALDH were authorized to protest, but argued that 
he had not authorized their participation as representatives 
of the CALDH.  When he asked the other human rights leaders 
who had organized the protest, Claudia Samayoa said that 
LaRue\'s organization (the CALDH) had provided the sound truck 
and the mime.  The other leaders similarly argued against the 
war, but acknowledged that burning the flag had been \"in poor 
taste.\"  They promised to urge members of their organizations 
to not deface national symbols or to protest in ways that 
were offensive to all Americans. 
 
5.  PolCouns then noted, again on instruction from the 
Ambassador, that many governments around the world were 
expressing public concern over the recent arrest by Cuban 
authorities of a large number of human rights workers, 
journalists and those in opposition to the Castro regime, and 
told the human rights leaders that we were surprised by their 
public silence on this matter.  The human rights leaders 
responded that the Cuban situation is \"complicated by 
political factors, including the U.S. embargo,\" and they had 
decided to avoid the controversy altogether by not commenting 
publicly one way or the other.  We noted that the human 
rights situation in Guatemala is also complicated by many 
political factors, but that had not stopped the USG from 
making the defense of threatened human rights workers in 
Guatemala our highest mission priority.  We explained that we 
view human rights workers as a special category of people, 
who because of the risks inherent in their work, require from 
all of us special attention and protection, irrespective of 
\"political complications.\"  That was why the USG has invested 
so much political capital in drawing attention to the need to 
provide better security guarantees for human rights workers 
in Guatemala.  We told them that we hoped they would consider 
providing moral support to their Cuban counterparts.  The 
human rights leaders were non-committal. 
 
6. Comment: The meeting was not confrontational, but laid out 
clearly our rejection that the human rights community would 
express their disagreement with our policies by burning our 
flag and throwing paint on the Embassy building.  It also 
conveyed our disappointment at their inaction to stand up for 
human rights workers imprisoned by the Cuban regime.  At no 
point was there a suggestion that this disappointment would 
affect our joint programs, and the rest of the meeting 
focused on how we can work together to support the CICIACS 
proposal.  But it planted a flag that among friends we must 
disagree without gratuitously causing offense. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7197","4/7/2003 15:44","03GUATEMALA916","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA705","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000916 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT RECEIVES LIMITED PRESS COVERAGE 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 705 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 683 
 
1. (U) Summary: Upon public release of the 2002 Human Rights 
Report (HRR) on March 31, Embassy issued a press statement 
from the Ambassador highlighting the USG human rights 
concerns in Guatemala and areas where we believe improvements 
can made.  However, neither the report nor the Ambassador\'s 
statement received much public attention, as the recurring 
theme of the human rights situation was overshadowed by the 
war in Iraq and breaking political scandals.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The Ambassador\'s statement reiterated USG concern over 
the human rights situation and expressed hope for improvement 
with the creation of CICIACS (Ref A).  Only one daily 
newspaper, Prensa Libre, reported the release of the HRR and 
the Ambassador\'s statement.  No radio programs covered the 
report\'s release.  All press attention focused on the war in 
Iraq and the latest Guatemalan scandal, that of the duel 
between Attorney General Carlos de Leon and former 
Anti-Corruption Prosecutor, Karen Fischer. (Ref B) 
 
3. (U) Immediately after the public release in Washington, 
HROff and PolOff delivered a copy of the report to Sara 
Solis, Director of Bilateral Affairs, and Mario Cifuentes, 
Senior Assistant to the Minister, at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.  HROff also circulated the report amongst human 
rights contacts.  All recipients thanked HROff for the 
detailed report and said they anxiously await translation, 
which post expects to have completed with the next two weeks. 
 
4. (U) Comment: Domestic scandals in an election year and a 
controversial foreign war crowded out news of the HRR\'s 
release this year.  In addition, USG concern over the human 
rights situation here in Guatemala is common knowledge, and 
thus not particularly newsworthy.  Once we have a Spanish 
translation, we will consider new PD opportunities to advance 
our human rights agenda.  At a meeting April 3, however, 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez said he had read the report in its 
entirety.  He appeared to find it balanced and objective. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7204","4/7/2003 22:06","03GUATEMALA927","Embassy Guatemala","SECRET","03GUATEMALA770|03GUATEMALA801|03GUATEMALA884","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","S E C R E T GUATEMALA 000927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR DAVID WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/03/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MOPS, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR PRESSES TORTURE CASE WITH MINISTER OF 
DEFENSE MORAN 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 770 
     B. GUATEMALA 884 
     C. GUATEMALA 801 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Ambassador called on Minister of Defense 
Robin Moran on April 3 to emphasize that resorting to illegal 
detention and torture as appears to have occurred in the 
March 6 drug seizure in Rio Hondo, Zacapa is totally 
unacceptable.  Moran clearly understood that these methods 
put Guatemala\'s recertification at risk.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C)  Following up on similar calls on President Portillo 
(ref A) and the Minister of Interior (ref B), the Ambassador 
made clear to Moran that attempting to fight drugs in this 
way is not only counter-productive, it is wrong on every 
count.  Such methods are unnecessary and hugely prejudicial 
to the GOG\'s efforts to be certified as a fully cooperating 
partner on drugs.  The Ambassador reminded Moran that similar 
(albeit, more serious) abuses last year by the former 
anti-narcotics police (DOAN) in the Chocon case were a major 
reason for decertification as well as the Embassy\'s decision 
to severely restrict its assistance to the DOAN. 
 
3. (S)  The Ambassador told Moran that there were strong 
allegations that the military (as opposed to police) were 
responsible for the abuses.  He added that the personnel 
involved appear to have planted drugs on the three people 
detained and that, too, is totally unacceptable. 
 
4. (C) Moran, who had clearly anticipated the purpose of the 
Ambassador\'s visit, started to make a lame defense, but 
decided better to drop it.  Moran said that he had already 
given strict orders limiting the military\'s role in the 
counter-narcotics effort to providing transportation to 
police and prosecutors and to providing perimeter security 
when an operation is mounted. 
 
5. (C) Comment: Moran seemed to clearly understand that the 
abusive methods evidenced in the Zacapa seizure put 
recertification at risk.  If not for the Zacapa incident, 
Moran might have hoped for congratulations from the 
Ambassador due to recent successes involving effective 
military support for counter-narcotics police operations (ref 
C) that demonstrate the type of results possible with proper 
cooperation.  Instead, the Ambassador treated Moran to a 
close inspection of the military\'s black-eye over this 
incident. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7224","4/8/2003 13:46","03GUATEMALA929","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA890|03STATE77340","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT, UN, OAS 
SUBJECT: NGOS UPBEAT ON CICIACS DEVELOPMENTS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 890 
     B. STATE 77340 
 
1. (U) Summary: Embassy officers met with human rights 
activists Frank LaRue, Claudia Samayoa, and Orlando Blanco on 
April 2 to discuss both the recent protest by human rights 
groups in front of the Embassy and their silence on Cuban 
dissident jailing (Ref A), as well as steps that the Embassy 
can take to help the NGOs move the Commission to Investigate 
Illegal Bodies and the Clandestine Security Apparatus 
(CICIACS) proposal forward.  Embassy officers offered 
technical expertise to help NGOs analyze investigative models 
of possible use to the CICIACS.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On April 2, representatives from POL, NAS, ICITAP, 
AID, and RSO met with human rights activists to address 
questions emerging from DAS Fisk\'s meeting with Jose Miguel 
Vivanco (Ref B), and to demonstrate our continuing moral and 
technical support for the NGOs as they push the formation of 
the CICIACS forward.  We discussed the commission set-up, the 
NGO\'s latest dealings with the GOG, the budget progress, the 
commission candidates, and further steps for Embassy-NGO 
collaboration. 
 
From Here to September: A Cloudy Process 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) According to LaRue (and confirmed to us by the MFA), 
the GOG has appointed former Ambassador to the Court of St. 
James, Maritza Ruiz de Vielman to handle GOG negotiations 
with the UN and the OAS for the creation of the CICIACS. 
Ruiz de Vielman drafted an initial agreement in which the GOG 
would establish the CICIACS under the Secretary of Peace 
(SEPAZ), a domestic institution in which the NGOs have little 
confidence.  The Human Rights Ombudsman communicated with FM 
Gutierrez to say that the NGOs were not supportive of that 
idea and that the CICIACS had to be set up as an 
international commission for the NGOs and the international 
community to support it.  Gutierrez reportedly agreed, saying 
that Ruiz de Vielman misunderstood the March 13 agreement 
from which she drew her proposal, and that the GOG also wants 
an international commission.  To that end, Gutierrez sent 
Ruiz de Vielman to New York on April 1, to lobby the UN and 
start the official exchange of letters. 
 
4. (U) As NGOs understand the situation, the GOG and the UN 
and OAS will now exchange letters proposing a joint 
commission, and this series of agreements will then be 
submitted to Congress for ratification.  The NGOs have heard 
that commissions of this size need only the approval of the 
Secretaries General of the UN and OAS, and need not be 
 
SIPDIS 
submitted to these organizations\' general assemblies.  The 
NGO representatives also told us that they have heard that 
both UN SecGen Annan and OAS SecGen Gaviria are already on 
board in support of CICIACS. 
 
Budget Progress 
--------------- 
 
5. (U) The NGOs have delayed further work on the CICIACS 
budget, instead choosing to focus their energies on the 
set-up of the commission.  Once the UN and the OAS have 
confirmed their involvement, and agreed on the scope, 
mandate, and timing of the CICIACS, the NGOs hope that these 
organizations will provide fiscal experts to help them 
develop a realistic budget. 
 
Commission Candidates 
--------------------- 
 
6. (U) Human rights activists Nery Rodenas and Orlando Blanco 
are traveling to the UN and the OAS on April 9 to present 
their ideas for candidates for the commission and to solicit 
feedback.  Frank LaRue told DCM and PolOffs that their top 
choices currently are Peruvians Jose Ugaz and Gino Costa. 
LaRue separately told the Ambassador that they were also 
considering Guatemalan Ramon Cadena, whom the Attorney 
General said was his choice to replace Tatiana Morales as 
Human Rights Prosecutor in the Public Ministry. (Note: LaRue 
doubted that Cadena would accept a job offer from De Leon. 
End Note.) 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
7. (U) The NGOs have items that they would like to discuss 
with Embassy experts in the future.  Many of them have to do 
with the role of the Public Ministry, including how the 
CICIACS will provide protection for the special prosecutor 
appointed by the Attorney General, how the CICIACS will help 
improve the Public Ministry, and how the CICIACS will protect 
witnesses and investigators.  The NGOs also wondered if we 
had any advice on how to mount a public relations campaign to 
help educate the average Guatemalan about clandestine groups 
and the aims of CICIACS.  NGOs intend to contact the Embassy 
to discuss this after the official exchange of letters 
between the UN, OAS, and GOG. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (U) The NGOs were appreciative of our continued support. 
They trust the GOG\'s interlocutor, Ruiz de Vielman, and are 
hopeful that the commission set-up will proceed along the 
lines they envisioned.  We will continue our support and 
inform the Department about further requests for 
collaboration.  End Comment. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7233","4/8/2003 15:53","03GUATEMALA932","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE86002","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000932 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/07/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, CU, GT, UNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA STILL NON-COMMITTAL ON UNHRC CUBA 
RESOLUTION 
 
REF: STATE 86002 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) The Ambassador met with Foreign Minister Edgar 
Gutierrez on April 3, and raised reftel talking points 
requesting GOG co-sponsorhip of a UNHRC resolution on Cuba. 
The Ambassador noted that, to avoid unnecessary controversy, 
the draft resolution presented by three Latin American 
countries did not mention the human rights situation in Cuba, 
but rather simply called on the Cuban Government to permit 
the visit of the UNHRC\'s Special Representative.  The 
Ambassador said that, in view of the recent arrest by Cuban 
authorities of large numbers of dissidents and human rights 
workers, it would be unconscionable for the world not to 
stand up and call on the Cuban Government to permit the visit 
of the UNHRC\'s Special Representative.  He appealed to 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez\'s own past as a human rights 
worker, saying that human rights activists in Cuba depended 
on the solidarity of their hemispheric counterparts, and not 
to support this resolution would be to abandon those seeking 
basic democratic rights in Cuba through peaceful means. 
 
2. (C) Foreign Minister Gutierrez said that the GOG was aware 
of the arrest of large numbers of dissidents in Cuba.  He 
said that Guatemalan-Cuban relations had strengthened in 
2003, and that Guatemala hoped to use this improvement for 
\"constructive engagement\" with Cuba on a number of issues, 
including human rights.  He said the GOG believes past UNHRC 
resolutions have been ineffective, and wants to consider 
options that might produce better results.  The Ambassador 
replied that Cuban Government intransigence should not be 
used to justify abandonment of dissidents who were putting 
their lives on the line for their democratic beliefs, and 
pressed Gutierrez to give a more precise indication of how 
the GOG is coming out on this issue.  Gutierrez took refuge 
in saying the GOG has not made a decision on how it will 
address the Cuba resolution at the UNHRC. 
 
3. (C) PolOff delivered the demarche separately to Acting 
Head of Multilateral Affairs at the MFA Silvia Corado on 
April 3.  Corado was similarly non-committal. 
 
4. (C) Comment:  The arrest of Cuban dissidents has 
embarrassed President Portillo and Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez, who (pressured by FRG leader Rios Montt) are 
inclined not to support the Cuba resolution this year -- 
largely out of pique with us over decertification and our 
perceived opposition to the Rios Montt presidential 
candidacy, and in part because of their personal sympathies 
with the Cuban revolution.  We have built a case in the press 
and with local human rights NGO\'s for supporting the Cuban 
dissidents, and are using that to keep pressure on the GOG in 
the lead-up to the vote.  We expect the Cubans will also be 
working hard to convince the GOG to support them -- Vice 
President Reyes was seen Sunday showing the Cuban Minister of 
Education around the colonial city of Antigua.  Co-sponsorhip 
is a bridge too far, but a positive vote may not be out of 
range. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7239","4/8/2003 17:10","03GUATEMALA933","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/07/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, SNAR, OVIP, KIPR, PHUM, ELAB, MARR, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND FOREIGN MINISTER DISCUSS 
PRESIDENTIAL SUMMIT AND BILATERAL ISSUES 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The Ambassador and Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez met on April 3 to discuss the upcoming visit of the 
Central American presidents to Washington to meet with 
President Bush on CAFTA.  The Ambassador carried out 
demarches on Cuba and Iraq (septels), mentioned upcoming 
visits of USG officials to discuss GSP labor concerns and 
Article 98 Agreement, asked for expedited signing of the new 
IPR law and discussed progress in setting up CICIACS. 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez welcomed the information on the 
Presidential meeting.  He informed us of problems in the 
DECAM (GOG arms and munitions regulatory agency), and 
remedial actions being taken by the GOG to avoid arms being 
held legally by drug-traffickers.  End summary. 
 
The April 10 Presidential Meeting 
--------------------------------- 
2. (C) The Ambassador met with Foreign Minister Edgar 
Gutierrez at the Foreign Ministry on April 3 to discuss the 
upcoming meeting of the Central American Presidents with 
President Bush.  He said the Presidential meeting reflects 
something much bigger than the sum of our individual 
bilateral issues, but rather the future of the entire 
bilateral relationship and regional integration.  The 
Ambassador noted that President Bush would like to focus the 
meeting on free trade (CAFTA), and hoped that the Central 
American presidents would take advantage of this opportunity 
to keep attention focused on that theme.  If, as apparently 
had been agreed in Roatan, the Presidents were going to 
address such subjects as regional integration, agriculture 
and arms reduction, it would be useful to relate them to 
CAFTA and to keep the remarks short and conversational, not 
set-piece speeches.  Gutierrez said, \"don\'t worry about us -- 
will keep it short.\" 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador noted that other bilateral themes, 
including counter-narcotics cooperation, would be a topic for 
discussion at the April 11 breakfast between President 
Portillo and WHA Acting A/S Struble.  However, the meeting 
with President Bush would not be an appropriate venue for a 
debate on certification.  The Ambassador commented that WHA 
A/S Struble would be holding a tele-briefing for the 
Guatemalan press on April 8 to draw attention to recent 
improvements in Guatemala\'s counter-narcotics cooperation. 
We believe that this will generate a positive climate for the 
Presidential meeting.  The Ambassador noted, however, that 
the USG decision to decertify Guatemala as a cooperating 
partner in the war on drugs would not be reviewed prior to 
the April 10 meeting, and the GOG should not expect action on 
this front prior to the summit.  Gutierrez thanked us for the 
upcoming press briefing by WHA A/S Struble, which he thought 
would be useful for setting a positive tone.  He did not push 
back on our statement that Guatemala would not be recertified 
before the April 10 meeting, and appeared satisfied that the 
USG was pleased with continuing progress and would say so in 
the April 8 press briefing.  He welcomed the April 11 
breakfast between Portillo and A/S Struble. 
 
Torture of Drug Suspects 
------------------------ 
4. (C) The Ambassador told Gutierrez that we were concerned 
that state agents may have used torture and illegal detention 
to carry out a drug seizure in Zacapa in March (septels). 
Furthermore, it appears they planted drugs on three suspects 
in order to incriminate them.  The Ambassador said he has 
already talked to the President, the Ministers of Defense and 
Government and the PNC Director about this matter, and 
received their assurances that it would not happen again. 
The Ambassador told Gutierrez that the GOG needed to ensure 
that the drug war is pursued solely by means that are legal 
and that do not violate human rights.  Actions outside the 
law will hurt, not help, re-certification. 
 
Counter-Narcotics Maritime Agreement 
------------------------------------ 
5. (C) Prior to the discussion of the Struble 
tele-conference, Gutierrez gave the Ambassador a MFA legal 
opinion on our proposed CN Maritime Agreement.  Gutierrez 
said the GOG had gotten hung up for some time on the 
sovereignty issue, but had come up with what he hoped we 
would regard as a creative solution.  We will report this 
issue septel once we have analyzed the GOG proposal. 
 
Article 98 Agreement 
-------------------- 
6. (C) The Ambassador advised Gutierrez of the April 10-11 
visit to Guatemala of Ambassador Marisa Lino and a team of 
USG negotiators to discuss signing an Article 98 Agreement. 
He asked that the GOG assign the highest level negotiators to 
ensure that the discussions succeed.  Gutierrez noted that he 
had already given instructions for the head of the MFA\'s 
legal department to meet with the USG delegation, and 
lamented that the senior officials who could initial an 
agreement would all be out of the country those dates. 
Gutierrez believes that, despite the absence from the country 
of the senior MFA officials, the discussions of an Article 98 
Agreement can make progress. 
 
IPR Law 
------- 
7. (C) The Ambassador expressed appreciation for the recent 
passage of improved IPR legislation, and said that it was 
important that the law be signed by President Portillo before 
April 8 in order for it to be taken into consideration in our 
Special 301 Review.  The Foreign Minister took note and 
promised to advise us. 
 
GSP Review 
---------- 
8. (C) The Ambassador commented that USTR would decide on 
April 15 whether to accept a GSP petition filed against 
Guatemala, based in large part on violence against labor 
leaders.  The Ambassador noted the April 4 visit of Assistant 
USTR for Labor William Clatanoff and Department of State 
Director of International Labor Affairs George White would 
give the GOG an opportunity to hear USG concerns and provide 
a GOG response.  Gutierrez said that the GOG takes this issue 
seriously, and he had asked Vice Minister Aguilera to 
represent him in meetings with the senior USG visitors, as 
Gutierrez would be in Belize that day. 
 
CICIACS 
------- 
9. (C) In early April, the GOG sent senior Guatemalan 
diplomat Maritza Ruiz de Vielmann to Washington and New York 
to discuss the modalities for OAS and UN participation in the 
commission being established to investigate threats against 
human rights workers (CICIACS).  Specifically, Ruiz was to 
explore UN willingness to have the CICIACS constituted as an 
international mission under UN auspices, like MINUGUA, as 
this was what the Human Rights Ombudsman and the NGO 
community were now demanding.  Gutierrez doubted that the UN 
would want to be responsible for a second international 
mission, but wanted to explore the option as a gesture of 
good faith.  The Ambassador commented that we viewed recent 
GOG flexibility on this matter (together with the GOG 
dropping the idea of CICIACS reporting to the GOG Peace 
Secretariat, to which the Ombudsman objected) as a positive 
 
SIPDIS 
sign, as it had convinced the human rights NGO community that 
the GOG would not obstruct efforts to establish a credible 
investigatory commission.  Gutierrez commented that he had 
placed Ambassador Ruiz de Vielmann in charge of this effort 
to demonstrate the seriousness the GOG assigns to 
establishing a credible mechanism to investigate clandestine 
groups. 
 
DECAM 
----- 
10. (C) Foreign Minister Gutierrez told the Ambassador that 
President Portillo had instructed him to inform us that the 
GOG was investigating \"serious abuses\" by the DECAM (the 
GOG\'s arms and ammunition regulatory agency belonging to the 
Ministry of Defense).  According to Gutierrez, the GOG found 
out that the DECAM has been issuing assault rifle permits to 
the bodyguards of the major narco-traffickers.  The GOG has 
temporarily invalidated all fire-arms licenses, and will 
carefully review all requests for restoring permits in an 
attempt to more carefully control the issuance of such 
licenses.  Gutierrez promised to keep us informed of progress 
(Note:  Minister of Defense Moran mentioned the same charge 
against the DECAM earlier in the week, and similarly noted 
that the GOG is in the process of cleaning it up. End note). 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
11. (C) The Guatemalans view the upcoming meeting with 
President Bush as very important for generating a modicum of 
domestic credibility for Portillo\'s battered presidency. 
Appearances on April 10 will be as important to them as 
substance.  With the national election campaign only five 
weeks away from officially starting, the perception that the 
U.S. views the Portillo administration negatively has 
implications for his party, the FRG.  This explains why, in 
April 5-6 press coverage, Portillo has stated he will raise 
with the President the statements made by former A/S Reich 
(GOG official corruption) and decertification.  Our 
assessment, however, is that Portillo will be statesman-like 
at the presidential meeting, and will try to convey the 
impression that, despite our doubts about his government\'s 
counter-narcotics cooperation, he is someone we can work with. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7242","4/8/2003 21:43","03GUATEMALA937","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE88308","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

082143Z Apr 03

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000937 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PARIS FOR U.S. OBSERVER TO UNESCO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2013 
TAGS: PREL, AORC, IZ, GT, UNESCO 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA OPPOSES DISCUSSION OF IRAQ AT UNESCO 
 
REF: STATE 88308 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) The Ambassador raised reftel concerns with Foreign 
Minister Gutierrez on April 3.  Gutierrez confirmed his 
earlier statement that the GOG believes multilateral 
discussion of Iraq should be confined to the UNSC.  Guatemala 
will oppose discussion of Iraq at UNESCO, according to 
Gutierrez. 
 
2. (C) Poloffs carried out similar demarche on the Acting 
Director of Multilateral Affairs at the MFA, who similarly 
confirmed that the GOG opposes discussion of Iraq at UNESCO. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7298","4/9/2003 23:05","03GUATEMALA955","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, SNAR, CU, GT, UNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY CALLS ON RULING PARTY TO URGE PORTILLO TO 
SUPPORT CUBA CHR RESOLUTION 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) On April 9, the Guatemalan Congress passed an 
unscheduled resolution calling on President Portillo to 
abstain in the upcoming UNCHR resolution on Cuba.  Only one 
independent congressman, Emilio Saca, voted against the 
measure, saying that the Government of Cuba should be 
censured for its deplorable human rights situation. 
 
2. (SBU) On instruction from the Ambassador, PolCouns met on 
April 10 with the Congressional leadership of the ruling 
party (the FRG - Frente Republicano Guatemalteco) to express 
our disappointment with the Congressional resolution and to 
urge them to take a principled position in support of the 
jailed human rights activists, journalists, labor leaders and 
other dissidents in Cuba.  Present for the FRG were First 
Vice President of Congress Carlos Hernandez, Third Vice 
President Jorge Arevalo and Majority Leader Aristides Crespo. 
 PolCouns relayed the details of the recent arrest and 
summary trial of the dissidents, noted by name many of the 
dissidents who are personally known to Ambassador Hamilton, 
and argued that these individuals deserved the support of all 
freedom-loving Latin Americans.  They had been arrested and 
summarily tried in kangaroo courts for exercising the most 
basic human rights that all Guatemalans enjoy and that are 
strongly defended in Guatemala by the FRG.  It was 
unconscionable that only Guatemalan labor leaders had spoken 
out in the defense of the dissidents, and an abstention on 
the UNCHR resolution on Cuba would only convince the GOC that 
it had friends that were prepared to support it irrespective 
of its deplorable behavior.  PolCouns asked them how the FRG 
viewed the arrest of the dissidents. 
 
3. (SBU) Aristides Crespo responded that the arrest appeared 
to be an injustice, but said that counter-narcotics 
decertification of Guatemala by the USG was also viewed as an 
injustice by them.  He said that many believed that it had 
been done expressly to hurt the FRG in the upcoming 
elections, and that the FRG believed that decertification was 
unmerited.  He argued that if the USG wanted greater 
cooperation on drugs from a poor country like Guatemala, it 
needed to provide greater financial support to the effort. 
PolCouns noted that since decertification the GOG had 
accomplished several significant successes in the war on 
drugs, in cooperation with us, but without new resources.  We 
are pleased with the increase in counter-narcotics 
cooperation and are prepared to continue providing all the 
support possible.  However, the issue of supporting the Cuban 
dissidents should be an issue of principle, not of bilateral 
differences with us.  The FRG is known as a party of strong 
principles, and we know that they support the principles of 
free speech and free association for which the Cuban 
dissidents were arrested and sentenced to long terms.  Surely 
the FRG would find these principles much closer to their own 
than the principles employed by the Cuban Government in 
arresting these people. 
 
4. (SBU) PolCouns asked if they had seen the draft Cuba 
resolution tabled in Geneva by Costa Rica, Uruguay and Peru. 
When they acknowledged they had not, PolCouns gave them a 
copy and noted that it simply called for Cuba to allow the 
visit of the UNCHR\'s Special Representative.  The UNCHR has 
sent Special Representatives to Guatemala many times, and the 
GOG has always welcomed them.  It is difficult for us to 
understand why an FRG government would not vote in favor of 
this resolution, as Guatemala certainly believes that all 
governments should meet the same human rights standards that 
have been applied here. 
 
5. (SBU) Crespo noted that, despite the Congressional 
resolution, the decision on the Cuba vote is entirely the 
Executive\'s.  When pressed, he acknowledged that they did 
have some influence on the vote, and said they would relay 
our request to the senior party leadership (i.e. President of 
Congress Rios Montt). 
 
6. (C) Comment:  The Congressional vote of April 9 may well 
have been a face-saving move by the FRG to give Portillo 
cover with the Cubans to abstain on the vote, vice the \"no\" 
vote the Cubans had hoped for.  The linkage between not 
supporting us on Cuba and the recent decertification of 
Guatemala for counter-narcotics cooperation, naked as it is, 
has been made to us repeatedly by MFA interlocutors.  The 
Ambassador\'s continuing efforts to portray support for the 
Cuban dissidents as an issue of principle is a hard one for 
the Guatemalans to argue against, and is beginning to crack 
Guatemalan determination to \"pass us the bill\" for 
decertifying Guatemala.  We will continue to press this issue 
publicly and privately on all fronts in the lead-up to the 
vote. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7340","4/10/2003 22:43","03GUATEMALA962","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","02GUATEMALA3160","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000962 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: OMINOUS SIGNS COME IN THREES: LATEST HUMAN RIGHTS 
SETBACKS 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 3160 
 
     B. 02 GUATEMALA 3213 
     C. 02 GUATEMALA 3275 
     D. GUATEMALA 884 
 
1. (U) Both in the capital and farther afield, new human 
rights concerns are popping up in Guatemala.  To the north, 
in Quiche, a Mayan priest and human rights activist was 
murdered; to the east, in Izabal, the Human Rights Ombudsman 
(PDH) Auxiliary office was ransacked; here in the Guatemala 
City, the home of Nineth Montenegro (New Nation Alliance 
(ANN) Congresswoman and Mutual Support Group (GAM) founder) 
and Mario Polanco (GAM Director) was robbed.  Embassy 
inquiries and efforts to support activists continue, as shown 
in the Peccerelli case, but deteriorating security conditions 
and governmental apathy remain troubling.  End Summary. 
 
Violence Strikes Again in Quiche 
-------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) Diego Xon Salazar, a Mayan priest, was found dead 
Saturday, April 5, in Quiche province.  Xon Salazar had 
reportedly been receiving death threats due to his active 
role in GAM, a human rights NGO, and his protest of the 
resurgence of the ex-civilian patrollers (ex-PACs) in 
war-torn Quiche.  GAM is denouncing the GOG for knowledge of 
death threats against Xon Salazar and refusal to provide 
protection.  An investigation of his death remains pending. 
This is the second murder of a Mayan indigenous activist in 
six months, the first being Antonio Pop Caal of Alta Verapaz 
in October 2002. (Ref A) 
 
Auxiliary Ombudsmen at Risk? 
---------------------------- 
 
3. (U) Waldemar Barerra, Auxiliary Ombudsman in Izabal 
province, reported that he was assaulted and his offices 
ransacked in early April.  Barerra reported that his 
investigation reports and computer equipment were stolen, but 
valuable items were left behind, leading him to believe that 
the thieves were politically and not economically motivated. 
Barerra\'s office has been involved in a number of high 
profile cases, such as the Chocon case, involving the former 
anti-narcotics police, and the murder of journalist Mynor 
Alegria, as well as the investigation of many campesino 
killings. (Ref B) 
 
Domestic Tranquility Shattered 
------------------------------ 
 
4. (U) Professionally active and powerful, yet personally 
private, duo Nineth Montenegro and Mario Polanco were 
victimized on April 7, when five armed men stormed their home 
and robbed them of property valued over 100,000 quetzals 
(12,500 dollars) and issued threats to Polanco, who was in 
Geneva with a delegation of human rights leaders.  Montenegro 
is an outspoken leftist congresswomen known for her work 
against impunity and for transparency.  Polanco is the 
Director of GAM and is very involved with the human right\'s 
movement\'s proposal for a Commission to Investigate Illegal 
Bodies and the Clandestine Security Apparatus (CICIACS). (Ref 
C) 
 
5. (U) The Ambassador called Montenegro on April 7, to 
express our concern and to inform her that he had spoken with 
both Minister of Government Reyes Calderon and Police Chief 
Manchame to push for a quick investigation and immediate 
police protection of Montenegro, Polanco, and their family. 
Montenegro thanked the Ambassador and promised to inform the 
Embassy of further developments.  DCM and Human Rights poloff 
met with Vice Minister of Government Caceres on April 10 and 
pressed him to provide all possible protections. 
 
Peccerelli Update 
----------------- 
 
6. (U) Following-up on Ambassador\'s March 31 meeting with 
Minister of Government Reyes Calderon (Ref D), DCM and HROff 
escorted Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology Foundation (FAFG) 
Director Fredy Peccerelli to a meeting with Vice Minister of 
Government Caceres.  DCM thanked Caceres for the police 
protection the MOG has provided the FAFG in the past, and 
asked him to consider the personal details and perimeter 
security that Peccerelli requested in response to recent 
death threats.  Caceres agreed to do so immediately and faxed 
the Embassy a copy of his official order to the police for 
Peccerelli\'s protection within three hours of the meeting. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. (U) While deflating, these recent attacks re-enforce the 
need for continued USG pressure to push for the protection of 
human rights in the Capital and in the countryside.  We will 
continue to lobby the GOG for investigations of these 
egregious murders and robberies, as well as protection for 
those human rights leaders and government entities who 
soldier on despite such glaring obstacles and setbacks. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7370","4/11/2003 14:24","03GUATEMALA967","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000967 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, GT, KICC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: ICC/ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT AND SOFA 
DISCUSSIONS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Marisa Lino for reason 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  On the Article 98 Agreement, discussions 
with the GOG covered all the points where the GOG 
counterproposal differs from the US text.  New language was 
proposed by both sides ad ref.  If approved, and the 
negotiating team believes the proposed changes are workable, 
we would have an agreement. On the SOFA text, the GOG side, 
which has had the text to consider since January 2001 and has 
never offered any comment on it, said it would be preferable 
to have the text of the broader agreement reviewed for 
constitutionality by the Constitutional Court.  Estimate is 
this process might take about five months.  The US team 
pressed hard to obtain detailed GOG response on the text 
before that process begins, in order to see what other issues 
might be raised by the GOG side.  The GOG lead negotiator 
promised to provide a detailed response \"very quickly.\"  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Article 98 Agreement Discussions 
-------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) On April 10, 2003, the PM-led interagency team met 
with Guatemalan MFA officials to discuss the GOG 
counterproposal to our Article 98 text. Amb. Maritza Ruiz de 
Vielman (MFA Advisor and former FM) led the GOG team and was 
accompanied by Amb. Regina Martinez de Palencia (Legal 
Department Director), Minister Counselor Sara Solis 
(Bilateral Affairs Director) and Angela Chavez (Legal Advisor 
to the Treaty Department). PM Senior Advisor Marisa Lino was 
accompanied by Mary Catherine Malin (L/WHA), Col. Al 
Ringgenberg (DOD/GC), David Lindwall (Political Counselor) 
and Robert Copley (Poloff). 
 
3. (U) The Guatemalans had previously been provided with the 
Article 98 text that does not specifically mention the ICC. 
The discussion focused on three issues:  the new paragraphs 
proposed (3 and 4 in the GOG counterproposal) and the closing 
clause.  It was agreed that other minor discrepancies in the 
text between the English and Spanish versions would be worked 
out between the Embassy and the MFA subsequently. 
 
 
4. (C) Paragraph 3 of the GOG counterproposal reads as 
follows: 
 
Quote: Both Parties undertake to investigate and, if there 
are grounds for initiating a criminal complaint, to prosecute 
the alleged perpetrators, based on the national jurisdiction 
of each Party.  Unquote. 
 
The US side explained at some length the philosophy 
underpinning the US position on the Rome Statute and the 
concern we have for the potential for politically motivated 
allegations against US persons.  The team noted that in the 
case of a politically motivated case there might not be a 
formal investigation initiated if a preliminary evaluation 
indicated the case was politically motivated.  Thus, the 
GOG-proposed language for this paragraph was unacceptable. 
The GOG side noted that the importance of the paragraph was 
to avoid any possibility of impunity.  Ruiz also explained 
that in the Guatemalan system there is a procedure which 
occurs prior to judicial review for deciding if an allegation 
is politically motivated or not, based on a decision by a 
designated panel of peers of the accused. 
 
5.  (C) After much discussion, both sides worked to craft a 
paragraph that might take into account their respective 
concerns.  Lino emphasized that any language drafted would be 
strictly ad referendum and would be subject to a detailed 
review in Washington.  The compromise language reads as 
follows: 
 
Quote:  Except in cases where the Party concerned determines 
that the allegations are politically motivated, each Party 
shall, as appropriate, investigate and prosecute cases of war 
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, to the full 
extent permitted by its domestic law.  Unquote. 
 
The US negotiating team believes this rewrite of the GOG 
paragraph, which would appear as paragraph 3 in the operative 
section of the agreement, may be an acceptable solution that 
does not commit the United States beyond what our domestic 
legislation can provide.  A number of countries have raised 
the issue of putting similar text into the operative 
paragraphs, and for the GOG it appears to be an important 
issue.  Team recommends interagency consideration of this new 
operative paragraph text. 
 
6. (C) Paragraph 4 of the GOG counterproposal reads as 
follows: 
 
Quote: Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties 
from cooperating in any investigation by an international 
tribunal or from furnishing any evidence in their possession, 
even if said evidence was requested as part of a proceeding 
initiated against one of the persons referred to in this 
Agreement.  Unquote. 
 
The US team took pains to explain why this language was 
unacceptable, referring to the previous discussion about lack 
of impunity, but also describing at length the US rationale 
for not ratifying the Rome Statute.  As non-Parties, neither 
side is obliged to cooperate with the ICC, but are not barred 
from doing so (Guatemala is a non-signatory, non-Party, and 
although the GOG has presented the Rome Statute to the 
Parliament for consideration, it is not expected to pass). 
The USG, however, would object to cooperation with the ICC if 
allegations were to be made against a US person.  The GOG 
side noted the importance politically of this issue, because, 
again, the GOG needs to avoid the appearance of providing 
conditions for impunity, not only for US persons but also for 
Guatemalan persons.  The Embassy believes this view may be 
the prevailing view in the MFA, but may not be shared within 
the Parliament. 
 
7. (C) However, the GOG team was insistent that such language 
was necessary for an agreement.  After much discussion, the 
US team tried to see if there might be a way to eliminate the 
perception, created by the proposed language that the United 
States would not object to cooperation with the ICC with 
respect to a US person under ICC investigation.  The proposed 
solution reads as follows: 
 
Quote:  Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties 
from cooperating in any investigation by an international 
tribunal established by the United Nations Security Council 
or from furnishing any evidence in their possession, even if 
said evidence was requested as part of a proceeding initiated 
against one of the persons referred to in this Agreement. 
Unquote. 
 
By using the same formulation used to avoid mention of the 
ICC, the team believes the additional phrase might make this 
paragraph acceptable. 
 
8. (C) The original closing clause had inadvertently been 
dropped from the text provided to the GOG.  The GOG team 
insisted that both the English and Spanish texts had to be 
equally authentic.  Lino noted that, in such a case, it would 
be all the more important for the Embassy and the MFA to work 
out the differences in the translation of the final text. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Status of Forces Agreement Discussion 
------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) The second part of the meeting focused on the USG 
proposed text (C175 approved text for WHA countries) for a 
longer term status of forces agreement.  There was a pause 
while Ruiz was briefed on the subject by the other members of 
her team; she admitted she had not followed the issue.  The 
Embassy had briefed the negotiating team that this did not 
seem to be a high priority for the MFA Legal Department and 
it is clear that is indeed the case.  Lino pointed out that 
the enormous amount of work done by both sides to reach an 
agreement for each individual exercise - agreements that 
require Parliamentary approval - could be avoided by coming 
to terms on a longer term SOFA.  Given the approach of NEW 
HORIZONS 2004, it would be to the advantage of both sides to 
reach such an agreement in time for that sizable training 
exercise.  Ringgenberg added that the existence of a 
longer-term SOFA permits the DOD to have much more 
flexibility with respect to planning exercises and smaller 
scale activities with the GOG. 
 
10. (C) Ruiz said there had been complaints about the 
previous agreements signed for individual exercises and 
indications that such agreements were contrary to the 
constitution.  Since the proposed SOFA text is broader in 
scope and longer in terms of duration, the question of 
constitutionality could become even more prominent.  She 
suggested strongly that it would be best to obtain an opinion 
on the constitutionality of the agreement from the 
Constitutional Court before proceeding to present it to the 
Parliament. 
 
11. (C)  Lino pressed hard to obtain a detailed GOG response 
on the text before that process begins, in order to see what 
other issues might be raised by the GOG.  Ruiz said she would 
have the Legal Department provide the Embassy with a detailed 
response \"very quickly.\"  She said there were probably three 
main objections on constitutional grounds, although she did 
not specify what those issues might be. When further pressed 
by Lino, Ruiz agreed that the Legal Department would list any 
other questions the GOG might have with the proposed longer 
term SOFA text.  With that the session ended. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
12. (C) The April 10 discussions made clear the GOG\'s 
political will to negotiate a compromise agreement with us 
which would provide the protections we seek from the ICC. 
Technical issues remain, and ultimately any agreement will 
have to be sent to Guatemala\'s Congress for ratification. 
The Embassy will continue to press the MFA at the highest 
levels for expedited attention to our longer-term SOFA 
proposal, and will report the MFA\'s comments as soon as 
received.  Embassy welcomes Department\'s views of the 
compromise language to the Article 98 Agreement worked out 
with the MFA. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7469","4/15/2003 22:36","03GUATEMALA1015","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: LOS CIMIENTOS: A PORTILLO PRESS SPECTACLE AND NEW 
CHALLENGES 
 
REF: 02 GUATEMALA 2785 
 
1. (U) Summary: On April 8, HROff and EconOff attended 
President Portillo\'s inauguration of a primary school at the 
new site of the Los Cimientos Community in San Vincente, 
Siquinala, Escuintla.  After the flashy Presidential press 
opportunity, HROff and EconOff visited the community\'s 
temporary settlement and learned about the efforts of NGOs 
and community members to rebuild the lives of the 233 Los 
Cimientos families relocated after the bloody land conflict 
in the Quiche (Reftel).  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On April 8, HROff and EconOff visited Escuintla 
province to witness Portillo\'s inauguration of a primary 
school for the recently relocated group of Quiche families 
from the Los Cimientos land dispute in the Ixil triangle. 
The school, which is a half hour\'s drive away from where the 
Los Cimientos community is living, is a four-room concrete 
block structure complete with a small library of Latin 
American literature classics in Spanish.  Unfortunately, only 
a small fraction of the children (or adults) of the community 
actually speak Spanish and even fewer are able to read. 
 
3. (U) Before the President\'s arrival, EmbOffs toured the 
school and congratulated community leaders and government 
representatives on both their new land and new school.  The 
Director of the President\'s Commission on Human Rights 
(COPREDEH), Dr. Juan Fuentes Soria, thanked us for coming and 
said that he hoped this event would be included in our 2003 
Human Rights Report, having recently been disappointed by the 
lukewarm coverage his institution received in the 2002 report. 
 
4. (U) The ribbon cutting ceremony was attended both by 
members of the Los Cimientos community and double their 
number of patriotic schoolchildren bussed in from neighboring 
towns in Escuintla.  These clean, well-kempt children in 
matching white shirts and royal blue shorts, waving 
Guatemalan flags and performing FRG chants, presented a 
glaring contrast to the malnourished, unwashed Los Cimientos 
children dressed in indigenous Mayan clothing, who appeared 
more amused than interested in the event at hand. 
 
5. (U) During Portillo\'s speech, he thanked AmCit Francia Ala 
for her dedication to resolving the Los Cimientos case, as 
well as the Embassy for our support of land conflict 
settlement.  Portillo mentioned that this school would 
represent a pilot program for what he called \"decentralized 
schools,\" in which communities will be responsible for their 
own teachers and curriculum.  Portillo also thanked the press 
for attending such a milestone event, and pledged to come 
back to San Vicente in one month to break ground on a housing 
project. 
 
6. (U) After the ceremony, Ala took EmbOffs to see the 
abandoned sugar plantation servants\' quarters that the Los 
Cimientos community is currently using for housing on their 
newly-acquired land, as well as the first crops that the 
community is beginning to cultivate.  Ala showed us the many 
children who were suffering from various diseases due to the 
new pests and climate to which they must grow accustomed. 
Ala also spoke of bright spots, such as the involvement of 
many volunteers from the US and Europe, who were trying to 
help organize horticulture and medical projects.  Community 
members all agreed that they will be much better off once the 
GOG complies with the rest of their agreement, which is to 
provide housing on the land near the newly-built school. 
 
7. (U) COMMENT: While it is encouraging to see the GOG 
provide some semblance of a resolution to a century-old land 
conflict, the new challenges which the Los Cimientos 
community faces are great.  Whether the Portillo 
administration will come through on its promise to provide 
housing to the impoverished community or whether this was 
just another chance for Portillo to appear out in the country 
doing public works during an election year remains to be 
seen.  We will continue to follow the case with interest and 
help to remind the GOG of their public promises to the Los 
Cimientos community.  End Comment. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7575","4/21/2003 22:56","03GUATEMALA1032","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE9937","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001032 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/USOAS BRUCE FRIEDMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SUPPORTS CUBA RESOLUTION AT OAS 
 
REF: STATE 9937 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
(C) In the absence of Foreign Minister Gutierrez, Embassy 
raised reftel points with Director General for Multilateral 
Affairs, Giovanni Castillo on April 21, 2003.  Castillo 
agreed that the OAS Permanent Council is an appropriate venue 
for a human rights resolution on Cuba.  Castillo cautioned 
that he could not speak officially without reviewing the 
actual text, but then assured us that Guatemala would support 
an OAS resolution along the lines proposed in reftel. 
Castillo said that Nicaraguan and Costa Rican co-sponsorship 
would reinforce Guatemala\'s support for the resolution and 
speculated that El Salvador and Honduras would be almost 
certain to support it as well.  Castillo emphasized that 
under those circumstances it would be \"impossible\" for 
Guatemala to oppose the resolution. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7593","4/22/2003 17:15","03GUATEMALA1036","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA995|03STATE95180|03STATE98747","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001036 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ, GT 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON FLEEING IRAQI OFFICIALS 
 
REF: A. STATE 98747 
     B. STATE 95180 
     C. GUATEMALA 995 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
(C) In the absence of Foreign Minister Gutierrez, Embassy 
raised ref A points with Giovanni Castillo, Director General 
for Multilateral Affairs on April 21.  Castillo assured us 
that the GOG would immediately inform the Embassy of any 
cases of former Iraqi regime officials attempting to enter 
Guatemalan territory.  Castillo added that in the wake of our 
previous demarche on this subject (refs B and C), he had been 
in consultations with the Ministry\'s Legal Department 
regarding procedures for potential asylum claims by Iraqi 
officials.  The GOG would look to the Embassy for 
information, coordination, and support, he said, in any such 
claims. Castillo said he doubted any Iraqi officials would 
attempt to take refuge in Guatemala but repeated his 
assurances that we would be immediately consulted if the GOG 
detects possible Iraqi officials in Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7641","4/24/2003 15:29","03GUATEMALA1066","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, GT, CU 
SUBJECT: CUBA VOTE PROVOKES LARGELY POSITIVE REACTIONS IN 
GUATEMALA 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Unlike previous years, Guatemala\'s vote in 
favor of the 2003 Cuba resolution at the UN Human Rights 
Commission drew favorable editorials in the press.  Cuba\'s 
repression of dissidents and the execution of the three 
hijackers led to a steady stream of press criticism of 
Castro\'s regime in the lead up to the vote. The only public 
criticism of the GOG vote came from some human rights leaders 
who oppose US policy in Cuba, and are prepared to be more 
tolerant of the situation of human rights on the island. End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) Leading daily Prensa Libre carried two editorials 
April 21, entitled \"Guatemala Sided with the Good Guys in 
Geneva,\" and \"The Pathetic Case of Fidel Castro,\" which 
praised the GOG\'s decision to take a stand against recent 
human rights violations in Cuba.  With reference to the 
recent crackdown, the latter editorial stated, \"In these 
circumstances, to remain quiet in the face of unfair 
practices is to become an accomplice to an old man who has 
lost his mind...and leaves the door open for chaos in Cuba 
when he dies.\"  The press, which is largely anti-government, 
accused the Portillo government of being spineless in the 
days before the UNCHR vote, when insinuations that the GOG 
was going to abstain in Geneva were appearing on the same 
pages as reports of new egregious actions by the Cubans to 
repress dissent.  The press, which in previous years had 
editorialized against the GOG\'s vote in favor of the Cuba 
resolution as a sell-out to the USG, called on the GOG to 
vote for the resolution this year and then praised the GOG 
for voting in a principled manner.  We attribute part of this 
change to the press\' favorable analysis of the USG\'s 
criticism of GOG corruption and abuses in the last year. 
 
3. (SBU) At the Ambassador\'s request, Human Rights Officer 
engaged leaders of the human rights community in the weeks 
previous to the vote to seek public support for imprisoned 
Cuban dissidents.  Some said they would \"ask the Cuban 
Embassy privately for an explanation of the recent crackdown 
against dissidents,\" but none engaged the press before the 
vote.  After the vote, in an op-ed in daily El Periodico, 
human rights activist Miguel Angel Albizures wrote that, 
while the role of the USG in determining international policy 
towards Cuba is condemnable, that is no excuse for the Castro 
regime\'s brutal crackdown against dissidents.  Other human 
rights leaders openly opposed the vote, however.  In Siglo 
Veintiuno, Orlando Blanco, director of CONADEHGUA, a leading 
human rights NGO, said, \"it is important to guard the rights 
of the Cubans.  Guatemala caved in to American pressures in 
order to help with recertification efforts.\" 
 
4. (SBU) COMMENT: While the GOG had argued that voting in 
favor of the Cuba resolution at the UNCHR would have a 
political cost, in fact public opinion as measured in the 
press was clearly shocked by Castro\'s recent human rights 
crackdown and called on the GOG to punish Castro with its 
vote.  With the exception of a couple of human rights leaders 
who have long opposed our policies in Cuba, Guatemalans have 
reacted positively to their government\'s principled vote in 
Geneva. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7679","4/26/2003 18:12","03GUATEMALA1131","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03WHITEHOUSEOP261812ZAPR3","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: LETTER TO PRESIDENT PORTILLO 
 
REF: WHITE HOUSE O P 261812Z APR 03 
 
 1.  Confirm we have received and will deliver letter to 
President Portillo following  working day. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7699","4/28/2003 15:36","03GUATEMALA1084","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: APPEAL OF 2002 MACK CASE SENTENCE 
 
REF: 02 GUATEMALA 2605 
 
1. (U) Summary: On April 23, the Fourth Court of Appeals 
heard the public arguments from both the defense and the 
prosecution for the appeal of the Third Sentencing Court\'s 
October 3, 2002 decision in the Myrna Mack murder case, in 
which retired Colonel Juan Valencia Osorio was convicted and 
sentenced to 30 years in prison, while retired General Edgar 
Godoy Gaitan and retired Colonel Juan Oliva Carrera were 
acquitted.  The tribunal listened to five hours of oral 
arguments in a courtroom packed with press and interested 
observers, including the Ambassador, and then told the public 
they would announce their decision on May 7.  End Summary. 
 
Mack Team\'s Arguments 
--------------------- 
2. (U) The public prosecutor Mynor Melgar and private lawyer 
for the Mack Foundation Roberto Romero stated that, 
throughout the course of the September 2002 trial, the 
prosecution proved that Myrna Mack\'s murder was a political 
crime, that Mack was the object of surveillance before her 
murder, and that the convicted material author, Noel de Jesus 
Beteta, was ordered by his superiors in the Presidential 
Military Staff (EMP) to surveil and eliminate Mack.  Melgar 
and Romero both asked the court to confirm the sentence 
against Valencia Osorio and to apply the conviction and 
prison sentence to Oliva Carrera and Godoy Gaitan because of 
their positions above and below Valencia Osorio in the EMP\'s 
chain of command. 
 
The Defense\'s Arguments 
----------------------- 
3. (U) Valencia Osorio\'s new legal representation, Francisco 
Flores, spent over 90 minutes arguing his appeal before the 
judges, who ultimately requested that he make his comments 
more concise.  Flores questioned the admissibility of the 
evidence in the case, especially the testimony of former 
inmate Jorge Lemus (aka \"El Buki\") and the tapes he made of 
cellmate Beteta claiming that Valencia Osorio ordered the 
murder.  Flores also questioned the court\'s decision to lay 
all the blame on Valencia Osorio for what was considered a 
political crime, since he was not singularly responsible for 
designing the GOG\'s counterinsurgency policy during the 
internal conflict.  Flores argued that the Third Sentencing 
Court made an erroneous application of the law, that 
convictions of this gravity must be based on stronger 
evidence, and that his client should be released.  Lawyers 
for Godoy Gaitan and Oliva Carrera asked the tribunal to 
confirm the Third Court\'s decision finding their clients 
innocent. 
 
Helen Mack, Juan Valencia Osorio, and Edgar Godoy Gaitan 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
4. (U) Helen Mack asked the tribunal (who also presided in 
the Gerardi appeal and decided to annul the Third Sentencing 
Court\'s 2001 conviction, which was subsequently confirmed by 
the Supreme Court) to act with integrity and independence. 
Mack reminded them that she has worked for justice in this 
case for thirteen years, and that the Inter-American Court 
also requested that Guatemala take this case seriously, after 
years of frivolous dilatory tactics by the defense.  Mack 
asked that the tribunal confirm the sentence against Valencia 
Osorio and to give Oliva Carrera and Godoy Gaitan equal 
punishments because she proved that all three were co-authors 
of the crime. 
 
5. (U) Valencia Osorio argued that he was innocent and that 
Beteta blatantly lied.  Valencia Osorio said that direct 
communication between a Major (Valencia Osorio\'s rank in 
1990) and a Sergeant (Beteta\'s rank in 1990) was 
inconceivable and that this proved he did not order Beteta to 
murder Mack.  Godoy Gaitan asked that the tribunal confirm 
the Third Court\'s decision because he, too, was innocent and 
had been suffering through the harsh conditions and various 
bloody riots in Guatemalan prisons over the past seven months. 
 
Public Presence 
--------------- 
6. (U) The President of the Court said that they would 
release their decision in another public audience at noon on 
May 7.  After the proceedings, the Ambassador was swarmed by 
the press, who noted that the USG has consistently placed a 
high priority on justice for human rights crimes in 
Guatemala.  The Ambassador told the press that this case is 
important for justice in Guatemala and that his presence was 
intended to convey moral support for the participants in the 
judicial process, especially judges and others who had come 
under threat. 
 
Comment 
------- 
7. (U) We will continue to monitor the case closely and show 
public support for the judicial process. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7702","4/28/2003 19:13","03GUATEMALA1108","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE89910","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NP/CBM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, MNUC, ETTC, TSPA, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA STILL STUDYING BALLISTIC MISSILE ICOC 
 
REF: A. STATE 89910 
 
     B. 02 GUATEMALA 2889 
 
PolOff raised ref A points with Sylvia Corado, Director for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry (MFA) on April 
25.  Corado said the MFA remains interested in subscribing to 
the International Code of Conduct Against Ballistic Missile 
Proliferation (ICOC), and hopes to do so in time to 
participate in the June meeting on implementation issues and 
confidence building measures.  Corado explained that the MFA 
had not responded to our earlier demarche (ref B), because 
paragraph 3 (a) of the ICOC requires subscribers to \"ratify, 
accede to, or otherwise abide by\" the terms of three treaties 
related to outer space.  Corado admitted the MFA has very 
little expertise in this area and needed to be sure it 
understood what it was signing.  Corado stressed that 
Guatemala supports the goal of non-proliferation. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7758","4/30/2003 20:07","03GUATEMALA1125","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE79965","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DANIKA WALTERS AND ROB JACKSON DRL/PHD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, EAID, KDEM, KSEP, GT 
SUBJECT: VICTIMS\' ASSISTANCE CENTER: GUATEMALA\'S HRDF GRANT 
SUBMISSION 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 79965 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 548 
 
1. (U) Embassy Guatemala appreciates the opportunity to 
propose an HRDF grant to help implement our human rights 
strategy.(Ref A)  We believe that the Human Rights Victims\' 
Assistance Center project outlined below offers an excellent 
opportunity to increase the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office 
capacity to help human rights defenders and victims recover 
from threats and attacks they have suffered.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
2. (U) Guatemala is a fledgling democracy that emerged from a 
36-year civil war in 1996, that left approximately 200,000 
people dead or disappeared.  The internal conflict left a 
legacy of disrespect for human rights and a lack of 
confidence in the state\'s capacity to promote and protect 
human rights.  The 1985 Constitution established the Human 
Right\'s Ombudsman\'s office to operate as an independent 
entity responsible for verification and protection of human 
rights work. 
 
3. (U) One of the USG\'s main objectives in Guatemala is 
supporting the work of human rights organizations and 
strengthening the domestic institutions that deal with the 
same issues.  While some progress has been made during the 
post-war era, violence continues to threaten the lives of 
many Guatemalans, especially human rights workers.  This 
project will help to better protect and counsel those who 
have been harassed, as well as develop a domestic capacity to 
respond to human rights emergencies. 
 
Objective 
--------- 
4. (U) The objective of the $50,000 HRDF grant would be to 
provide funding for a new Victim\'s Assistance Center 
established by the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office to provide 
counseling and refuge for victims of recent and past human 
rights abuses.  USAID supports the work of the Human Rights 
Ombudsman\'s office and its links to civil society through 
their human rights programs, but does not fund this 
particular project.  The project does not duplicate existing 
efforts; rather, it expands upon our current efforts to 
strengthen the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office and to support 
a more congenial environment for the defense of human rights. 
 
Method 
------ 
5. (U) The Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office has established a 
Victim\'s Center but lacks sufficient resources to carry out 
its work effectively.  With our support, the Center (located 
in the war-torn department of Chimaltenango) would provide 
mental and physical health services, shelter, and legal 
counseling to victims of human rights crimes. 
 
Results 
------- 
6. (U) The goal of the Victim\'s Center project would be to 
firmly establish the center, with operations support to be 
assumed by the Ombudsman\'s Office in the future.  The 
Ombudsman\'s Office has already obtained the building and the 
basic infrastructure for the Center.  Our financial support 
would allow the Ombudsman\'s Office to hire professionals, 
purchase administrative and medical supplies for the center, 
and begin assisting victims.  Based on the 100-plus cases the 
Ombudsman\'s Office has addressed over the past year, they 
anticipate providing inpatient services to approximately ten 
people per month. 
 
Implementing Organization 
------------------------- 
7. (U) The Human Right\'s Ombudsman\'s Office will implement 
the project.  The Ombudsman\'s Office is an independent, 
autonomous government entity charged with human rights 
verification and protection.  It receives a limited budget 
annually from Congress. 
 
Budget 
------ 
8. (U) We are asking for up to $50,000 for the project to be 
spent on the following items over an eight-month period: 
 
Staff Salaries: 
Paramedics (2) : $7,100 
Center Coordinator (1) : $6,000 
Psychologist (1) : $12,150 
Psychologist\'s Assistant (1) : $6,075 
Security (2) : $5,060 
Cook (1) : $1,520 
Maintenance (2) : $2,530 
 
Administrative Supplies: $5,060 
Medicine : $4,505 
HAMILTON 
"
"7869","5/6/2003 17:03","03GUATEMALA1170","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 001170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/PPC:CHARLOTTE ROE; DRL/IL:ARLEN WILSON; 
EB: RANDY FLEITMAN 
LABOR DEPARTMENT FOR ILAB: JORGE PEREZ LOPEZ, CARLOS ROMERO 
AND ROBERT WHOLEY 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF AND ANDREA DURKIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: PRE-CAFTA ROUND GUATEMALA LABOR UPDATE (#3) 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: The following labor developments in 
Guatemala are discussed in the paragraphs marked below. 
 
-- Special Prosecutor\'s Case Files--Violence Against 
Unionists (2) 
 
-- More May Day Marchers Reject CAFTA (3) 
 
-- President Portillo Touts Labor Priorities and CAFTA (4) 
 
-- U.S. Human Rights Report and UNICEF Child Labor Report 
Make Headlines (5) 
 
-- Banana Conflict Brewing (6) 
 
-- Social Security Institute Raises Rates (7) 
 
-- Unemployment Increased to 18% in 2002 (8) 
 
End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Special Prosecutor Opens His Case Files 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
On April 25 the Embassy received an update from the Attorney 
General on the status of investigations of violence against 
union leaders.  The report included actions taken by 
investigative authorities in the following murder and 
violence cases (see below) and also reported on 10 cases of 
threats, one of abuse of authority, one of union fraud, one 
of robbery, and one of falsification of documents involving 
union member victims (details not included here). 
 
a.  Murder of Baldomero de Jesus Ramirez, member of the Union 
of Municipal Workers of Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa, Esquintla. 
 June 17, 1999. 
 
Status:  No suspects. 
 
b.  Murder of Oswaldo Monzon Lima, Secretary General, Union 
of Gas Truck Drivers, Esquintla.  June 22, 2000. 
 
Status:  Suspect:  Mario Roberto Ortiz Barranco.  No arrests. 
 
c.  Threats Against Gloria Rafaela Cordova Miranda and Gilda 
Esperanza Tecun Sazo, members of the Union of Workers at the 
Choishin Textile factory, Villa Nueva, Guatemala province, 
July 18, 2001. 
 
Status:  Suspect: Wal Jong Lee.  Judge dismissed the case on 
July 23, 2002 for lack of evidence.  Case still open in 
Prosecutor\'s Office. 
 
d.  Murder of Baudilio Amado Cermeno Ramirez, Organization 
Secretary, Light and Power Union.  Guatemala City.  December 
 
SIPDIS 
21, 2001. 
 
Status:  Indictment (but no arrest warrant) issued October 
29, 2002, for Rosa Maria Gonzalez Gonzalez, his companion. 
 
e.  Bullet wounds to Marcos Alvarez Tzoc, Union of Workers at 
El Arco Plantation, Chicacao, Suchitepequez, January 18, 2003. 
 
Status:  Suspect: Julio Enrique de Jesus Salazar Pivaral. 
Report to judge in Suchitepequez on April 14, 2003 requesting 
arrest warrant for Salazar. 
 
f.  Murder of Carlos Franciso Guzman Lanuza, leader of Union 
of Municipal Workers and Secretary General of the Labor Front 
of the South Coast, in Nueva Concepcion, Escuintla.  November 
27, 2002. 
 
Status:  Witnesses placed in witness protection program. 
Case referred to Presidential Secretariat for Specific Issues 
on orders of Attorney General.  (Note:  press reported that 
Rolando Chacon Escobar, first councilman of Nueva Concepcion, 
was arrested for this and other crimes on April 25, 2003. 
End Note.) 
 
3.  (U) May Day March Bigger Than Past Years 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
Between 25,000 and 35,000 workers marched in May Day parades 
in the capital, a significant increase over recent years. 
The marchers, ranks were swelled by teacher organizations, 
who concluded a successful nationwide strike in March. 
(Note: The teacher strike was ruled illegal by labor courts, 
but Congress passed an amnesty for strikers on April 2. 
Teachers remain in dialogue with the government on unresolved 
budgetary demands and the fate of an education 
decentralization teachers unions have labeled privatization. 
End Note.)  The May Day march was initially divided between 
two major groupings, the UASP labor federation, which 
includes teachers groups, and the other major federations 
(UGT, UNSITRAGUA, CSNP).  All came together in the central 
square and were unified in their common demands: 
 
-- job creation, decent wages, reinstatement of illegally 
fired workers, agrarian reform, greater freedom to organize 
unions and bargain collectively, full implementation of the 
Peace Accords, 
-- resignation of the Labor Minister (for abuse of authority), 
-- rejection of a CAFTA and FTAA, 
-- rejection of payments to ex-civil defense patrollers who 
committed human rights abuses, 
-- rejection of increased payroll deductions for Social 
Security, and demands for greater autonomy for the Social 
Security Institute, 
-- rejection of fuel and electricity price hikes, and 
-- rejection of privatization of education, health and social 
security. 
 
4.  (U) President Portillo Touts Labor Priorities and CAFTA 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
The May 2 copy of the government\'s official daily, \"Diario de 
Centro America,\" includes text of President Portillo\'s May 
Day speech, including the following comments on the labor 
clause of a CAFTA: 
 
-- The labor clause must be integrated into the main text of 
a CAFTA agreement, 
 
-- There should be a \"cooperative focus\" in the enforcement 
mechanism, 
 
-- Responsibilities of governments and companies should be 
clearly differentiated, 
 
-- Our right to require clarification and amplification of 
the text must be respected, 
 
-- It should be understood that we cannot assume short term 
solutions for structural problems that require medium and 
long-term solutions, 
 
-- The dispute settlement mechanism for labor issues must be 
separate from other disputes, due to its special nature and 
the ILO and bilateral rules. 
 
The speech also highlights other GOG labor priorities: 
 
-- Ministry restructuring (new Strategic 5-year Plan) to 
better meet today\'s realities (70% of workers in informal 
sector, 50% of workers located in rural areas, coffee crisis, 
a weak Labor Ministry). 
 
-- A Labor Ministry budget boost of 30% for 2004. 
 
-- A collective bargaining agreement for the ministry\'s 
workers. 
 
-- Labor Code reforms to be sent to Congress shortly: on 
child labor, domestic workers, sexual harassment, universal 
(no-fault) severance pay, and procedural and administrative 
process changes. 
 
-- Tripartite dialogue, formation of a national recreation 
institute for recreation for public sector employees, a new 
national core labor rights course. 
 
5.  (U) HRR and UNICEF Child Labor Report Get Headlines 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
Major daily Prensa Libre printed an opinion piece on May 2 
headlined \"Labor Criticisms from the U.S. Against Guatemala\" 
noting criticisms of labor rights violations in the context 
of CAFTA negotiations.  The article quoted extensively from 
the Department\'s Human Rights Report for 2002 (newly 
translated and on the Embassy\'s website).  Press also gave 
extensive coverage to a recent report from the National 
Statistical Institute, funded by UNICEF and the World Bank, 
which reported the following statistics for child labor in 
Guatemala: 
 
-- highest incidence of child labor in Central America 
(507,000 children working between ages 7 and 14 (66% male, 
56% indigenous, 77% rural); 418,000 between ages 15 and 17 
(66% male, 47% indigenous, 69% rural); a total of 925,000 
child workers). 
 
-- The rate of child workers has risen from 7.9% in 1994 to 
23.5% today. 
 
-- 68% of child workers work in the agriculture sector. 
 
-- 76% of child workers work for their families and are not 
paid for their labor. 
 
-- Child workers work an average of 47 hours per week. 
 
-- 8,000 child workers work in dangerous professions such as 
fireworks production and in mines. 
 
6.  (SBU) Banana Conflict Escalating 
------------------------------------ 
 
In early March, 38 workers at the Lourdes and Fatimah 
plantations owned by BANDEGUA and leased to independent 
producers were fired in retaliation for a two week work 
stoppage during which workers also blockaded an access road 
that serves a number of plantations, including some not 
involved in the work stoppages.  BANDEGUA is the Guatemalan 
subsidiary of Del Monte Fresh Produce of Coral Gables, 
Florida.  On April 24 the SITRABI banana workers union told 
U.S. Representative Levin that another 60 workers have since 
been fired, and all 98 workers and the SITRABI union 
leadership have been charged in criminal court for violations 
related to the loss of fruit and blockage of transit.  The 
Solidarity Center is considering including the conflict in 
its submission for CAFTA labor comments.  LabAtt inquired 
about this case on April 30 to Vice Labor Minister Monzon, 
and expressed concern that the ministry mediate labor 
conflicts before they escalate into criminal actions. 
Monzon\'s son, Sergio Monzon Ordonez, is reportedly the new 
operator of the plantations.  Monzon Sr. said a high level 
GOG group is being formed to seek resolution of the conflict 
and will provide additional information on May 7. 
 
7.  (U) Social Security Institute (IGSS) Raises Rates 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
The IGSS has invested funds in a controversial new housing 
project, and been the subject of union and employer calls for 
greater political autonomy, and the subject of never-ending 
corruption scandals that leave hospitals without medicine. 
Even more controversial, however, was the decision by the 
IGSS board to increase employer and worker payroll deductions 
beginning in April.   By changing the calculation of base pay 
to include mandatory bonuses, the IGSS decision nearly 
tripled the average contribution by workers and employers. 
The board also decided to delay IGSS coverage for new 
registrants for four months after inscription.  The payroll 
tax increase sparked a constitutional challenge from 
employers (CACIF), a non-binding resolution in Congress 
asking the board to reconsider the increase, and protests 
from labor groups. 
 
8.  (U) Unemployment Rising 
--------------------------- 
 
Press reported that unemployment (including underemployment 
) jobs that once finished, lead to unemployment) jumped from 
10.8% in 2000 to 18.3% in 2002, according to the National 
Statistical Institute\'s August-September 2002 Survey of 
Employment and Income.  During the same period, however, 
employment (especially in the informal sector) has increased, 
as more women have entered the workforce (increasing from 
700,000 in 1989 to 1.8 million (of a total of 4.9 million) in 
2002).  In Guatemala City, 43% of women workers are 
unemployed or under-employed.  The agriculture sector, which 
includes 50% of all male workers nationwide and 18% of women 
workers, has the highest rate of informal employment (80%), 
where workers are not covered by social security or other 
legal protections. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"7871","5/6/2003 22:12","03GUATEMALA1172","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENTIAL ASPIRANT BERGER LEAVES THE PAN, 
ACCEPTS CANDIDACY OF COALITION 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Presidential front-runner Oscar Berger 
announced on May 1 that he was leaving the National Action 
Party (PAN) to head a coalition of three smaller parties. 
Berger broke with the PAN after internal tensions erupted 
April 30 when the PAN Executive Committee (controlled by his 
rival Leonel Lopez) voted to no longer support Berger as its 
presidential candidate after he discussed forming an 
electoral alliance without party permission.  Berger,s exit 
from the PAN, while not unexpected, adds a new wrinkle to the 
already muddled presidential race.  As other parties regroup, 
the ruling Guatemalan National Front, headed by Efrain Rios 
Montt, hopes to benefit from splits in the opposition.  End 
Summary. 
 
Berger Candidacy Still Afloat 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Oscar Berger, who won the PAN presidential primary 
in October, 2002, announced on May 1 that he would be the 
presidential candidate for a coalition of political parties 
currently made up of Otto Perez Molina,s Patriotic Party 
(PP), Jorge Briz,s  Reform Movement (MR) and Ricardo 
Castillo Sinebali,s National Solidarity Party (PSN).  Berger 
had been wooing the coalation ever since differences (largely 
over patronage) between him and PAN Executive Secretary 
Leonel Lopez became increasingly unsolvable and threatened to 
marr the upcoming election.  When it became apparent that 
there was no conciliation in sight, Berger announced in late 
April that he would accept the support of the coalition, 
which goes by the initials GANA, provoking the PAN Executive 
Committee to announce on April 30 that Berger\'s decision 
effectively annulled his candidacy as the PAN\'s presidential 
hopeful.  That was the final straw for Berger, who withdrew 
from the PAN and began openly campaigning for the GANA.  In a 
campaign stop in the Department of Solola on May 3, Berger 
rallied local PAN members to vote for him.  He received the 
support of the local PAN leadership, that has now switched to 
his GANA coalition.  Berger hopes to woo away significant 
support from PAN voters who voted for him in the primaries. 
 
PAN\'s Prospects Sinking 
----------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Without Berger, who, despite a massive loss to 
President Portillo in 1999 consistently registers the highest 
poll numbers, the PAN enters the exclusive control of its 
Secretary General, Leonel Lopez Rodas.  It was Rodas who lost 
 
SIPDIS 
the PAN primary to Berger.  After apparently patching things 
up, Rodas and his allies strongly objected to Berger,s 
naming Gonzalez as his preferred running-mate.  Rodas seized 
Berger,s discussions about forming an alliance with other 
parties (without party approval) as the pretext for his 
ouster.  Thus far, the PAN has not announced a replacement 
candidate for Berger. 
 
Other groups GANA-bound? 
------------------------ 
 
4.  (SBU) The GANA coalition is in discussion with other 
small parties, including the divided leftist New National 
Alliance (ANN), which desperately needs financial support. 
The Unionista Party, led by former ministers under the Arzu 
Administration who split from the PAN in 2000, is currently 
keeping its distance from GANA, though we understand that 
there have been serious talks of an ultimate union. Christian 
Democratic Party (DCG) candidate Ricardo Bueso has launched a 
media blitz to raise his name recognition without much 
success, raising speculation that the DCG and its electoral 
partner, the Democratic Union party (UD) may also eventually 
join the GANA coalition. 
 
Opposition Holdouts 
------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Meanwhile, the leftist URNG has pledged to stay 
away from alliances this election, after suffering disastrous 
results in previous electoral coalitions.  Alvaro Colom is 
flirting with the PAN, after rejecting the GANA coalition and 
the earlier offer of the PAN vice presidential nomination 
under Berger.  The ANN is considering throwing its support to 
Alvaro Colom or Rigoberto Queme, the first indigenous 
presidential aspirant heading the Solidarity Movement 
alliance of civic committees, which has not yet been 
officially registered in the race.  Jacobo Arbenz Villanova, 
son of the late president ousted by the 1954 U.S.-supported 
coup, is another long-shot candidate (for the Democratic 
Social Participation Party-PDSP) who has chosen to avoid 
electoral alliances. 
 
Boost to the FRG 
---------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The FRG has the most to gain from the split-up of 
the PAN, though many analysts do not believe the large gap in 
the polls between Berger and Rios Montt will narrow much as a 
result.  The ruling FRG,s electoral possibilities could 
suffer if the GANA coalition gains further strength by 
uniting the opposition.  At present the FRG will hold its 
national assembly (postponed from May 3 to May 24), at which 
it will name its presidential candidate.  Conventional wisdom 
is that President of Congress Rios Montt will be selected as 
its presidential candidate, and Agriculture Minister Edin 
Barrientos as his running mate.  Should the FRG choose Rios 
Montt to head its ticket, we expect there will be challenges 
filed before the Constitutional Court. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Berger,s split with the PAN reflects the 
institutional weakness of Guatemalan political parties, and 
could give a momentary boost to the FRG by dividing the 
opposition.  The split further reflects the pique and poor 
political judgment of both Berger and Lopez Rodas, neither of 
whom was prepared to make the concessions on patronage 
necessary to keep the party together.  Berger and the GANA 
coalition have better prospects than the PAN to recover from 
this setback, since Berger,s financial supporters apparently 
still view him as the most likely prospect to unseat the FRG. 
 Considerable polling indicates that Berger has better 
positive name recognition than anyone else in the PAN party. 
Attracting and holding a diverse coalition together, however, 
will be difficult for Berger. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7872","5/6/2003 22:15","03GUATEMALA1177","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001177 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: ANOTHER STEP FORWARD: FURTHER REDUCTION OF EMP 
STAFF 
 
REF: 02 GUATEMALA 3309 
 
1. (U) Summary: At a May 2 public event, President Portillo 
officially demobilized 107 Presidential Guard (EMP) members 
in the second phase of the peace accord-mandated process to 
replace the EMP with a civilian agency.  The Ambassador 
attended the ceremony at the National Cultural Palace, and 
later discussed with the press the GOG\'s progress on peace 
accord implementation, advocating prompt EMP dissolution and 
other advances in the Peace Accord agenda.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) President Portillo announced on May 2 that the 107 
members of the EMP staff being retired would be absorbed by 
other civilian agencies within the GOG.  Added to the first 
staff reduction, which occurred on December 29, 2002 
(reftel), the EMP has now been reduced by 55 percent (204 
members) of its pre-Peace Accord size.  According to Portillo 
and Peace Secretary Catalina Soberanis, the GOG will 
demobilize the remainder of the EMP staff by October 31, 2003. 
 
3. (U) The Ambassador attended the public ceremony along with 
other chiefs of diplomatic missions.  After the event he told 
the press that the demobilization of the EMP was a positive 
sign of the GOG\'s commitment to fulfilling pending items on 
the peace agenda.  He also expressed USG concern over the 
lack of action so far towards completion of such peace accord 
mandates as increasing the tax burden, creating a transparent 
military budget, or increasing the budget of the Judiciary. 
 
4. (SBU) Ricardo Marroquin, director of the Secretariat for 
Administrative Matters and Security (SAAS), the new civilian 
agency tasked with taking over the bulk of the EMP\'s 
functions, told PolMilOff that the former EMP members joining 
his ranks were being very carefully screened before 
admittance.  Marroquin also noted that he was pleased with 
the transition thus far and that both he and the EMP staff 
were on schedule to meet the October 31, 2003, demobilization 
deadline. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT: The continuing demobilization of the EMP is 
encouraging, and has created expectations that the Portillo 
Administration will meet its goal of completely demobilizing 
the EMP and replacing it with a civilian agency by October. 
While in recent years the EMP has not been accused of the 
human rights abuses it was involved in during the internal 
conflict, the total lack of transparency into its actions and 
budget have led to concerns that it could be used, as it was 
in the past, for corruption and even election-year dirty 
tricks.  Its definitive departure later this year will be an 
important step forward in the peace process. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7901","5/7/2003 20:53","03GUATEMALA1189","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001189 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINS, SOCI, ASEC, CASC, GT 
SUBJECT: SPURNED EX-PACS KIDNAP OFFICIALS, BURN PROPERTIES 
 
 
1. Summary: Former civil patrol members (ex-PACs) on 
Guatemala\'s south coast rioted on May 5 to protest continued 
delays in promised GOG payments for their war-time service. 
In San Francisco Zapotitlan, a small municipality in 
Suchitepequez Province, former members of civil-defense 
committees took the mayor and provincial governor hostage 
after many civil patrol members found their names were not 
included on a list of PAC members authorized compensation. 
The officials were released upon the arrival of special 
police to restore order.  In nearby Chicacao, hundreds of 
angry PACs burned the mayor\'s office, house, and cars, 
starting fires that also consumed a market and a museum. 
Tensions remain high as the complex and poorly understood 
compensation process gets underway after numerous delays. 
End Summary. 
 
2.  On Sunday, May 4, former PAC members began gathering in 
Mazatenango, capital of Suchitepequez Province, where they 
expected to receive the first of three GOG payments for their 
service during Guatemala\'s internal conflict.  On Monday 
morning, May 5, their numbers had reached 15,000 by some 
accounts.  The process for determining who qualified for 
payment and how the payments would be made was not clear to 
the former civil patrol members, and thousands of those who 
arrived seeking payment were not on the list.  New delays in 
transferring the funds caused local authorities to call on 
the PACs to return to their respective communities.  Many did 
so without incident, but tensions boiled over in San 
Francisco Zapotitlan and Chicacao, about 170 kilometers south 
west of Guatemala City. 
 
3.  In San Francisco Zapotitlan, frustrated ex-PACs took 
advantage of the presence of Provincial Governor, Fernando 
Terecero Muxi, to press their demands by holding him hostage 
along with the Mayor, Marco Tulio Gonzalez.  Both officials 
were released unharmed several hours later when members of 
Police Special Forces arrived. 
 
4.  In Chicacao, several thousand people from surrounding 
communities descended on the Mayor\'s office to demand 
payment.  Of the 2,600 people who had registered as PACs in 
this office, only 240 had reportedly been approved for 
payment.  (Comment: nationwide, some 620,000 people 
registered as ex-PACs in response to President Portillo\'s 
promise to pay them for service during the conflict. 
However, the GOG has approved payments to only about 160,000 
people whose names appear on lists maintained by the Defense 
Ministry, plus another 18,000 war widows. End Comment.) 
According to press accounts, the crowd became unruly and 
began looting when it learned the majority present would 
receive no payment.  Some charged that the 240 who were 
approved for payment were supporters of the mayor.  The 
Mayor\'s son apparently began firing into the air in order to 
extract his father from the building.  The crowd responded by 
setting fire to the office and then to the Mayor\'s home and 
both his official and personal vehicles.  The fires spread to 
the market, destroying some 35 small businesses and a museum 
before heavy rains put them out.  One person died, apparently 
of cardiac arrest, in the disturbances.  Police and military 
units arrived by evening to restore order. 
 
5.  Comment:  The complicated process of compensating the 
PACs has just begun, and we expect further misunderstandings 
will occur.  While the situation in Suchitipequez appears to 
be an isolated incident, the potential for disturbances in 
other areas where the compensation is being paid exists.  In 
the year since PACs shut down Peten Province and eventually 
obtained Portillo\'s promise to pay, they have been unable to 
organize nationally even as the compensation package was 
reduced and the lists of eligible recipients vetted.  Most 
PACs appear content to wait and see if they are among the 
160,000 who will eventually be paid.  However, we have heard 
numerous reports of corruption in the registry process, and 
it remains possible that people who paid to have their names 
included on the list may take measures against those they 
paid if they are excluded.  In this election year, charges of 
fraud or favoritism could lead to violence.  The GOG\'s 
decision to provide compensation at the provincial level 
guarantees that there will be a lack of uniformity in the 
process.  Press accounts report that the registration process 
to qualify for compensation is proceeding uneventfully so far 
in Peten, Quiche and Zacapa.  There were no incidents in 
Guatemala City among the more than 2,000 ex-PACs who 
assembled in the Zone 1 on Monday.  We have yet to see 
reports that actual cash payments have been made and will 
continue to monitor this issue. 
 
6.  While we will keep a close eye on the overall security 
situation, at this time there is no indication that the 
ex/PACS in Suchitepequez might attempt to disrupt the CAFTA 
and Consultative Group meetings in Guatemala (scheduled for 
the week of May 12). 
HAMILTON 
"
"7903","5/7/2003 22:15","03GUATEMALA1191","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02GUATEMALA2605","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: ANOTHER LANDMARK TOPPLED: MACK CONVICTION 
OVERTURNED 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 2605 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1084 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: On May 7, the Fourth Court of Appeals 
overturned the Third Sentencing Court\'s October 3, 2002 
conviction of Colonel (ret.) Juan Valencia Osorio (Ref A). 
The Fourth Court of Appeals also found Helen Mack\'s appeal of 
the acquittal of General (ret.) Edgar Godoy Gaitan and 
Colonel (ret.) Juan Oliva Carerra invalid (Ref B).  All three 
defendants were released immediately.  The Ambassador 
attended the appeal and spoke with the press afterward (para 
4).  Helen Mack intends to appeal to the Supreme Court within 
the allotted 15 days. Our public statements on this are 
crafted to support the trial process without interfering. End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) The Fourth Court of Appeals released their decision on 
the Mack case on May 7, to an overflowing courtroom filled 
with family members, human rights advocates, and pro-military 
observers.  Outside the courtroom, ex-PACS were protesting 
and disgruntled would-be observers jostled for position. 
When the Ambassador arrived - a sign of the intense US 
interest in the case - he was verbally harassed by members of 
a tense and partisan crowd as he entered the courtroom. 
 
3. (U) The Fourth Court of Appeals decided that there was a 
contradiction in the Third Sentencing Court\'s October 3, 2002 
decision.  They said that the Third Court was erroneous in 
finding one defendant guilty for a crime that came out of a 
chain of command, even though Valencia Osorio admitted that 
he transmitted the order to assassinate Myrna Mack. 
 
4. (U) After the release of the decision, the Ambassador told 
the press: \"We believe this case is of enormous importance 
for the Guatemalan system of jurisprudence.  We of course 
respect the decision of the Guatemalan judiciary.  At the 
same time, we find it extremely disappointing that, 13 years 
after such a barbarous crime, its intellectual authors remain 
free.\" 
 
5. (U) HROff spoke to Helen Mack shortly after the verdict. 
She said that she was horribly disappointed that the 
Guatemalan justice system had again failed her, and that she 
would appeal the Fourth Court\'s decision to the Supreme Court 
immediately.  She and her team of lawyers have fifteen days 
to formulate their new appeal. 
 
6. (U) COMMENT: We are disappointed that yet another landmark 
conviction in a human rights case has been overturned by the 
Fourth Court of Appeals (the first being Gerardi, also in 
October 2002).  We will remain vigilant in our efforts to 
protect Helen Mack and her team from threats, and to support 
justice for the killing of Myrna Mack. 
 
7. (U) COMMENT CONTINUED: We do not have yet an assessment on 
juridical grounds of the latest sentence. Nor do we know yet 
what the prospects are of overturning the Appeals Court 
verdict. We will pursue both questions with our contacts. The 
Embassy will also release a statement along the lines of the 
Ambassador\'s statements (para 4), and we encourage the 
Department to do likewise. 
 
8. (SBU) COMMENT CONTINUED: We continue to walk a fine line 
on this case: we support Helen Mack\'s quest for justice, but 
we do not want to be perceived as interfering in the judicial 
process, which would be counterproductive for the Mack case 
and our overall human rights objectives. 
HAMILTON 
"
"7928","5/8/2003 18:37","03GUATEMALA1205","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE106632","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/T 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, GT, WHO 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA DEMARCHED ON TOBACCO CONTROL CONVENTION 
 
REF: STATE 106632 
 
1.  PolOff discussed reftel points and left non-paper with 
Sylvia Corado, Director for Multilateral Affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry on May 5, 2003.  Corado expressed 
appreciation for the Spanish language version of the 
non-paper, saying it would help her prod the Health Ministry. 
 Corado said it was unclear, even at this late date, if the 
Health Ministry would send representatives to the May 19 - 28 
World Health Organization Assembly in Geneva due to budget 
problems.  She said the GOG understood the U.S. need to be 
able to ratify the convention with reservations, but was 
noncommittal as to whether Guatemala would support efforts to 
delete Article 30 (prohibiting reservations). 
HAMILTON 
"
"8040","5/13/2003 16:44","03GUATEMALA1243","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/08/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, EAID, PREL, PINR, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT OF SUPREME ELECTORAL TRIBUNAL DISCUSSES 
UPCOMING ELECTIONS WITH AMBASSADOR 
 
 
Classified By: AIDOFF Todd Amani for reason 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  During a courtesy call by the Ambassador, 
the President of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) 
indicated his belief that General Rios Montt is prohibited by 
law from being a candidate for president, but noted that if 
the TSE is asked to decide this question, other magistrates 
may have different views.  He stated that the TSE would be 
seeking a decision from the Constitutional Court to force the 
Congress to name a new magistrate to fill the position left 
open when one of the original magistrates selected by the 
Congress refused to take the position.  He also indicated 
that the Carter Center had sought him out to discuss an 
election observation mission. End summary. 
 
TSE Position on Rios Montt Candidacy 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador paid a courtesy call on President of 
Guatemala\'s Supreme Electoral Tribunal Oscar Bolanos on May 
7, 2003 to express support for their efforts and review 
current issues facing the Tribunal.  In response to a 
question about what the TSE will do if General Rios Montt 
attempts to register as a candidate, Bolanos indicated that 
he believes it is clear under the law that he cannot be a 
candidate.  When asked how other magistrates feel about the 
issue, Bolanos indicated that he had spoken to two of them 
and believes there may be some willingness by others on the 
TSE to approve Rios Montt as a candidate.  (COMMENT:  Bolanos 
 
SIPDIS 
position on this issue could be important if the TSE must 
rule on Rios Montt\'s candidacy.  Observers believe two of the 
current magistrates may have links to the FRG, while the 
remaining two seem to operate more independently.  Thus, 
Bolanos\' position on the five-person tribunal could be the 
determining vote.  Even if the TSE were to disapprove a Rios 
Montt candidacy, it would likely be appealed to the 
Constitutional Court which could well approve his candidacy. 
END COMMENT) 
 
Addressing Disputed TSE Position 
----------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) The Ambassador raised the issue of the TSE position 
that was not filled after the new TSE was initially named, 
noting that an OAS legal review suggested that Congressional 
failure to select a new magistrate could leave the TSE open 
to legal challenges at any point during the election process. 
  Bolanos indicated that the TSE has pressed this issue with 
Congressional leaders repeatedly since they took office but 
have been told that Congress is unable to get the two-thirds 
vote needed to name a new magistrate.   Referring to the law, 
he noted that he believes the current situation whereby a 
suplente has filled the position is defensible legally (as 
the FRG leadership has stated to Embassy officers), but the 
TSE believes the questions raised about this situation could 
 
SIPDIS 
damage the credibility of the institution during the election 
period.  He noted confidentially that the TSE would be 
seeking a ruling from the constitutional court the following 
day to force the hand of the Congress on this issue. 
(COMMENT:  Legal opinions on this matter seem to differ, but 
Bolanos is probably right that this issue needs to be 
addressed for political reasons.  Court action may put 
increased pressure on the Congress to get the few remaining 
votes needed to name a new magistrate and resolve this 
situation. END COMMENT) 
 
Carter Center Interest In Observation Mission 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
4.  (SBU) In response to a question about various planned 
observation missions to be carried out by the OAS, EU, and 
local civil society groups, Bolanos noted that he had been 
sought out by the Carter Center while observing the Argentina 
election process regarding a possible observation mission to 
Guatemala.  He noted that the TSE is generally supportive of 
these efforts.  (COMMENT:  Embassy was not aware of Carter 
Center plans for an observation mission, but welcomes their 
involvement if they have funding from other sources.  At this 
point we do not have resources available to fund a Carter 
Center observation effort.) 
HAMILTON 
"
"8090","5/15/2003 20:38","03GUATEMALA1277","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE126276","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA RATIFIED INSTRUMENTS ON PROTECTION OF 
CHILDREN 
 
REF: STATE 126276 
 
Guatemala has ratified all three conventions mentioned 
reftel.  The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed 
conflict and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child 
prostitution, and child pornography were both signed on 
September 7, 2000 and ratified on May 9, 2002.  The 
Convention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action 
for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (ILO 
182) was signed on July 23, 2001 and was ratified on August 
21, 2001.  ILO 182 was deposited on October 11, 2001 and 
entered into force for Guatemala one year later. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8111","5/16/2003 14:59","03GUATEMALA1281","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001281 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: NATIONAL ELECTIONS CONVOKED FOR NOVEMBER 9 
 
 
1.  The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) officially announced 
on May 15 the convocation of elections for President, all 158 
seats in Guatemala\'s unicameral Congress and mayors and city 
council members to take place on November 9, 2003.  If no 
candidate for President receives more than 50% of the vote, a 
second round of elections (only for President) will be held 
on December 28.  The convocation by the TSE officially begins 
the electoral campaign, though \"unofficial\" campaigning has 
been going on for several months.  Parties can now officially 
register their candidates, and it is expected that the major 
parties will name their candidates within the next few weeks. 
 The ruling Frente Republicano Guatemalteco (FRG) is 
scheduled to hold its national assembly on May 24, at which 
it will nominate its candidate.  The GANA coalition is 
backing the presidential candidacy of Oscar Berger, but is 
still considering its slate for legislators and local 
government positions.  The left-of-center UNE (which garnered 
20% of the vote in the 1999 elections) will again register 
Alvaro Colom as its candidate, and the small Democracia 
Cristiana (DC) is supporting Ricardo Bueso for President. 
The Partido de Avanzada Nacional (PAN) recently split and has 
not yet identified a presidential candidate. 
 
2.  A legal controversy over the make-up of the TSE remains 
unresolved.  When the current members of the TSE were 
sworn-in in 2002, one of the permanent members did not accept 
the position.  He was replaced by an alternate, but Congress 
failed to elect a new permanent member as some contend the 
law demands.  On May 14 the Constitutional Court instructed 
Congress to elect a permanent member by May 15.  A vote was 
held in Congress on possible replacements, but none of the 
candidates received the required two thirds majority. 
Representatives of three of the major political parties told 
reporters that they do not believe this impasse should have 
any bearing on the legitimacy of the elections, but 
constitutional lawyers argue that the current composition of 
the TSE exposes the entire electoral process to future 
litigation and possibly annulment by the Constitutional 
Court.  Congress will hold a special session in July to try 
once again to replace the missing permanent member of the TSE. 
 
3.  Comment: The opening of the electoral race will distract 
the government, the political parties and many elements of 
civil society from other urgent tasks of governing and 
legislating during the next few months.  Polls have not been 
published since the recent break-up of the PAN, and it is not 
clear which potential candidates have the best chance of 
making it into the second round.  The biggest unknown remains 
the question of whether Rios Montt will be named the 
candidate of the FRG, and how the courts would deal with his 
candidacy.  There is a growing move among some of the 
opposition parties to unite in order to better confront the 
FRG.  Should former General Rios Montt decide to run, it is 
expected that the momentum to unite the opposition will grow. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8159","5/19/2003 22:34","03GUATEMALA1299","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARRARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETRD, SNAR, PHUM, KDEM, EAID, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT PORTILLO DISCUSSES CAFTA, PEACE ACCORDS, 
COUNTER-NARCOTICS COOPERATION AND LABOR RIGHTS 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  In a May 14 breakfast at the Ambassador\'s 
residence with visiting senior USG officials, President 
Portillo expressed hope for the prompt conclusion of a free 
trade agreement with the U.S. which, he said, \"will transform 
Guatemala;\" said that in his remaining months in office he 
would seek Congressional passage of laws implementing the 
peace accords in order to \"ensure the accords remain a 
priority for the next government\" and prevent a new 
administration from rolling back reforms; and noted that he 
hoped Guatemala\'s increased counter-narcotics cooperation 
would lead to an early USG decision to \"re-certify\" to reduce 
the chances that this issue would influence the upcoming 
national elections.  Portillo and Minister of Finance Weymann 
spoke of the need for constitutional reform in order to 
modernize tax laws and implement many elements of the peace 
accords.  The Ambassador and senior Washington visitors told 
Portillo that, through trade capacity building programs, we 
will help the GOG prepare their most disadvantaged economic 
sectors to participate effectively in CAFTA; stressed the 
importance of making concrete advances in implementation of 
the peace accords in the next eight months; and expressed 
hope that the GOG would initial a maritime counter-narcotics 
cooperation agreement in the next few days, increasing the 
likelihood of an early inter-agency review of Guatemala\'s 
decertification as a cooperating partner in the war on drugs. 
 The meeting was cordial and reaffirmed President Portillo\'s 
desire to advance issues of interest to us in the remaining 
months of his presidency.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On May 14, the Ambassador hosted a breakfast at the 
Residence for visiting USG officials to discuss CAFTA, Peace 
Accord implementation, counter-narcotics cooperation and 
labor rights with President Alfonso Portillo.  Portillo was 
accompanied by Minister of Foreign Affairs Edgar Gutierrez 
and Minister of Finance Eduardo Weymann.  The Ambassador was 
accompanied by Assistant USTR Regina Vargo, USAID Assistant 
Administrator for LAC Adolfo Franco, Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for INL Deborah McCarthy, Acting Deputy 
 
SIPDIS 
Undersecretary of Labor Jorge Perez-Lopez, WHA/CEN Guatemala 
Desk Officer Brian Wilson, Acting USAID Guatemala Director 
Deborah Kennedy-Iraheta, EconCouns Steve Olson, and PolCouns 
David Lindwall (notetaker). 
 
Bullish on Free Trade 
--------------------- 
3. (C) President Portillo opened the meeting by saying his 
government believes a free trade agreement with the United 
States will transform Guatemala, not only by creating jobs 
and generating economic growth, but also by modernizing and 
opening up the economy.  Portillo said he expects Guatemala\'s 
Congress to overwhelmingly approve the final agreement, 
noting that \"only a handful of legislators from the left\" 
will oppose it.  He noted that some in the private sector and 
civil society will oppose CAFTA based on their own parochial 
interests and fundamental misunderstandings of how it will 
work, but said that opposition will not be significant. 
Portillo noted that it will be important to work with sectors 
of the economy that will be disadvantaged by CAFTA -- 
specifically mentioning small farmers -- to prepare them to 
better compete.  He acknowledged that CAFTA will not 
transform Guatemala overnight, but heralded it as the best 
hope for bringing Guatemala\'s economy into the 21st century. 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez added that CAFTA will break the 
monopolies that have long dominated Guatemala\'s economy. 
 
4. (C) USAID Franco said that the USG is prepared to help 
disadvantaged sectors of the Central American economies 
prepare for CAFTA, and has established a fund for trade 
capacity building focused largely on small enterprise and the 
rural sector.  He added that USAID is currently working in 
Guatemala on agricultural diversification in response to the 
coffee crisis.  He noted that the success of CAFTA would 
depend to a large extent on GOG actions to increase 
transparency and to improve the administration of justice. 
USTR Vargo commented that customs rules in Central America 
need to be uniform and transparent in order for Central 
American economic integration to also benefit from CAFTA. 
Finance Minister Weymann acknowledged that Guatemala\'s 
customs procedures are in great need of reform, and blamed 
the zeal of the tax authority (SAT) for much of the current 
lack of transparency in customs operations (Comment: Weymann 
has recently been trying to distance himself from the SAT, 
which reports to him.  He appears to be signalling that Vice 
President Reyes, not he, is the one who condones some of the 
SAT\'s heavy handed tactics. End comment).  President Portillo 
interjected that despite major reforms in customs, tax 
evasion at the port of entry is still on the order of 45%. 
Minister Weymann said that, in terms of USG trade capacity 
building programs, he believes reforming the way Central 
Americans market their products is just as important as 
modernizing production. 
 
Using the Consultative Group to Move Peace Process Forward 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
5. (C) The Ambassador told President Portillo that we have 
firm expectations that the Consultative Group Meeting (which 
met in Guatemala on May 13-14) would lead to a GOG plan of 
concrete actions which would implement many remaining Peace 
Accord commitments during the last eight months of the 
Portillo Administration.  The Ambassador praised the IDB\'s 
leadership of the meetings, and said we would consider the CG 
a success if it produced a package of specific areas for 
short-term compliance.  He expressed disappointment that the 
political parties had used their fifteen minutes at the CG to 
attack the government, but did not offer a vision on how they 
would implement the accords, leaving the impression that the 
political parties are not making peace accord implementation 
an important component of their electoral platforms. 
 
6. (C) Foreign Minister Gutierrez blamed civil society and 
the opposition for \"self-fulfilling prophecies of failure\" of 
the accords, noting that both played an important role in 
implementing the accords.  He said that the Portillo 
Government\'s big challenge in its remaining months was 
ensuring that peace accord implementation \"survives the 
transition to a new government.\"  President Portillo said 
that he had implemented many of the accords through 
presidential decrees, which could easily be undone by a new 
government.  He intends to consolidate much of the 
implementation to date by having Congress pass laws 
implementing the reforms, making it more difficult for a new 
government to change them.  Minister of Finance Weymann 
commented that it is particularly important to resume 
implementation of the fiscal pact, noting that several of the 
candidates in the upcoming election are already talking about 
dropping taxes in possible violation of the peace accord 
commitment to raise tax revenue to 12% of GDP. 
 
7. (C) President Portillo launched into an impassioned 
defense of the need for constitutional reform, saying that 
the current constitution had been \"made to order\" by the 
different interest groups that held sway at the time of its 
drafting (1985).  He said constitutional provisions affecting 
financial and fiscal laws stand in the way of genuine 
economic reform and create a drag on implementing the peace 
accords.  In response to questions regarding what mechanism 
he would use to reform the constitution (i.e. through a vote 
in Congress, ratified by a national referendum or by a 
constituent assembly), Portillo said that previous attempts 
to reform the constitution by Congress had been voted down 
when submitted to a national referendum.  Therefore, he 
believes the only way to achieve constitutional reform is 
through a constituent assembly.  He acknowledged that opening 
up the whole constitution for reform, as would happen if a 
constituent assembly were convoked, had its perils, but said 
he is considering calling for a constituent assembly to meet 
after the first round of elections (November 9, 2003) to 
minimize potential politicization (Note:  Guatemala\'s 
constitution requires that Congress convoke constituent 
assemblies by a two-thirds majority vote, a virtual 
impossibility without significant consensus among all 
parties. End note). 
 
The Path Ahead on Counter-Narcotics Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
8. (C) INL DAS McCarthy said that recent improvements in GOG 
counter-narcotics cooperation were encouraging, and said that 
the U.S. would look to Guatemala to initial a maritime 
counter-narcotics cooperation agreement before we would 
consider proposing an early decision on \"re-certifying\" 
Guatemala.  Foreign Minister Gutierrez acknowledged the 
importance of a maritime agreement, and said his Ministry had 
provided a counter-proposal to us \"in record time.\"  He 
welcomes our comments on their counterproposal and said the 
GOG hopes to initial an agreement with us \"very soon.\" 
Gutierrez said that re-certifying Guatemala early (before the 
normal September review) would reduce the impact of the 
decision on the November presidential elections, and would be 
healthy for all sides.  DAS McCarthy noted that the interests 
of the different USG agencies that weigh-in on certification 
decisions are very diverse, and urged the Guatemalans to 
sustain counter-narcotics performance in all areas if they 
want an early review of their certification status. 
 
9. (C) The Ambassador said that we were pleased with the 
Castillo extradition, but that other extradition requests are 
pending that could be moved forward by the GOG.  He noted 
that the Attorney General\'s office is cooperating with an 
extensive request by DOJ for evidence in a recent money 
laundering case in which cash was seized in Guatemala, and 
that completing that request is very important to us.  He 
added that we remain interested in seeing the Attorney 
General\'s office assign greater personnel resources to their 
money laundering unit, and said that cooperation between that 
unit and bank supervisors is still inadequate.  The 
Ambassador noted, however, that we have been pleased with the 
passage of asset forfeiture legislation, the increase in 
cocaine seizures, the burning of stored drugs used for 
evidence in old cases and other progress in counter-narcotics 
cooperation.  President Portillo said \"you will see new 
progress in the next week!\" 
 
New Steps on Labor Reform 
------------------------- 
10. (C) DOL Jorge Perez-Lopez told President Portillo that he 
had met at length with Minister of Labor Victor Moreira on 
May 13 and was pleased with the recent establishment of a 
bilateral working group on labor rights, formed at the 
Ambassador\'s suggestion in the context of a GSP labor rights 
review.  He said the USG views this as an important mechanism 
for continuing dialogue on this critical issue that has 
implications for human rights and free trade.  President 
Portillo recounted his government\'s actions in promoting 
labor rights, and the opposition these had generated on the 
part of the private sector.  He said that he intends to 
promote further reforms in his remaining months in office, 
including one aimed specifically at reducing the time labor 
courts can consider a case from the current two years down to 
six months. 
 
Comment 
------- 
11. (C) President Portillo clearly appreciated the chance to 
meet with visiting senior USG officials, and to articulate 
his vision for progress on the bilateral agenda in the 
remaining months of his presidency.  He has made conclusion 
of a free trade agreement with us and regaining certification 
as a cooperating partner in the war on drugs a high priority, 
but provided little indication that peace accord 
implementation would see much concrete progress in coming 
months.  We will continue to press Portillo to not let the 
election campaign distract him from the full range of issues 
on our bilateral agenda. 
 
12. (C) The cable was not cleared by visiting USTR, USAID, 
DOS and DOL officials prior to their departure from post. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8222","5/22/2003 16:29","03GUATEMALA1320","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001320 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/CRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, KIRF, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: 2002 RELIGIOUS FREEDOM REPORT UPDATE 
 
1.  Post recommends the following updates to the 2002 country 
report on religious freedom for Guatemala: 
 
Section I. 
---------- 
No changes. 
 
Section II. 
----------- 
Legal/Policy Framework 
Paragraph 1: Please replace \"In April 2002, on the seventh 
anniversary of the signing of the accord, the U.N. 
Verification Mission noted that there had been little 
progress in its implementation\" with \"In May 2003, the U.N. 
Verification Mission noted in its presentation to the 
international donor community at the Consultative Group that 
the accord continued to face serious barriers to its 
implementation.\" 
 
Restrictions on Religious Freedom 
Paragraph 1: Please add as last sentence: \"The Commission has 
not taken action to protect any specific sacred sites since 
its inception.\" 
 
Abuses of Religious Freedom 
Paragraph 1 
Please replace entire paragraph with: 
An appeal remains pending in the Constitutional Court 
regarding the June 2001 conviction of three military officers 
and an assistant priest for the 1998 murder of Bishop Juan 
Gerardi, the Coordinator of the Archbishop\'s office on Human 
Rights (ODHA).  In October 2002, an appeals court annulled 
the 2001 conviction and ordered a retrial, which the ODHA 
immediately appealed to the Supreme Court.  In February 2003, 
the Supreme Court Appellate Chamber confirmed the June 2001 
trial, a decision which the defense then appealed to the 
Constitutional Court. 
 
Paragraph 2 
Please replace entire paragraph with the following three 
paragraphs: 
There were multiple reports of assassinations of religious 
leaders of various denominations over the last year, though 
evidence has not surfaced in any of the cases to suggest that 
the murders were related to the individuals\' religious 
practices.  In October 2002, Mayan spiritual leader Antonio 
Pop Caal was kidnapped and murdered in Coban, Alta Verapaz 
province.  His alleged murderers are being held in custody 
and a trial is pending.  In December 2002, Mayan priest 
Marcos Sical Perez, was murdered by unknown assailants in 
Salama, Baja Verapaz province.  An investigation is pending. 
 In April 2003, human rights activist and Mayan priest Diego 
Xon Salazar was murdered in Chichicastenango, Quiche 
province.  Xon Salazar had reportedly received multiple death 
threats related to his work denouncing the resurgence of the 
civilian defense patrols (ex-PACs) in the Quiche.  The 
investigation of his murder is pending.  In May 2003, Mayan 
priest Gerardo Camo Manuel was murdered during a religious 
ceremony in Rabinal, Baja Verapaz province, after reportedly 
receiving death threats from one or more members of his 
community. 
 
Also in May 2003, evangelical pastor Oscar Armando Montiel 
Montalvan was murdered during an evening service in his 
parish in San Juan Sacatepequez, Sacatepequez province. 
While the police continue to investigate the crime, none of 
his congregation has testified to the identity of the 
assailants, leading the police to speculate that witnesses 
fear retribution.  Catholic priest Edgar Estuardo del Cid was 
kidnapped, detained, and threatened for several hours along 
with three parishioners in Guanagazapa, Escuintla province. 
In the report filed with the Public Ministry, the victims 
attributed the crime to del Cid\'s criticism of social 
injustice during his homilies. 
 
While these crimes have not been linked to religious 
persecution, they do represent a disturbing trend of 
targeting voices of dissent against the corruption and 
impunity that plague Guatemalan society. 
 
Section III. 
------------ 
Paragraph 1: Final sentence, delete \"lynching,\" replace \"such 
activities against\" with \"attacks on\" 
 
Paragraph 3: Replace first sentence with, \"Within the Jewish 
community, there were no reported incidents of Anti-Semitism.\" 
 
Paragraph 4: Delete first sentence. 
 
Paragraph 6 
Please insert, \"The Ecumenical Forum\'s leadership council 
continues to meet on a monthly basis, maintaining dialogue 
between most religious groups operating in Guatemala.\" 
Section IV. 
----------- 
HAMILTON 
"
"8249","5/23/2003 15:47","03GUATEMALA1336","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE131326","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001336 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON POSSIBLE PUERTO RICAN REQUEST FOR 
RECOGNITION 
 
REF: STATE 131326 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Marco Tulio Chicas, 
Deputy Director for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign 
Ministry on May 21.  Chicas, who is the MFA\'s action officer 
for the Central American Integration System (SICA), confirmed 
that Puerto Rico had requested Guatemalan support in its bid 
for permanent observer status in SICA and said he believed 
Puerto Rico had made the same request in all SICA capitals. 
Guatemala\'s response to Puerto Rico, according to Chicas, has 
been to merely receive the request.  Chicas stated that the 
MFA understood the logic or our points and added that no 
decisions would be made until the MFA\'s legal department 
reviewed the request.  We would note, however, that Puerto 
Rico sought and obtained observer status at the Central 
American Parliament in October of 2001. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8250","5/23/2003 15:48","03GUATEMALA1337","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE118495","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/USOAS, L/WHA, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, KTIA, AORC, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON INTER-AMERICAN CONVENTION AGAINST 
TERRORISM 
 
REF: STATE 118495 
 
1. Information provided below is keyed to reftel questions: 
 
A. The OAS Terrorism Convention is not currently on the 
legislative agenda.  Congress is in recess until August. 
General elections will be held in November.  The Foreign 
Ministry continues to consult internally and with various 
line Ministries about the Convention. 
 
B. According to Sylvia Corado, Director for Multilateral 
Affairs, the Foreign Ministry anticipates no obstacles to 
eventual ratification.  Corado acknowledged that the process 
has been slow but said that the political will Guatemala 
showed when it signed the Convention is still in place. 
 
C. Until the Convention goes to Congress, the key leader in 
the ratification process will be the Foreign Minister. 
Corado believes it is unlikely the Convention will be 
forwarded to the current Congress.  The leadership of the 
next Congress will be determined in the upcoming elections. 
 
D. Currently, the FRG party holds a slight but disciplined 
majority in Congress.  The party is led by retired General 
Efrain Rios Montt. 
 
E. According to Corado, Guatemala can ratify the Convention 
without making any legislative or regulatory changes. 
However, once ratified, some changes will be required. 
Corado said this was part of the reason consultations were 
taking so long.  Although she could not recall details, 
Corado said she had attended discussions related to changes 
in asylum and extradition laws, and assured us that the 
Government of Guatemala was preparing to move quickly once 
the Convention is ratified.  Asked about constitutional 
provisions related to extradition (Article 27), Corado could 
only say the matter was under review and was not considered 
an obstacle. 
 
F. Many of the Convention\'s obligations are already covered 
by current legislation.  Technically, once the Convention is 
ratified it will have the force of law.  Corado called this a 
\"gray area\" and said that the Foreign Ministry would propose 
the necessary legislative changes to Congress once the 
Convention was ratified. 
 
G. In Guatemala, the text of a convention is approved by the 
Congress and ratified by the President.  Ratification is not 
automatic following approval of the text by Congress. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8285","5/27/2003 20:00","03GUATEMALA1357","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1172","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: FRG NOMINATES RIOS MONTT FOR PRESIDENT 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1172 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The ruling Guatemalan Republican Front 
(FRG) nominated its founding leader, Efrain Rios Montt, for 
President; former Agriculture Minister Edin Barrientos for 
Vice President; and corrupt former Minister of Public Works 
Luis Rabbe was nominated for Mayor of Guatemala City by a 
party conclave on May 24.  The selection of Rios Montt does 
not ultimately resolve the issue of whether he will be the 
FRG standard-bearer, as constitutional challenges are 
expected to emerge once the FRG registers his candidacy with 
the Supreme Electoral Tribunal.  For the moment, however, 
Rios Montt\'s candidacy could help unify a fragmented 
opposition.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) At a party assembly on May 24, the ruling FRG 
nominated retired General and former de facto head of state 
Efrain Rios Montt for President, and Edin Barrientos for Vice 
President.  Party leaders announced that they will decide by 
the end of May when they will officially register their 
candidate with the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE).  The NGO 
Center for the Defense of the Constitution (CEDECON) has 
already announced that it will challenge the 
constitutionality of Rios Montt\'s eligibility to run for 
President, in the event the TSE allows him to register.  The 
Constitutional Court ruled against Rios Montt\'s presidential 
candidacy in 1990, based on Constitutional Article 186 (a), 
which prohibits candidates who attained power through 
extra-constitutional means from eligibility to run for 
president.  The composition of the Constitutional Court has 
changed, however, and under Guatemalan law, decisions of the 
Constitutional Court are not binding on future decisions. 
Rios Montt has assembled a \"dream team\" of constitutional 
lawyers, including former Foreign Minister Gabriel Orellana, 
to argue his case.  They will argue that the constitutional 
principle of non-retroactivity should be applied to this 
case, since the Constitution took effect in 1985, after Rios 
Montt had been installed by coup d\'etat and served as head of 
government in 1982-83. 
 
3.  (SBU) Edin Barrientos, Rios Montt\'s running-mate, had 
served as Agriculture Minister and previously worked as a 
consultant to USAID.  The FRG gave prominent billing at its 
assembly to Luis Rabbe, the FRG candidate for Mayor of 
Guatemala City.  Rabbe has been the subject of numerous 
lawsuits for his mishandling of state funds while he was 
Minister of Public Works. 
 
4.  (U) A Prensa Libre-commissioned political opinion poll 
published May 27 put GANA coalition presidential nominee 
Oscar Berger in front of voter preferences with 39%, followed 
by Alvaro Colom of the National Unity of Hope Party (UNE) at 
9% and Rios Montt at only 4%;  33%  of the 1,200 people 
polled nationwide were undecided and 7% said they would not 
vote for anyone.  The poll was also reported that widespread 
confusion over Berger\'s abandonment of the National 
Advancement Party (PAN); 32% believe that Berger is still the 
PAN candidate, and the PAN ranked as the highest chance of 
winning the elections, with 39%.  (Note:  Berger left the PAN 
after differences with party secretary Leonel Lopez Rodas on 
May 1 (RefTel).  He now heads the GANA coalition comprised of 
the Patriotic Party (PP), the Reform Movement (MR), and the 
National Solidarity Party (PSN). End Note.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The FRG\'s affirmation of Rios Montt as its 
presidential standard-bearer sets the stage for the General 
to face constitutional challenges head-on in the five months 
remaining before the elections.  It shifts the political 
focus to the Constitutional Court, which is expected to rule 
on his candidacy by the end of June.  If challenges are 
raised and the court rules in Rios Montt\'s favor, he will be 
free to run.  The selection of Barrientos for the vice 
presidency helps balance (i.e. improve) the FRG\'s image with 
the electorate, but FRG insiders tell us that Barrientos is 
not viewed as a possible substitute for Rios Montt.  The more 
revealing move, in our view, was the FRG\'s selection of 
notoriously corrupt former Public Works Minister Luis Rabbe 
for Mayor. 
 
6.  (SBU) The recent poll, commissioned and executed by 
anti-government media, is consistent with previous polls 
showing the FRG and Rios Montt as also-rans, though we would 
warn that polls are often misleading in Guatemala.  Berger 
cannot be too sanguine about his lead, however, as the polls 
also reflect his precipitous drop since entering the race as 
the presumptive PAN candidate in October, 2002.  (Note:  In 
1999, Berger also entered the race the favorite, left the PAN 
and then returned, and lost in a landslide to the FRG\'s 
Portillo.  End Note.)  Nevertheless, Berger will benefit from 
the FRG\'s nomination of Rios Montt, which is likely to 
polarize the presidential race between FRG and anti-FRG 
forces.  Berger is attempting to broaden his coalition by 
courting the Left, and Rios Montt\'s long-awaited decision to 
run may lead some to overcome their scruples and join with 
Berger in the hopes that unifying the opposition is the only 
way to defeat Rios Montt. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8347","5/29/2003 15:26","03GUATEMALA1375","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE141801","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001375 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/OAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/27/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA MAKES COUNTER REQUEST ON OAS CANDIDATES 
 
REF: A. STATE 141801 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1340 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  See paragraph 4. 
 
2. (U) Per ref A, following up on our previous demarche (ref 
B) and diplomatic note, PolOff discussed post-specific and 
Central American points with Sylvia Corado, Director for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on May 28. 
Corado expressed appreciation for our favorable view of Dr. 
Altolaguirre\'s candidacy and pressed for a commitment of U.S. 
support.  Corado took careful note, without commenting, of 
our view that the Salvadoran candidate is also well qualified 
and of our hope that both the Guatemalan and Salvadoran 
candidates will join us on the IACHR.  Corado then repeated 
the position that Guatemala would vote according to the 
qualifications of the candidates, adding that no decisions 
had been made.  PolOff reviewed the qualifications of the 
U.S. candidates with her. 
 
3 (C) Corado then asked if the U.S. would be willing to 
publicly express support for Jorge Mario Garcia Laguardia, 
Guatemala\'s candidate for the Inter-American Court of Human 
Rights.  Told that the decision would have to be made in 
Washington, Corado hinted that our support for either of 
Guatemala\'s candidates would likely result in Guatemalan 
support for the U.S. candidates.  Corado added that 
Laguardia\'s candidacy was Guatemala\'s priority.  Laguardia 
will accompany the Guatemalan delegation to the OAS General 
Assembly. 
 
4. (U) Action request.  Please advise how post should respond 
to the GOG\'s request for support of their candidates at the 
OASGA. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8517","6/5/2003 14:46","03GUATEMALA1435","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 001435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
USDOL FOR ILAB: JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ AND ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, ELAB, ETRD, CASC, GT 
SUBJECT: ASSISTANT SECRETARY STRUBLE\'S MAY 29-31 VISIT TO 
GUATEMALA 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor David Lindwall. Reason 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  During a May 29-31 visit to Guatemala, to 
participate in a WHA Entry Level Conference, Acting Assistant 
Secretary Curt Struble met with Vice President Reyes Lopez, 
 
SIPDIS 
Acting Foreign Minister Aguilera and Minister of Interior 
Reyes Calderon to discuss the full range of bilateral issues. 
 Vice President Reyes reiterated the Portillo 
Administration\'s desire to complete free trade negotiations 
with us by November, 2003, and said that the GOG would 
conclude a maritime counternarcotics agreement with the U.S. 
during the first week of June.  In a call on human rights 
leader Helen Mack, AA/S Struble expressed USG support for 
Mack\'s efforts to obtain justice in the case of her sister, 
who was murdered by security forces in 1990, and the creation 
of an international mission to investigate the actions of 
clandestine forces that have threatened human rights workers 
in recent years.  AA/S Struble and the Ambassador secured 
assurances from Attorney General de Leon that greater 
attention would be given to the investigation of the murders 
of American Citizens and labor union members.  De Leon also 
described the ongoing investigation of a major corruption 
case at the Social Security Institute that could implicate 
important political sectors.  Press attention during the 
visit focused on USG concerns over a possible Rios Montt 
presidency and satisfaction with improvements in 
counternarcotics cooperation.  The visit brought attention 
both publicly and privately to the need for concrete actions 
to advance critical issues on the bilateral agenda in the 
remaining eight months of the Portillo Administration.  End 
Summary. 
 
Vice President Anxious to Conclude Free Trade Negotiations 
----------------------- 
 
2. (C) Vice President Francisco Reyes Lopez, accompanied by 
Acting Foreign Minister Gabriel Aguilera and Minister of 
Interior Reyes Calderon, hosted a lunch at the Presidential 
Palace for AA/S Struble, the Ambassador and PolCouns 
(notetaker) on May 30.  Reyes said that the Portillo 
Administration is firmly committed to completing a free trade 
agreement with the United States (CAFTA), and would like to 
conclude the negotiation as soon as possible.  Reyes noted 
that President Portillo will be handing over power to a new 
president in January 2004, and that by November 30, 2003, 
Congress will out of session.  He said the GOG is prepared to 
increase the pace of negotiations in order to complete them 
by the end of October, 2003, giving the Guatemalan Congress a 
month to ratify the agreement.  Reyes fears that if an 
agreement is not concluded by then, it will be difficult to 
get the current Congress to approve it, and the next Congress 
is expected to be much more fractured than the current one. 
 
3. (C) AA/S Struble and the Ambassador praised the Guatemalan 
negotiating team, and said that Guatemala\'s positions at the 
most recent round of talks had moved the negotiation 
significantly forward.  The Vice President agreed, but said 
that the GOG still has some concerns over potential losses to 
its agricultural sector.  He described how, during a visit to 
Iowa, he was amazed at the US potential for producing corn. 
He said Guatemala could never compete against the US in corn 
production, yet 50% of Guatemalans are corn farmers.  Lopez 
argued that an agreement that did not take into consideration 
Guatemala\'s particular agricultural needs would only lead to 
increased rural poverty and more immigration to the United 
States.  AA/S Struble commented that during the April 10 
meeting between President Bush and the Central American 
presidents, President Bush said emphatically that the US does 
not want an agreement that disfavors Central America.  USG 
policy is to negotiate an agreement that is beneficial to 
both sides.  Struble also noted AID\'s efforts to coordinate 
its development assistance strategy to the needs of CAFTA, 
but he warned that inefficient producers are going to come 
under pressure with or without CAFTA. 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador told the Guatemalans that the USG was 
pleased with the increase in counternarcotics cooperation in 
recent months.  He noted that we are close to signing a 
maritime counternarcotics cooperation agreement, and 
expressed hope that the GOG would ratify this agreement in 
the coming days.  Acting Foreign Minister Aguilera said that 
the MFA expects to have an agreed text ready to send to 
Congress for ratification by June 4 (Note: In Guatemala, 
Congressional ratification of international agreements 
precedes signature by the President. End note).  Vice 
President Reyes said that much has been done, but 
acknowledged that much remains to be done to deny the use of 
Guatemala to the traffickers as a transit point for drugs 
heading north.  He made a pitch for greater USG financial 
assistance to the counter-drug effort in Guatemala.  The 
Ambassador commented that recently passed asset forfeiture 
legislation, if properly applied, would generate far more 
resources for the law enforcement purposes than the U.S. 
would ever be able to provide.  He urged the Guatemalans to 
begin implementing this law and to use the proceeds 
effectively to fight drugs. 
 
5. (C) On other matters, AA/S Struble expressed concern for 
the slow movement by GOG authorities to investigate the 
murders of 13 AmCits in the past three years, and called on 
the Vice President to use the Executive\'s influence with the 
Attorney General and the Courts to give serious attention to 
these cases.  He noted that the USG is also concerned about 
the recent murders of several labor leaders and the lack of 
effective investigation of their cases.  AA/S Struble told 
Vice President Reyes that labor rights are a fundamental 
concern of the U.S. in Guatemala, and that the potential GSP 
review and ongoing CAFTA negotiations brought more attention 
to Guatemala\'s labor situation.  Vice President Reyes 
acknowledged that more needs to be done to protect labor 
rights, and went on to list the Portillo Government\'s 
accomplishments in this field (e.g. passage of a new labor 
code, increases in the minimum wage, lowering of requirements 
for establishing new unions, etc.). 
 
Helen Mack Describes Long Road Ahead for Human Rights 
----------------- 
 
6. (C) Accompanied by Ambassador and PolOffs, AA/S Struble 
visited the Myrna Mack Foundation to discuss with Foundation 
Director Helen Mack recent developments in the Myrna Mack 
case, progress in establishing the proposed commission to 
investigate clandestine groups (CICIACS) and widespread 
concerns about the failure of the justice system and 
continuing impunity.  Mack thanked AA/S Struble for his visit 
and the sustained USG public support, both from Washington 
and the Embassy.  Mack said that she was disappointed by the 
recent reversal of the October 2002 conviction that she and 
her legal team had won against the alleged intellectual 
authors of her sister\'s murder.  She also explained the 
appeal process before the Supreme Court, which she filed on 
May 28, in which she asked the court to uphold the earlier 
conviction of retired Colonel Valencia Osorio and his former 
EMP (Presidential Military Guard) supervisor, retired General 
Godoy Gaitan.  Mack anticipates that no decision will be made 
on her appeal until after the November 2003 elections and the 
installation of a new government in January of 2004.  AA/S 
Struble expressed USG disappointment in the recent setback in 
the Mack case, and the hope that the Guatemalan judicial 
system would soon find the intellectual authors responsible 
for the crime. 
 
7. (C) In regard to CICIACS, Mack opined that the most 
important effect the CICIACS could have would be to expose 
publicly the existence of the organized criminal structures 
that are undermining the rule of law in Guatemala, and 
beginning to remove those structures from the positions of 
power they currently enjoy, thanks to their connections in 
the government.  She thanked AA/S Struble for the commitment 
of USG financial and political support for this endeavor. 
 
8. (C) Mack said that she did not have high expectations that 
the recent Consultative Group Meeting would spur the 
government of President Alfonso Portillo to make significant 
progress in implementing remaining elements of the peace 
accords during its final eight months in office.  She opined 
that little improvement would be made in administration of 
justice in Guatemala unless the international financial 
institutions conditioned their loans on concrete improvement 
in the administration of justice.  Mack does not believe 
sufficient incentives are currently in place to bring about 
improvements in administration of justice, and that the only 
tool that is likely to have sufficient leverage is 
conditionality on IFI loans.  She expressed thanks for the 
support of the international community which used the 
Consultative Group Meeting to press the GOG for concrete 
reforms, but said that unless Guatemalans overcome their 
apathy and begin to take ownership of resolving these 
problems themselves, this government and future governments 
would have little incentive to respond. 
 
9. (C) Following the meeting, AA/S Struble spoke with 
reporters and reaffirmed the priority the USG attaches to the 
promotion and defense of human rights in Guatemala.  Calling 
Helen \"a national treasure,\" Struble lauded her role in 
seeking justice in human rights cases and working to end the 
impunity that has long overshadowed human rights cases in 
Guatemala. 
 
Attorney General Promises Greater Attention to AmCit and 
Labor Cases 
------------------------- 
 
 
10. (C) AA/S Struble and the Ambassador met on May 29 with 
Attorney General Carlos de Leon Argueta to congratulate the 
GOG on recent improvements in counter-narcotics cooperation 
and to encourage stronger efforts by the Public Ministry to 
investigate unsolved murders of U.S. citizens, Guatemalan 
labor leaders, and to ensure the independence of a GOG 
forensic laboratory which will receive USG funding.  He told 
de Leon that the USG, Congress and civil society are 
concerned about unsolved murders of AmCits (13 in the past 
three years) and lagging investigations of murdered labor 
leaders in Guatemala.  AA/S Struble requested that the GOG 
make further efforts to combat and prevent these crimes by 
ending the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators.  AA/S Struble 
further noted that an AFL-CIO petition to withdraw 
Guatemala\'s GSP trade benefits is currently under review, and 
Congressional approval of an eventual free trade agreement 
with Central America will draw increased attention to labor 
rights protections in the region.  AA/S Struble noted a 
growing recognition by some in Central America (he cited 
Salvadoran President Flores in an April 11 meeting between 
Central American presidents and President Bush) that Central 
American governments need to do a better job convincing U.S. 
NGOs and the AFL-CIO that a CAFTA will enhance protection of 
labor rights in the region.  The Ambassador went on to 
encourage de Leon to devote more resources to combat money 
laundering. 
 
11. (C) De Leon said that he was reviewing the progress of 
the special prosecutor investigating the murder of AmCits, 
and will replace him if insufficient progress is revealed. 
To combat impunity the Ministry had added 100 new 
prosecutors, including six dedicated to money laundering 
investigations.  A new Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Trade Unionists and Journalists and supporting team had 
recently been appointed, and is already making progress, 
pursuing arrest warrants, judicial processes and trials. 
Some of the crimes against union leaders, for example the 
murder of the head of the municipal union of Nueva 
Concepcion, Escuintla province in November 2002, were 
motivated not by anti-union motives but by a power struggle 
within organized crime, he said.  Arrests have already been 
made in that case, which involved 16 murders.  De Leon 
expressed GOG gratitude for support from the Ambassador and 
DEA which has resulted in record seizures of drugs and cash 
in recent months.  He also cited the Ministry\'s efforts to 
prosecute human rights crimes, citing the successful 
prosecution of 16 former agents of the anti-narcotics police 
for abuse of authority in the Chocon case. 
 
12. (C) De Leon said he was optimistic about what the 
Ministry could accomplish over the remaining three years of 
his term.  However, although the Public Ministry had 
substantially improved its human resources since his arrival, 
it still lacked sufficient funding to provide adequate 
national coverage.  The average prosecutor must handle 1,500 
cases per year, and the Ministry budget can only afford an 
average expenditure of $130 per case.  Nevertheless, the 
Ministry had launched low-cost initiatives to extend the rule 
of law.  For example, the ministry recently ran a public 
information campaign to combat intra-family violence; 
complaints by battered women shot up 400% as a result.  De 
Leon said his other priorities include the creation of a new 
FBI-like institution within the Public Ministry and combating 
corruption.  He claimed to be resisting overtures from 
corrupt elements within the Presidential Guard (EMP) and to 
have instituted procedures to prevent the disappearance of 
seized assets.  \"In this job I cannot have friends or 
enemies, I must apply the law equally to everyone,\" he said. 
 
13. (C) De Leon said that the current IGSS scandal (involving 
the theft of over $30 million from the Social Security 
Institute) shows that the GOG\'s system to detect and 
investigate money laundering works.  All the IGSS funds 
diverted to illicit and overseas accounts have been 
recovered, he said.  He gave AA/S Struble a list of the banks 
and sums of money identified (including Citibank) totaling 
$17.4 million, and said that money laundering statues 
provided the Public Ministry new powers to take measures to 
freeze illicit accounts.  The Ministry had executed over 20 
raids and seized computer records and other evidence of the 
fraud committed by IGSS officials.  The Ministry will arrest 
Carlos Wholers, an FRG Deputy and then-President of the IGSS 
board of directors (named by President Portillo), as well as 
the other members of the board of directors on May 30.  AA/S 
Struble encouraged the GOG to recoup workers\' funds and 
punish those responsible. 
 
Press Questions Focus on Rios Montt Presidential Candidacy 
------------------------ 
 
14. (U) At a press roundtable attended by 20 reporters on May 
30, most questions focused on a recent statement by State 
Department Spokesman Boucher to the effect that if former 
General Efrain Rios Montt were elected President in the 
upcoming election, the United States would have a difficult 
relationship with his government.  Reporters also asked about 
the status of Guatemalan counternarcotics cooperation (and 
the possibility of Guatemala regaining certification as a 
cooperating partner in the war on drugs) and USG objectives 
in the ongoing free trade talks. AA/S Struble addressed the 
question about Rios Montt by reading the State Department\'s 
earlier statement and saying it speaks for itself.  On 
counternarcotics cooperation, AA/S Struble told reporters 
that there have been several concrete improvements in 
counternarcotics cooperation in recent months, and that the 
USG would evaluate this progress at the appropriate time.  In 
response to questions about CAFTA, AA/S Struble noted the 
firm commitment of President Bush to securing an agreement 
that is good for both sides.  AA/S Struble\'s statements 
played prominently in all the papers and radio on May 31. 
 
Comment 
------- 
15. (C) The visit of Acting Assistant Secretary Struble 
brought attention, both publicly and privately, to the need 
for the Portillo Administration to focus efforts in a number 
of concrete areas of our bilateral agenda in its remaining 
eight months in office -- namely, successful completion of 
free trade negotiations, continued progress in 
counternarcotics cooperation, effective promotion of human 
rights (including the establishment of CICIACS), and 
investigation of the murders of American citizens and labor 
union leaders.  As national elections begin to distract the 
Government and other political actors from the task of 
addressing critical areas of our bilateral agenda, the 
Embassy will press the government and Attorney General to 
keep their eye on the ball to ensure that their commitments 
result in concrete actions. 
 
16. (U) This cable was cleared by AA/S Struble prior to his 
departure from post. 
MCFARLAND 
"
"8528","6/5/2003 22:56","03GUATEMALA1454","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001454 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, PHUM, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: FRG REACTS TO USG STATEMENT ABOUT RIOS MONTT 
CANDIDACY 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Guatemala\'s anti-government dailies gave 
prominent play to the Department\'s May 27 statement 
expressing concern over the presidential candidacy of former 
de facto president Efrain Rios Montt.  Zury Rios and other 
prominent FRG contacts immediately weighed in with the 
Ambassador and Embassy Officers to express their 
disappointment with the U.S. position.  The opposition has 
been privately pleased with the U.S. statement, though public 
reaction has been limited. We do not know to what extent FRG 
pique will affect the leadership they have taken in Congress 
in promoting legislation of importance to us.  End summary 
 
2. (U) State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher\'s May 27 
statement that \"in light of Mr. Rios Montt\'s background, it 
would be difficult to have a cordial relationship\" with a 
government headed by the former general, were he elected 
President, played prominently in the Guatemalan press on May 
28-29.  Rios Montt responded by telling reporters that he has 
no doubt that the United States, as the foremost promoter of 
democracy in the world, will uphold the choice of the 
Guatemalan people in the upcoming election.  He added that he 
does not understand why the United States could be worried 
about him winning the election, as Americans are generally 
firm believers in opinion polls, and the most recent voter 
preference polls give him only three percent.  In response to 
questions during a May 30 press roundtable in Guatemala City, 
visiting Acting WHA Assistant Secretary Curt Struble 
reiterated Spokesman Boucher\'s statement without elaboration. 
 President Portillo has not commented on the statement, and 
Vice President Reyes limited himself to saying he had not yet 
seen it. 
 
3. (C) Rios Montt\'s daughter and Second Vice President of 
Congress Zury Rios called on the Ambassador on June 2 to 
express her disappointment with the U.S. statement.  She 
believes that the newest statement implies that relations 
between the U.S. and a Rios Montt government would be 
\"unfriendly,\" which she views as significantly different from 
the characterization of \"awkward\" that had been transmitted 
to her privately by Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan Fisk in 
November, 2002.  She was \"shocked and taken aback\" by the 
\"strong\" USG statement, particularly in light of the FRG\'s 
consistent and almost single-handed promotion of USG 
interests in Congress during these past three years (e.g. 
passage of legislation covering money laundering, IPR, labor 
rights, asset forfeiture, maritime counternarcotics 
cooperation, Mayan Jaguar counter-narcotics exercises, New 
Horizons and more).  The Ambassador told her that the newest 
public statement and earlier private statements were 
essentially the same: that, given the history, there is a 
political reality beyond our control that would make it 
extremely difficult to have the kind of friendly relationship 
with Guatemala that we would ideally prefer.  Zury Rios 
closed by saying that if Rios Montt is elected to the 
presidency in November, the U.S. will continue to get \"far 
better cooperation from the FRG on a full range of issues 
than (the USG) would get from any of the other parties.\" 
 
4. (C) Embassy officers have also received complaints from 
Minister of Finance Eduardo Weymann and First Secretary of 
Congress Haroldo Quej, who believe the USG position is 
\"unfair\" and unbalanced by not mentioning USG concerns about 
other candidates (including human rights concerns in the case 
of URNG candidate Rodrigo Asturias, and corruption concerns 
in the case of others).  Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez 
told the Ambassador that the FRG bloc in Congress is very 
upset (\"muy molestos\") with us. 
 
5. (C) Private sector leaders, in conversations with the 
Ambassador and Embassy Officers on May 30 and June 2, were 
elated at the USG statement, and believe that it was 
important for the USG to weigh in at a time when Guatemalan 
institutions are under pressure from the FRG to allow Rios 
Montt to become a candidate in apparent violation of the 
constitution.  Civil society leaders have also been 
supportive, by and large, though nationalistic concerns may 
have contributed to keeping their support for the statement 
private for now. 
 
6. (U) Public reaction has been relatively muted.  Op ed 
writers, who typically latch on to matters confronting the 
USG with the government and the ruling FRG, have largely 
resisted commenting on these latest statements.  One paper 
gave prominent play to an interview with URNG Congressman 
Ricardo Rosales who said it was \"unacceptable\" for a foreign 
government to \"interfere\" with the electoral process in 
Guatemala, arguing that it is up to Guatemalans to decide who 
their next president will be. 
 
7. (C) Comment: USG concerns over Rios Montt\'s presidential 
ambitions have long been known by the FRG and its opponents. 
Now that the United States view has been placed unambiguously 
in the public spotlight, Guatemala\'s official institutions 
that will ultimately have to decide on the constitutionality 
of Rios Montt\'s candidacy will know that their decision will 
face international scrutiny.  It is too soon to evaluate what 
reaction Guatemalan voters will have to USG engagement on the 
Rios Montt candidacy.  We do not know to what extent FRG 
pique will impact on their helpfulness thus far in securing 
votes in Congress on issues that are crucial to us (i.e. the 
counter-narcotics maritime agreement, which has been driven 
by Zury Rios), but we expect cooperation may well be impacted 
in areas of legislation of secondary importance. 
MCFARLAND 
"
"8554","6/6/2003 18:28","03GUATEMALA1464","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA884","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 001464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND CA/OCS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC, ELAB, PHUM, SOCI, GT 
SUBJECT: AMCIT LAND DISPUTE IN ALTA VERAPAZ 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 884 
 
1.  Summary.  \"Finca Esmeralda,\" a coffee farm in Alta 
Verapaz province owned by Carlos Ardebol, and AmCit, has been 
occupied since February by organized landless peasants who 
have damaged personal property and prevented the return of 
the Ardebol family.  There are of over 40 such occupations by 
peasants in the province, several of which involve the 
Ardebol family.  While Ardebol appeals to the courts to 
defend his right to property, his family has abandoned the 
property for the capital, fearing for their security.  Since 
being notified by the Ardebol family of this land dispute in 
February, the Embassy has actively pursued resolution of the 
case.  On February 12, responding to the initial occupation, 
PolOff contacted the occupying campesino group leader to 
express concern over AmCit safety and property rights; on 
March 17 EconCouns accompanied the Ardebols to a session with 
campesino lawyers at the land dispute agency (CONTIERRA); on 
March 27 ConGen met with Carlos Ardebol and the 
representative of the peasant organization in Coban, the 
provincial capital; and on March 31, the Ambassador raised 
the case with the Minister of Government (RefTel), who 
pledged to investigate property damage and to act quickly on 
any court-ordered dislodgment order.  On April 30, PolOff 
learned of ongoing Government efforts to mediate the case 
through dialogue with the squatters.  End Summary. 
 
Status of Case 
-------------- 
 
2.  PolOff spoke on April 30 with Eric Gonzalez, CONTIERRA\'s 
Coban representative to inquire about the status of the Finca 
Esmeralda case and to express concern about the forcible 
entry and trashing of Carlos Ardebol\'s house.  According to 
Gonzalez, CONTIERRA held a successful meeting on this 
conflict on April 29, in which Carlos Ardebol and CONIC 
representatives (Mario Garcia and Hector, but not Arturo 
Chok, who could not make it) agreed to the following measures: 
 
--  Ardebol will suspend demands in the criminal courts while 
pursing dialogue. 
 
--  CONIC will conduct an investigation into the damages to 
Ardebol\'s personal property. 
 
--  Ardebol will develop an inventory of his possessions and 
his own report on the damage. 
 
-- Both sides will next meet on May 15 at CONTIERRA for 
further mediation.  Members of the community which claims the 
right to passage through the ranch on private roads will also 
attend, and more fundamental issues about the occupation 
(which continues) will be discussed. 
 
PolOff congratulated Gonzalez for these results, expressed 
concern for the Ardebol\'s property rights as U.S. citizens, 
and told him the Embassy will be in touch after May 15 to 
hear how that meeting goes. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
3.  On February 11, EconCouns and LabAtt met with Mrs. 
Ardebol and her adult sons (Carlos and Roger).  EconCouns 
told them he had raised their security concerns with the Vice 
Minister of Government.  They had had no contact or other 
evidence of follow-through.  LabAtt told the Ardebols he had 
raised similar concerns with the national campesino 
coordination organization (CONIC).  The Ardebols explained 
that they had decades-old problems with which they were 
dealing satisfactorily and new, CONIC inspired problems 
involving people not originally from the area.  Violence and 
threats appeared with CONIC, they claimed.  The new problems 
date back a couple of months, no more.  They said that their 
case was similar to others in Alta Verapaz, which has 
experienced a spate of land occupations over the past year. 
They claim that they provide right of way on the road through 
their land (which we had heard was an issue for a neighboring 
town) but were increasingly being harassed when they closed 
the road for the night. 
 
4.  The Ardebols say that they have clear title to most of 
the land they claim, some if it going back within the family 
for over one hundred years.  Some dual-title land was 
reportedly cleared in their favor by CONTIERRA, with whom 
they have been in continuing contact.  The Ardebols claim 
several properties in San Miguel Tucuru, Alta Verapaz 
province, including finca Esmeralda, Finca Bella Vista, and 
Finca Coyocte. 
Embassy Expresses Concern About AmCit Safety 
------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  On February 12 PolOff spoke with Juan Tiney, CONIC\'s 
national leader, and again expressed Embassy concern for the 
safety of the Ardebol family as American citizens.  PolOff 
explained the Embassy\'s responsibility to protect U.S. 
citizen property rights.  Threats to the Ardebol\'s security 
came from campesinos blocking a road on Finca Coycote 
approximately a month ago.  The Ardebols are committed to 
dialogue and negotiation as a means to resolve campesino 
claims to their land.  PolOff urged CONIC to attend a meeting 
to be held in Coban to discuss the dispute, hosted by the 
authorities.  The Ardebol\'s are alarmed by reports that 
campesinos organized by CONIC have recently occupied Finca 
Bella Vista, and claim that tension and threats have 
increased since CONIC appeared in the area, mentioning 
specifically CONIC regional organizer Miguel Perez Chiquin. 
The land and labor courts are the proper venues for land and 
labor claims.  Political dialogue is possible through the 
National Roundtable on Agrarian Conflict to be conducted on 
February 13 by the Presidential Secretary for Agrarian Issues. 
 
6.  Tiney responded that he understood Embassy concerns, and 
that he gave similar priority to security of members of 
CONIC.  He repeated assurances that CONIC does not and will 
not threaten the security of anyone, but said that \"properly 
announced\" measures such as road blockades must be respected. 
 He expressed appreciation that the Embassy was involving 
itself in this issue, and urged us to tell American citizens 
to respect Guatemalan law and labor obligations.  He claimed 
that the occupation of Finca Bella Vista involves former 
workers there who had not been paid mandatory severance by 
the Ardebols.  After the GOG refused to take responsibility 
by accepting CONIC\'s Agrarian Platform proposal, campesinos 
occupied the finca to demand land in lieu of what they are 
legally owed.  CONIC would be pleased to attend the meeting 
in Coban on February 21 if invited, he said; the National 
Roundtable meeting is \"just a show\" and CONIC was undecided 
whether to attend. 
 
EconCouns Meets with CONTIERRA on Dispute 
----------------------------------------- 
 
7.  On March 17, EconCouns arranged a call on the Director 
General of CONTIERRA, Gustavo Ciraiz, and arrived to find 
himself in a meeting including the Ardebols and lawyers from 
CONIC.  CONTIERRA (somewhat reluctantly) supported the 
Ardebol\'s allegation that CONIC-associated campesinos were 
acting outside the law, destroying property, and \"torpedoing\" 
(CONTIERRA\'s word) a peaceful resolution.  CONIC lawyers 
backed off their original position and admitted that excesses 
had occurred and undertook to look into matters.  CONIC\'s 
lawyers asked the Ardebol\'s for information on any 
destruction or other problems caused by the campesinos.  They 
made some surprisingly condescending statements about 
campesinos\' ability to understand the legal points and the 
ease with which they could be whipped up by politically 
motivated leaders who did not necessarily have their best 
interest at heart.  CONIC lawyers also admitted (at the end) 
that Ardebols had made good faith efforts to resolve old 
problems and may have good points with current ones. 
 
8.  CONIC\'s lawyers stated that they were part of a pressure 
group that sought solutions, when necessary, \"outside of 
normal legal means.\"  EconCouns laid a polite but firm marker 
that the U.S. Constitution and Guatemala\'s gave no quarter to 
\"pressure\" for deciding issues of private property ownership. 
 He questioned the need to \"negotiate\" property ownership 
when it was likely that administrative and/or legal processes 
would determine, without doubt, who had legal title. 
EconCouns applauded CONTIERRA\'s efforts to finish its land 
registry research quickly and conduct a \"mini-cadaster\" of 
the area to back it up.  Perhaps negotiations would be useful 
once the research was finished and areas of legitimate 
uncertainty were identified, he said. 
 
Ambassador\'s Meeting with Minister of Government 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
9.  RefTel reports the Ambassador\'s request to Minister of 
Government Reyes Calderon in a meeting on March 31 to 
investigate the forcible entry and property destruction on 
the Ardebol property, and the Minister\'s pledge to act as 
soon as a court rules authorizes it. 
 
Consul General Finds Common Ground 
---------------------------------- 
 
10.  ConGen Jacobsen and PolOff met with Carlos Ardebol, 
CONIC and CONTIERRA/Coban on March 27 to discuss the Finca 
Esmeralda case.  ConGen received assurances from all parties 
of their willingness to meet to discuss peaceful resolution 
of this land dispute. 
 
11.  Carlos Ardebol told ConGen that he remains cut off from 
access to his farm, located an hour from Coban, and that he 
and his family have relocated temporarily to Guatemala City. 
He filed a complaint with the local office of the Public 
Ministry about the damage to his household goods by squatters 
(he showed us pictures of the inside of his farmhouse, which 
had ransacked).  Though he is seeking intervention by the MP, 
Ardebol is realistic about prospects for police action, and 
was also meeting with MINUGUA and local representatives of 
the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s office.  He said he would be 
willing to meet with CONIC\'s local organizers if CONTIERRA 
calls a new meeting.  He agreed to permit ConGen to share his 
cell phone number with CONIC to facilitate direct 
communication. 
 
12.  ConGen and PolOff then met at CONTIERRA\'s Coban offices 
with Arturo Chok, CONIC\'s local organizer responsible for the 
Finca Esmeralda dispute.  EmbOffs expressed USG concern about 
the security of U.S. citizens, the violation by squatters of 
his right to property, and the needless destruction of his 
personal effects.  Chok admitted with bowed head that he was 
\"aware of what happened at the Ardebol\'s house\" and that 
\"this is not what CONIC stands for.\"  Later, Chok said he was 
not sure who had trashed the house and put up the CONIC 
banner now hanging on the Ardebol\'s property warning people 
to stay out, saying \"outsiders\" may have been responsible. 
CONIC does not support such measures, he said.  CONIC does 
support the claims of the squatters to land, which involves 
\"historic\" rights to free passage, which he distinguished 
from the \"legal\" rights asserted by the Ardebols.  ConGen 
told Chok that the USG and the Embassy are involved in many 
initiatives in support of human and labor rights in 
Guatemala, including US visas, so CONIC\'s aggression against 
an AmCit could have repercussions far beyond Coban. 
 
13.  Asked by PolOff if he would be willing to meet with 
Ardebol, Chok said he would do so, under CONTIERRA\'s 
auspices, as long as the right of free access (to a road the 
Ardebol\'s built through their property) is also up for 
discussion.  We passed him Ardebol\'s contact information.  In 
Chok\'s presence, we thanked CONTIERRA (Carlos Echeverria) for 
its recent efforts to bring the parties to this dispute 
together and requested that a new attempt be made. 
Echeverria agreed to raise this request with his boss, 
Eduardo Gonzalez.  PolOff then called Carlos Ardebol and 
conveyed Chok\'s offer to meet under CONTIERRA\'s auspices, and 
suggested he contact Gonzalez. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
14.  The issue of AmCit safety is covered for the moment: 
the Ardebol family is in Guatemala City, far from Coban, and 
Ardebol said only he makes forays into Coban as he pursues 
this issue. 
 
15.  The land title issue is complicated, but not as 
complicated as CONTIERRA is making it.  The documents show 
that the family bought a number of adjacent parcels of land 
one-by-one and then consolidated them into two different 
farms.  However, a poorly delineated land grant from the 
1800s forms the basis for 59 small plots occupied by 
non-Ardebols, and the plots are not now adjacent to one 
another.  These plots have migrated and grown over time and, 
together, account for substantially more than the original 
land grant.  Issues of adverse possession (squatters rights) 
probably apply.  The Ardebols accept that some negotiation 
will be necessary to resolve this once CONTIERRA establishes 
who is on what plot where.  They would like to clarify title 
to what is and isn\'t theirs and, probably, sell to others the 
portions in the area that are still theirs. 
 
16.  The good news is that the GOG has not overreacted to the 
growing land occupation movement by resorting to the use of 
force, which could inflame the situation.  The bad news is 
that the GOG has not acted at all, from the Ardebol\'s 
perspective.  CONTIERRA\'s machinations to determine title 
issues have moved at a snail\'s pace, while the Ardebol\'s 
property rights continue to be violated by squatters as 
efforts to enforce eviction orders come to naught.  In this 
situation, dialogue and negotiation still offer an 
alternative means of dispute resolution, but the Ardebol\'s 
patience could soon run out.  We will continue to monitor and 
advocate progress in this case. 
MCFARLAND 
"
"8590","6/9/2003 13:23","03GUATEMALA1465","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1388","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001465 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA: JOHN JENKINS AND BILL BLOCK 
PANAMA FOR TREASURY ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/03/2013 
TAGS: KCOR, EFIN, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: SOCIAL SECURITY SCANDAL HITS FRG UNITY 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1388 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Critics continue to pounce on the ruling 
FRG for the scandal over the plundering of an estimated $45 
million in funds from Guatemala\'s social security institute 
(IGSS).  President Portillo is rumored to have given the 
green light for a thorough investigation.  The President, 
Vice President Francisco Reyes, President of Congress Efrain 
Rios Montt, and those more directly involved in the scandal 
have shown incredible disunity as each passes the blame to 
someone else.  Few new details of the actual crime have 
emerged, though Attorney General Carlos de Leon keeps pushing 
the case (and accompanying headlines) along.  Former IGSS 
General Manager Cesar Augosto Sandoval turned himself in 
after an abortive attempt to seek witness protection and has 
implicated former IGSS President of the Board and FRG Deputy 
Carlos Wohlers as the intellectual author.  Arrest warrants 
have been issued for all former IGSS board members.  The 
Constitutional Court (CC) overturned the Vice President\'s 
order to intervene in the IGSS, so it remains technically 
independent.  In a blow to Reyes, Portillo named his close 
friend and former Foreign Ministry Vice Minister Jorge Perez 
as the new IGSS President.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------- 
EVERYBODY SINGING \"NOT ME\" 
-------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) The IGSS scandal detailed in REFTEL has brought 
about an unprecedented amount of internal bickering among 
ruling party officials--unprecedented even by the standards 
of this notoriously fractured government.  Well-placed 
contacts argue that President Portillo feels he can 
successfully isolate himself from the scandal, so he has 
given the green light for a full investigation.  The 
implication is that either the Vice President or FRG members 
close to Efrain Rios Montt will be damaged.  FRG Deputy 
Haroldo Quej has frequently called press and opposition 
attention to the case a \"political lynching\" and has claimed 
that the FRG will come out clean.  Rios Montt and Vice 
President Reyes publicly disagreed over various aspects of 
the case and how well they each know Coban businessman and 
key figure in the alleged crime Gustavo Adolfo Herrera 
Castillo.  Newspaper headlines one day quoted Reyes saying he 
had forgotten that he had once dined at Herrera\'s house. 
Reyes also earned guffaws from commentators when he was 
quoted saying that the Guatemalan people were just as 
responsible as any public figure since they voted for this 
government. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
WOHLERS BLAMES SANDOVAL WHO BLAMES WOHLERS 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3. (C) The three most central figures in the scandal are FRG 
Deputy and \"Riosmonttista\" Carlos Wohlers, who served as 
President of the IGSS while the alleged thefts occurred; 
former IGSS General Manager Cesar Augosto Sandoval; and 
Gustavo Herrera.  Sandoval negotiated his surrender to 
authorities with Attorney General Carlos de Leon who 
allegedly promised Sandoval leniency under Guatemala\'s 
witness protection law.  In return, Sandoval promised to 
provide evidence proving that Wohlers was wholly responsible 
for the theft of funds.  In the end, the courts asserted that 
De Leon did not have the authority to place a suspected felon 
under witness protection and ordered Sandoval to prison. 
Wohlers has strongly denied involvement, with FRG (read Rios 
Montt) moral support, and counters he was unaware of 
Sandoval\'s activities.  However, a move to strip him of his 
congressional immunity proceeds.  Other members of the board 
have used the same defense. Herrera remains in the background 
as the figure most likely responsible for showing the others 
how to steal and launder the IGSS funds, although recent 
press reports indicate that the former Vice President of the 
IGSS board and close adviser to Rios Montt, Jorge Mario 
Nufio, also could have been the brains behind the scam. 
NOTE: Nufio was the congressional lead on the drafting of 
Guatemala\'s money laundering legislation and it\'s financial 
reform legislation.  He was also a member of the Monetary 
Board, which is responsible for setting monetary policy and 
supervision of the financial system.  END NOTE. 
 
--------------------- 
WHO RUNS THE IGSS NOW 
--------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) REFTEL reported that Reyes had almost immediately 
\"intervened\" in the IGSS after the scandal broke.  Critics 
quickly charged that the Vice President was leading a cover 
up and claimed that the executive had no authority to 
intervene in an independent agency.  Guatemala\'s umbrella 
business organization (CACIF) filed a case with the 
Constitutional Court, which ruled the intervention 
unconstitutional.  Reyes responded that he respects the 
courts decision even if he finds it very damaging to the 
country.  After the ruling, Portillo named his close personal 
friend and former Vice Minister of Foreign Relations Jorge 
Perez to be the new General Manager.  This is viewed by many 
to be a poke at Reyes given his poor relations with Perez. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5. (C) Little new information has been published on the IGSS 
scandal, but the opposition, press, and even FRG members have 
all been caught up in something of a food fight.  Even 
Attorney General Carlos De Leon has fallen into the scandal 
after it was revealed that he had been an adviser to another 
housing trust fund in which the IGSS had invested 
approximately $7.5 million.  The political ramifications are 
difficult to predict in a country accustomed to corruption 
scandals.  However, the quantity of money missing and the 
clear money trail revealed by money laundering investigators 
mean that someone will probably have to take a hard fall. 
Moreover, IGSS is Guatemala\'s social security, Medicare and 
Medicaid wrapped in one institution.  The populist leaning 
FRG will have a difficult time explaining to Guatemala\'s 
overwhelmingly poor population how it should not be held 
responsible for deteriorating service at the IGSS after its 
administration saw $45 million stolen from the people\'s 
savings. 
MCFARLAND 
"
"8600","6/9/2003 22:31","03GUATEMALA1479","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KDEM, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: RIOS MONTT CANDIDACY FACES FIRST LEGAL CHALLENGE 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The GOG\'s Registry of Citizens announced 
on June 6 its rejection of Efrain Rios Montt\'s presidential 
candidacy.  Rios Montt announced his intention to appeal the 
decision, a process involving several different institutions 
which could take months.  The deadline for candidates to be 
registered for the November 9 election is September 9.  On 
June 4, Congress appointed a new magistrate to the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal, filling a vacancy which some argued could 
have clouded the legitimacy of the electoral process.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.   (U) On June 6, the Registry of Citizens turned down Rios 
Montt\'s request for a certificate that he meets all the 
qualifications established in the Constitution to be a 
candidate for President.  Obtaining this certificate is the 
first step for any candidate before they can register their 
candidacy with the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE).  The 
decision, based on Article 186(a) of the Constitution, which 
prohibits candidates who took office as a result of 
extra-constitutional means, was expected.  Rios Montt\'s 
request was based on the principle that the 1985 Constitution 
is not retroactive in its application to his de-facto 
presidency, from March 23, 1982 to August 8, 1983.  The 
Registry decision noted that Article 186(a) was written in 
the past tense, indicating retroactivity.  The Registry had 
previously rejected Rios Montt\'s eligibility to run for 
president in 1990 and 1995. 
 
Reaction to Registry Decision 
----------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) While the political opposition and constitutional 
scholars applauded the Registry\'s ruling, Rios Montt said he 
will appeal.  On June 7 he told reporters that the Registry 
had exceeded its authority by making a legal interpretation 
of his qualifications.  President Portillo also supported 
Rios Montt\'s right to run, saying he knew of \"no impediment\" 
to his candidacy.  On the campaign trail in Western 
Guatemala, Rios Montt reportedly declared that \"if they do 
not permit me to participate, they will violate my rights, 
the law is not retroactive and it will be the people who 
elevate me to the Presidency.\"  Asked if the FRG was 
considering a replacement candidate, he said \"there is no 
substitute.\"  The FRG reportedly filed an appeal with the 
Registry after its decision on June 6.  Rios Montt drew a 
crowd of 20,000 supporters in Totonicapan on June 6, and 
continued to campaign over the June 7-8 weekend.  Civil 
society and some opposition party representatives hailed the 
Registry\'s decision as strengthening the rule of law in 
Guatemala. 
 
The Appeal Process 
------------------ 
 
4.  (U) The Registry\'s rejection of Rios Montt\'s candidacy 
can be appealed to the Department of Political Organizations 
of the Registry of Citizens within three days.  (Note: Press 
reported that the FRG sent documents to the Registry on June 
6.  End Note.)  The director of the Registry has 8 days to 
decide on the appeal.  If the Registry reaffirms its ruling, 
the FRG can appeal to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal.  The 
Tribunal\'s ruling, in turn, can be appealed to the Supreme 
Court\'s Court of Appeals.  Finally, the Supreme Court\'s 
ruling can be appealed to the Constitutional Court, 
constituted as the Extraordinary Tribunal of Injunction 
(\"Amparo,\" in Spanish). 
 
Congress Fills a Gap on the TSE 
------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) On June 4 Congress elected Sergio Mijangos to fill a 
vacancy on the TSE by 77 votes from the FRG and PAN. 
Mijangos was elected to serve as the replacement for a judge 
who never took office, creating a vacuum in the 5-member 
court.  Mijangos had served as Registrar of Property and 
Secretary General of the Public Ministry from 1994-96. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The decision by the Registry of Persons is  a 
significant, if expected, blow to Rios Montt\'s candidacy. 
The Registry\'s legal challenge is significant in that it 
forces Rios Montt (rather than his many opponents) to file 
the appeal.  The FRG leadership has vowed to pursue appeals 
at all levels to resolve the eligibility issue by September 
9, the deadline for inscription of candidates.  Politically, 
the Registry\'s ruling main significance is to show that at 
least one Guatemalan official institution does not believe 
that Rios Montt is constitutionally eligible to be a 
candidate. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8718","6/13/2003 17:43","03GUATEMALA1530","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1479","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001530 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: ELECTORAL TRIBUNAL UPHOLDS BAR AGAINST RIOS MONTT 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1479 
 
1.  (U) By a three to two vote on June 12 the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal (TSE) upheld a ruling from the Registry of 
Citizens (reported RefTel) barring President of Congress 
Efrain Rios Montt from running for president.  The ruling was 
based on Article 186 (a) of the Constitution.  Rios Montt has 
announced he will appeal this ruling to the TSE, and if 
reaffirmed, to the Supreme Court.  Constitutional experts 
estimate that the full appeal process including the Supreme 
and Constitutional Courts could take at least another month 
to complete. 
 
2.  (SBU) Before announcing the ruling, TSE President Oscar 
Bolanos privately expressed concern to us about recent 
threats to his family\'s security.  He received a call on the 
eve of the ruling detailing all of his daughter\'s movements 
the day before.  The Ambassador called Bolanos to express 
concern over the threats Bolanos has been receiving, and to 
tell him that we expedited a visa for Bolanos\' daughter to 
travel to the U.S. on June 12. 
 
3.  (U) In another electoral development, Romeo Alvarado 
Polanco, one of five Constitutional Court magistrates who 
will ultimately have to rule on Rios Montt\'s eligibility to 
run, resigned on June 12.  Alvarado had been appointed to the 
court by President Portillo and had voted in favor of several 
resolutions favoring views of the governing Guatemalan 
Republican Front (FRG), including the GOG\'s controversial 
Euro-bond issue.  The President has constitutional authority 
to name a replacement for Alvarado.  The other four 
Constitutional Court justices were selected by the Supreme 
Court, Congress, the High Council of the University of San 
Carlos, and the Bar Association, respectively. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
4.  (SBU) The TSE ruling bolsters the rule of law and took 
courage.  The desertion from the Constitutional Court appears 
to reflect the opposite.  His sudden departure will be read 
by most observers as indicating that pressure and threats, 
like those received by Bolanos, are starting to weigh on all 
those who have to decide this controversial case. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8719","6/13/2003 19:39","03GUATEMALA1535","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1191","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LIMA FOR WILL SMITH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, GT, UN, OAS 
SUBJECT: HELEN MACK\'S TAKE ON JUSTICE, POLITICS, AND CICIACS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1191 
 
Classified By: Human Rights Officer Katharine Read, reasons 1.5 (b & d) 
. 
 
1. (C) Summary:  On June 13, Helen Mack had breakfast at the 
residence with the Ambassador and Human Rights Officer to 
discuss the Supreme Court appeal in her case set for June 19, 
the latest political alliance between Oscar Berger and 
Eduardo Stein, the mixed commission to investigate 
clandestine groups (CICIACS), and other reform-minded 
proposals.  End Summary. 
 
Mack Appeal Hits Supreme Court 
------------------------------ 
2. (C) Helen Mack informed us that on June 19 the Supreme 
Court will hear her appeal of the Fourth Appeals Court\'s May 
7, 2003, decision to annul the October 3, 2002 conviction of 
Juan Valencia Osorio for ordering the murder of Helen\'s 
sister Myrna Mack (reftel).  The Ambassador asked Mack if she 
would like him to attend the appeal, and she answered that 
she always appreciates his presence and support.  The 
Ambassador promised to attend the oral appeal on June 19, and 
to rally the international community\'s support by calling his 
Ambassadorial-level colleagues.  (Initial results of these 
calls indicate we can get a good turnout.) 
 
3. (C) Mack told the Ambassador that ret. General Rios Montt 
told her directly that her case would not result in a 
conviction, but that the Gerardi murder case would, 
ultimately.  Mack opined that this was because her sister\'s 
murder was part of the GOG\'s counterinsurgency policies 
during the internal conflict, while Bishop Gerardi was 
allegedly murdered by renegade Presidential Military Staff 
(EMP) officers in 1998, after the signature of the Peace 
Accords.  Comment: It seems strange that Rios Montt would 
speak so boldly about outcomes that imply FRG/Army influence, 
but Mack says he did. 
 
Political Shuffling 
------------------- 
4. (C) Mack told the Ambassador that she favored the 
incorporation of Eduardo Stein into the Alianza GANA with 
Presidential hopeful Oscar Berger.  She also said that the 
presence of retired General Otto Perez Molina in a Berger 
government might be an important inside ally in the cleansing 
of corrupt GOG institutions and clandestine structures. 
 
CICIACS 
------- 
5. (C) Mack said that Peruvian prosecutor Jose Ugaz, who 
visited here in May, offered three thoughts as to what\'s 
needed to make the CICIACS successful: political buy-in; able 
investigators and sources; and adequate anticorruption laws 
on which to base investigations and prosecutions.  The humans 
rights NGOs have pitched the idea to many of the opposition 
parties effectively, and believe that they will be able to 
obtain political support from the new GOG.  The technical 
team from the UN is slated to come to Guatemala in late June 
or early July, and the NGOs hope that they will recommend 
able experts. 
 
6. (C) Mack said Ugaz recommended that the Guatemalans should 
look at the new Peruvian anticorruption laws as potential 
models for the laws that would be necessary to support the 
CICIACS.  The Ambassador pledged to coordinate with Embassy 
Lima to obtain the legal texts and share them with the human 
rights community.  (See Hamilton email to WSmith.) 
 
Other Reforms 
------------- 
7. (C) Concerned with what she believes is Attorney General 
De Leon\'s corruption, Mack said the human rights community is 
considering mounting a case against him.  She said that in 
the case of De Leon, Guatemala is responsible for 
\"prosecuting the prosecutor.\"  In a separate project, Mack 
also wants to work with the National Endowment for Democracy 
(NED) to study how to incorporate reforms into the long-term 
planning of judicial institutions and how to create oversight 
mechanisms that can monitor the budgets of the Public 
Ministry, Police, and Courts. 
 
Comment 
------- 
8. (C) We continue to believe that showing public support for 
justice in the Mack case is crucial to the respect of human 
rights in Guatemala, and the Ambassador will attend the June 
19 hearing.  We also believe Mack\'s proposal for establishing 
mechanisms to monitor implementation of the judicial sector 
budget could represent a major advance in promoting judicial 
integrity.  We will look for additional ways to assist local 
NGO\'s and the GOG in getting CICIACS up and running. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8779","6/16/2003 17:19","03GUATEMALA1541","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001541 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT OF STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, 
CA/VO and G/TIP 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
USTR FOR CHRIS WILSON 
GENEVA FOR ROBERT HAGEN 
PLEASE PASS TO OPIC: GREG MAGGIO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, KCRM, KWMN, ETRD, CVIS, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LABOR AND TIP UPDATE #4 
 
 
1.  The following is an update of significant recent 
developments in the labor sector.  Topics include: 
 
-- Bilateral Labor Group Convoked for Early July (para 
2) 
 
-- Union Leader Arrested in Social Security Scandal 
(3) 
 
-- Choi Shin/Cimatextiles in the GOG\'s Crosshairs (4) 
 
-- American Data Processing \"Maquila\" Conflict 
Unresolved (5) 
 
-- GOG Wants to Facilitate H2B Program (6) 
 
-- Penal Code Reform Stiffens Penalties for 
Trafficking in Persons (7) 
 
Bilateral Labor Group Convoked for Early July 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) On June 11 LabAtt requested MFA convoke 
another meeting of the GOG\'s Labor Working Group for 
the first week of July.  Sara Solis, MFA Director for 
Bilateral Affairs, agreed to do so, and said the 
inter-ministerial GOG Working Group had met recently 
and would soon be formally constituted by government 
decree.  The Embassy hopes to use this meeting to 
maintain momentum on labor issues raised in the first 
meeting (prosecution of violent crimes against union 
leaders, need to streamline the labor justice system, 
and the need to reinstate workers illegally fired for 
unionization activity) on May 13 with participation 
from USTR, USDOL and Department officials.  The 
Embassy will represent the USG in this meeting, and 
would welcome Department\'s guidance on the status of 
GSP petitions against Guatemala. 
 
Union Leader Arrested 
--------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Rigoberto Duenas, Adjunct Secretary General 
of the Central General Union of Guatemalan Workers 
(CGTG), was arrested on June 8 for his participation 
as a member of the Board of Directors of the National 
Social Security Institute (IGSS) in a major financial 
scandal involving the misuse of public funds by that 
institution.  Duenas was the first member of the board 
arrested, and unions have protested his innocence and 
accused the government of seeking a \"scapegoat\" for 
the scandal.  The scandal involved a housing 
construction scheme using IGSS funds, which was 
authorized by the board but implemented fraudulently 
by IGSS managers (Guatemala 1388 and 1465).  The 
Ambassador expressed concern over the arrest to 
Attorney General De Leon on June 11.  LabAtt and Pol 
Section Intern met with the CGTG executive board and 
Mrs. Duenas on June 12.  The union requested Embassy 
assistance to guarantee the safety of Duenas in 
custody.  LabAtt requested such assistance from the 
Attorney General\'s Private Secretary on June 12 and 
was assured that the Director of Prisons had already 
beefed up the security in the hospital of the 
Preventive Detention Center, where Duenas and one 
other IGSS board member is being held. 
Choi Shin/Cimatextiles in the Crosshairs 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) The GOG has given the management of the Choi 
Shin/Cimatextiles maquila plants until June 27 to 
respond to pending labor rights complaints by workers 
or lose its permission to export from Guatemala.  NGO 
sources report that Minister of Labor Victor Moreira 
(currently in Geneva for ILO meetings) intends to 
compel Choi Shin/Cimatextiles management to engage in 
collective bargaining with the only existing unions in 
the maquila sector.  Those unions were established 
after anti-union violence provoked GOG intervention in 
July 2001.  Press reports about the GOG\'s action 
against these factories provoked concern among union 
members about possible new violence from non-union 
workers.  LabAtt called Choi Shin management on June 3 
to express concern about possible violence and was 
assured by management that the plant was calm.  The 
Embassy and concerned U.S. NGOs are monitoring this 
situation closely, and have encouraged management to 
continue dialogue with the unions. 
American Data Processing \"Maquila\" Conflict Unresolved 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
5. (SBU) The U.S. data processing subsidiary ACS-BPS 
of Guatemala has entered into negotiations with seven 
employees who prefer to resign than to accept new data 
processing tasks under an internal reorganization. 
The seven have filed labor complaints with the labor 
courts and want management to provide a severance 
package including lawyers fees not required under 
labor law. 
 
GOG Wants to Facilitate H2B Program 
----------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) ConGen, NIV Chief and LabAtt met with Vice 
Minister of Labor Sandra Mendez de Garrido June 11 to 
discuss the Ministry\'s interest in facilitating the 
flow of H2B temporary work visa applicants.  NIV Chief 
provided feedback from U.S. employers concerned by the 
registry and deposit requirements of the Guatemalan 
Labor Code (article 34), which date to the early 
1950\'s and, if implemented, would probably drive U.S. 
recruiters elsewhere.  The Vice Minister said that her 
intent is not to enforce these parts of the Code, but 
to reform them, if necessary, to protect and expand 
the flow of H2B workers.  The Ministry would like to 
contact U.S. employers to offer its employment service 
as an alternative to Guatemalan recruiters, many of 
whom are corrupt.  ConGen asked the Vice Minister to 
provide an email address to which the Embassy can 
refer interested U.S. employers, and suggested the 
Vice Minister consider visiting the U.S. to witness 
working conditions of Guatemalan workers and meet with 
USDOL counterparts.  We are exploring possible USG 
support for such a visit under the Voluntary Visitor 
Program. 
 
Reforms Would Stiffen Penalties for TIP 
--------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) On June 10 The Congressional Commissions on 
Women and Legislation approved reforms to the Criminal 
Code which would increase the penalty for trafficking 
in persons from two to five years in prison.  The 
reforms would also increase the fine penalties for 
pimping from two to ten thousand Quetzales (approx. 
$1,282). 
 
Hamilton 
"
"8800","6/17/2003 14:35","03GUATEMALA1548","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1530","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KJUS, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: RIOS MONTT STONED BY MOURNERS IN RABINAL 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1530 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1479 
     C. GUATEMALA 962 
 
Classified By: Acting PolCouns Rob Copley, for reasons 1.5 (b and d) 
 
1. (U) Summary: During a poorly-timed campaign stop in the 
highland town of Rabinal on June 15, former General and FRG 
presidential candidate Rios Montt was greeted with stones and 
bottles thrown by a group of war victims participating in an 
inhumation of 67 community members killed by the army during 
the internal conflict.  The FRG rally coincided with the 
inhumation mass for victims of the Tres Cruces and Plan de 
Sanchez massacres of 1981 and 1982.  Rios Montt was not 
wounded in the fracas, though other members of his delegation 
were.  End Summary. 
 
Rumble in Rabinal 
----------------- 
2. (U) The FRG held a presidential campaign rally in Rabinal, 
Baja Verapaz on June 14, on the same day that residents from 
surrounding communities were holding an inhumation mass for 
the remains of loved ones killed in a series of army 
massacres during the conflict.  It appears that the FRG 
national leadership was unaware that the inhumation was to 
take place at the same time as the campaign rally.  Community 
members carrying the coffins of their loved ones coincided 
with the FRG rally in Rabinal\'s central square.  According to 
press accounts, inflammatory rhetoric by FRG Congressman from 
Baja Verapaz Juan Santa Cruz and other local FRG leaders 
raised tensions with the hostile mourners.  Insults were 
exchanged and the FRG leaders decided to move their rally to 
another location, away from the inhumation ceremony.  At that 
point Rios Montt, possibly unaware of the tension at the 
earlier rally where he was not present, appeared and began 
his speech.  Tensions boiled over when Santa Cruz (or his 
wife--accounts vary) pushed a journalist, causing him to fall 
from the podium.  People in the crowd, made up largely of 
hostile participants in the inhumations, began throwing 
rocks.  Rios Montt was only a few lines into his speech when 
he was forced to evacuate the stand.  Chaos reigned for 
several minutes while the FRG leaders retreated.  Several 
young women wearing FRG T-shirts were harassed by the crowd, 
which ripped their shirts off.  Numerous journalists and 10 
FRG loyalists reported minor injuries in the clash.  After 
burning what remained of the FRG banners, the crowd proceeded 
to El Calvario church for an emotional ceremony and the 
re-burial of the 67 massacre victims. 
 
3. (U) The FRG leadership, including Rios Montt, continued on 
to another smaller rally in nearby Cubulco, this one 
organized by former civil defense patrol members (ex-PAC). 
The meeting had been specially arranged for the ex-PACs, 
dozens of whom had traveled to Rabinal earlier, to respond 
directly to their concerns over delays in compensation for 
their war-time services promised by President Portillo. 
Press reports claim that many ex-PACs walked out of the 
meeting with the senior FRG leaders in frustration, and 
others chanting \"liar\" in response to the FRG leaders\' 
efforts to lower the expectations of compensation of the 
former civil patrol members. 
 
4. (C) Zury Rios, who accompanied her father to the rally in 
Rabinal, told us that her father was unaware of the 
inhumation before arriving in Rabinal, and said the local 
organizers had moved the stage to another part of town when 
they realized that the two events would coincide.  Even so, 
she said that the victims\' families, carrying the coffins of 
their loved ones, followed them to the new location, and that 
is when the confrontation took place.  She accused the police 
of not stepping in to calm the crowd.  Zury Rios said that, 
contrary to press accounts, her father was not injured in the 
melee, but said that a member of the entourage standing next 
to him was hit in the head by a rock, getting blood all over 
Rios Montt\'s collar (which led the press to speculate that he 
had been hit). 
 
Forensic Anthropologists Threatened Beforehand 
--------------------------------------------- - 
5. (SBU) The inhumation in Rabinal was organized by the 
Forensic Anthropology Foundation of Guatemala (FAFG), which 
continues to receive death threats for their work in Rabinal 
and elsewhere.  On Friday, June 13, Fredy Peccerelli, 
Director of the FAFG notified HROff that members of his staff 
and family continue to receive threats from unidentified 
sources, and most are not receiving protection from the GOG. 
One member of his staff, Omar Bertoni Giron de Leon, received 
a letter that said while Peccerelli had full-time security, 
they knew Giron did not and that they would kill him if he 
went into the countryside to perform the inhumation that 
weekend (in Rabinal).  Peccerelli immediately contacted 
police, Public Ministry, and the President\'s Commission on 
Human Rights (COPREDEH) to obtain investigation of the threat 
and security for Giron.  RSO contacted police, inquired into 
their investigation of the Giron incident, and asked them to 
follow up with any requests from the Peccerelli family. 
 
Frank LaRue Describes Incident in Rabinal 
----------------------------------------- 
6. (C) On Saturday, June 14, Frank LaRue, Director of the 
Center for Legal Action in Human Rights, called HROff to 
share his concerns about the clash between FRG supporters and 
those participating in the inhumation.  LaRue said that an 
inhumation was an incredibly emotional event for the family 
members of the 67 people being buried.  The timing of a 
campaign rally for the retired General whose term as de facto 
President partly coincides with the massacres in which these 
individuals were killed could only be construed as 
disrespectful.  LaRue also said that he feared events such as 
this would further deepen the rift between the ex-PACS and 
human rights activists, since FRG mayors and governors in 
Quiche and Huehuetenango provinces have been blaming 
difficulties in ex-PAC compensation packages on CALDH and 
other human rights organizations associated with the victim\'s 
reparations programs. 
 
7. (C) LaRue predicted that the FRG would try to spin the 
stoning incident as a ploy of the political opposition.  He 
said that this was completely untrue and that all the members 
of his organization and other human rights organizations were 
not financially supported or motivated by opposition parties. 
 
Comment 
------- 
8. (C)  The violence that erupted in Rabinal appears to have 
been the result of poor planning by the local FRG campaign 
leadership, and not an intentional provocation by either FRG 
candidate Rios Montt or the families of the victims of army 
massacres in Baja Verapaz.  Getting back up on the horse, 
Rios Montt continued with scheduled campaign rallies in 
Eastern Guatemala the next day.  A recent poll shows Rios 
Montt has picked up some support since March, and currently 
has 15.5 percent of the vote, placing him a distant second 
behind Oscar Berger who has lost a couple points since March 
and now stands at 41.9 percent of the vote.  Rios Montt\'s 
negative vote (percentage of the populace who say they would 
never vote for Rios Montt) has also grown, according to this 
poll, from 51 to 53 percent in the same time period. 
 
9. (C) The incident in Rabinal illustrates that scars from 
the internal conflict remain close to the surface in 
Guatemala, and reminds us that electoral violence can not be 
ruled out.  The latest threats against FAFG members are 
worrisome as human rights workers continue to be targets in 
Guatemala, and few of their murders are ever prosecuted.  We 
continue to raise our concerns over the security of human 
rights workers with all senior GOG contacts, and have pressed 
the police, the Minister of Government and the Attorney 
General to ensure the safety of FAFG members in the wake of 
this latest series of threats. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8809","6/17/2003 22:58","03GUATEMALA1561","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA1530","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001561 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: RIOS MONTT CAMPAIGN SUFFERS THIRD LEGAL DEFEAT 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1530 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1479 
 
On June 16, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) denied Rios 
Montt\'s appeal for a review of the TSE\'s June 12 split 
decision against the legality of his Presidential candidacy. 
TSE President Bolanos told reporters that the widely expected 
 
SIPDIS 
decision was based on Article 186 of the constitution.  The 
FRG announced that it will file an appeal with the Supreme 
Court.  Any decision by the Supreme Court, either for or 
against, is expected to ultimately be appealed to the 
Constitutional Court for final resolution.  Parties have 
until September 9 to register their candidates, giving the 
FRG sufficient time for the appeal process to run its course. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8867","6/19/2003 20:46","03GUATEMALA1581","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001581 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER SELECTS EDUARDO STEIN AS VP CANDIDATE 
 
 
Classified By: Acting PolCouns Rob Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The front-running Gran Alianza Nacional 
(GANA) officially nominated former Foreign Minister and chief 
of two OAS missions to Peru, Eduardo Stein, as its Vice 
Presidential candidate.  The move, announced on June 16, 
broadens the appeal of the Berger ticket providing it with 
needed policy credentials.  It is also generating optimism in 
civil society and human rights groups that progress on 
corruption and rule of law issues may be possible under a 
Berger government.  Several members of the Unionista party 
have already joined the GANA as a direct result.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The Berger camp had been courting Stein with 
increasing openness for several weeks.  For his part, Stein 
maintained in public that he would only join the Berger 
ticket if he was assured of an important role in policy 
decisions and of Berger\'s commitment to fighting corruption 
and advancing rule of law and social issues.  Stein\'s 
presence on the ticket provides a solid base of credibility 
and experience for countering Berger\'s substantive weakness 
and appears to be attracting others to the Berger camp. 
 
3. (C) For example, sources close to center-left 
Congresswoman Nineth Montengro report she is agonizing over 
her public promise to remain with the ANN party, when she 
would have far more influence as part of the GANA.  In 
another example, Frank LaRue of the human rights group CALDH, 
told the Ambassador that he was rethinking his avoidance of 
electoral politics given the stakes in this election and the 
possible progress that could be made by working directly with 
Stein as part of a future government.  LaRue said that, if 
the opportunity arose, he would be willing to exchange his 
position in CALDH for one in the government where he could 
make structural changes to the Justice system and seriously 
pursue CICIACS, a yet-to-be-established investigative body 
that will target clandestine groups involved in organized 
crime. 
 
4. (U) Stein\'s nomination led to announcements that former 
Vice President Luis Flores, Gustavo Porras, and Congresswoman 
Olga Camey, all from the Unionista party had also joined the 
GANA. 
 
5. (U) In accepting the VP slot, Stein made clear he is 
dropping his bid for the OAS Secretary General position. 
 
Comment 
------- 
5. (C) Stein is well known to the Embassy and to many in 
Washington for his service as Foreign Minister in the Arzu 
Government and for heading OAS electoral missions to Peru in 
200 and 2001.  He has terrific intellectual and diplomatic 
skills and is a person of rock solid integrity.  His 
nomination thus shores up a critical weakness in the Berger 
campaign and can be expected to generate further interest in 
and momentum for the GANA coalition from groups beyond its 
traditional backers in the private sector.  We expect other 
high profile politicians and opinion makers will now 
seriously consider getting behind GANA in an effort to build 
a coalition capable of defeating the ruling FRG. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8887","6/20/2003 18:11","03GUATEMALA1596","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1535","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001596 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, MOPS, PREL, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: LAST CHANCE FOR JUSTICE IN MACK CASE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1535 
 
Classified By: Human Rights Officer Katharine Read, reasons 1.5 (B and 
D) 
 
1. (C) Summary: On June 19, Helen Mack, the prosecution, and 
the defense presented oral arguments before the Supreme Court 
for the final appeal in the case against the three retired 
military officers allegedly responsible for ordering the 
murder of Myrna Mack in September 1990.  All three officers 
were released from jail by the Fourth Appeals Court on May 7, 
and will continue to remain so unless the Supreme Court 
convicts them and orders their detention.  Representatives 
from fifteen different diplomatic missions were present, 
including 11 Ambassadors whom the Ambassador personally 
recruited to show widespread international support for 
securing justice in Guatemalan human rights cases.  The 
Supreme Court expects a verdict within ten to fifteen days, 
though Mack doubts deliberations will be that swift.  End 
Summary. 
 
Setting the Stage 
----------------- 
 
2. (U) On June 19, the Supreme Court held the public audience 
for the oral arguments in the case against the so-called 
\"intellectual authors\" of anthropologist Myrna Mack\'s 
September 1990 murder.  The defendants, (ret.) General Godoy 
Gaitan, (ret.) Colonel Valencia Osorio, nor (ret.) Colonel 
Oliva Carrera, did not attend the proceedings, but were 
represented by their lawyers.  Prosecutor Mynor Melgar, 
lawyer Roberto Romero, and Helen Mack presented the appeal 
(casacion in Spanish) of the Fourth Appeals Court\'s May 7 
decision, which overturned the conviction they won against 
Valencia Osorio on October 3, 2002. 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador made calls to resident ambassadors 
urging them to attend the trial to demonstrate the 
committment of the international community to securing 
justice in this long delayed case.  Chiefs of Mission from 
the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Argentina, Sweden, 
Mexico, Germany, Chile, Norway, France, Canada, and Japan, as 
well as representatives from Denmark, Switzerland, and 
MINUGUA attended the trial.  The international community\'s 
presence was noted in local press and given much fanfare. 
The attendance of a number of Latin American ambassadors -- 
including Mexico -- to a human rights trial in Guatemala was 
historic. 
 
The Lawyers Proceed 
------------------- 
 
4. (U) Prosecutor Mynor Melgar and Mack Foundation lawyer 
Roberto Romero argued that the Fourth Appeals Court emitted 
an erroneous, illegal sentence that was not based on the 
appeals of either the defense of the prosecution.  They asked 
that the Supreme Court uphold the October 2003 conviction of 
Valencia Osorio and also convict Godoy Gaitan and Oliva 
Carrera. 
 
5. (U) The defense for Valencia Osorio argued that the 
October 3, 2002, sentence was contradictory because it did 
not clarify the discrepancy between individual and 
institutional responsibility; while admitting that Valencia 
Osorio transmitted an order to convicted material author Noel 
de Jesus Beteta Alvarez to murder Myrna Mack, the defense 
argued that he was not the \"author\" of the crime.  Therefore, 
Valencia Osorio\'s lawyer asked that the Supreme Court confirm 
the May 7, 2003, decision of the Fourth Appeals Court and 
leave his client free. 
 
6. (U) The defense for Godoy Gaitan and Oliva Carrera argued 
that both the Third Sentencing Court and the Fourth Appeals 
Court absolved their clients of guilt and that this Supreme 
Court appeal (casacion) should not apply to either one. 
 
Helen Mack\'s Final Words 
------------------------ 
 
7. (U) Helen Mack, as the private plaintiff and family 
representative in the case, spoke last.  Mack passionately 
recounted the thirteen-year quest for justice in her sister\'s 
case, then moved to the need for real reform in Guatemala\'s 
rule of law and access to justice.  She said the Supreme 
Court had one final opportunity to demonstrate the integrity 
of the Guatemalan judicial system by giving out a just 
sentence, applying the penal code to the credible evidence 
she and her team had presented. 
 
8. (SBU) Sources at the Supreme Court and in the press 
speculate that the Supreme Court will reach a verdict within 
ten to fifteen days, though Romero and Mack expect the judges 
to drag their heels. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C) Mack has told us that this is the final stage in the 
legal battle she and her team will fight in Guatemala, while 
the case remains pending in the Inter-American Court.  We 
will continue monitoring both processes with great interest 
and support. 
 
10. (C) The real challenge for the Supreme Court seems to be 
deciding the precedent that their ruling will set.  If the 
judges rule that Valencia Osorio can be held accountable for 
intellectual authorship in the murder of Myrna Mack, this 
could have profound repercussions for other cases against 
high-ranking military leaders involved in ordering or 
transmitting orders for countless murders, massacres, and 
disappearances of civilians during the internal conflict. 
 
11. (C) On the other hand, if the judges decide that material 
authorship alone constitutes guilt, these individual leaders 
will be absolved for acting in line with state policies. 
Such a ruling by the Supreme Court would be a setback for 
domestic justice in human rights cases involving the internal 
conflict, forcing Guatemalan activists to consider other 
avenues for reconciliation and reparations. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8889","6/20/2003 18:45","03GUATEMALA1609","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE171678|03SECSTATE171694","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001609 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KTIA, SNAR, PBTS, KCRM, PHSA, EWWT, EAIR, GT 
SUBJECT: COUNTER-NARCOTICS MARITIME AGREEMENT SIGNED 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 171694 
     B. SECSTATE 171678 
 
1. (U) Ambassador Hamilton and Foreign Minister Gutierrez 
signed the bilateral counter-narcotics maritime agreement 
(reftels) in a ceremony at the MFA on June 19.  Signature of 
this landmark agreement has been an important element in our 
dialogue with the GOG on counter-narcotics certification. 
The Ambassador told reporters that in signing the agreement, 
Guatemala was taking a significant step forward in the fight 
against drug trafficking and was joining five of its 
neighbors who have similar agreements.  The Foreign Minister 
commented that reaching this agreement had been a priority 
for both governments because narcotics trafficking has grown 
to the point that it threatens national security.  Guatemala, 
he said, needs to intensify its cooperation with it neighbors 
to confront this international menace.  The agreement will 
enter into force once it is ratified by the Guatemalan 
Congress.  The GOG intends to send the agreement to Congress 
for \"urgent treatment\" in a special session. 
HAMILTON 
"
"8954","6/24/2003 21:10","03GUATEMALA1642","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/USOAS AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, GT, UN, OAS 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR VIELMAN SAYS GOG IS PRESSING UN FOR 
ACTION ON CICIACS 
 
 
Classified By: Human Rights Officer Katharine Read, reasons 1.5 (B and 
D) 
 
1. (C) Summary: On June 23, Acting DCM and Human Rights 
Officer met with Ambassador Maritza Ruiz de Vielman, Foreign 
Minister Gutierrez\'s Special Advisor, to discuss the state of 
play on the proposed mixed commission to investigate 
clandestine groups (CICIACS), to commend GOG collaboration 
with the NGO community on CICIACS, and to pledge continued 
support for CICIACS\'s formation.  Vielman said that a UN 
technical team will be visiting Guatemala in the second week 
of July to make an assessment for commission set-up, that FM 
Gutierrez remains committed to CICIACS and to further 
collaboration with the NGOs, and that she appreciated past 
and future USG support.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) On June 23, Acting DCM and Human Rights Officer met 
with Ambassador Maritza Ruiz de Vielman, former Foreign 
Minister and former negotiator for the GOG-UN agreements 
establishing MINUGUA.  Vielman was appointed by FM Gutierrez 
to spearhead the GOG\'s efforts to establish CICIACS, and 
visited New York in April to lobby the UN for early 
participation in CICIACS.  Vielman said that officials at the 
UN agreed to send a technical team to Guatemala in late April 
to assess details for setting up the commission.  Vielman 
noted that the technical team has since been delayed, and 
that she recently heard from her sources at the UN that the 
team is slotted to arrive in Guatemala the second week of 
July. 
 
3. (C) Acting DCM congratulated Vielman on establishing 
credibility with the often skeptical and frequently 
fragmented human rights NGO community.  Vielman said that she 
found the human rights leaders easy to work with now that 
they are convinced of the GOG\'s commitment to CICIACS. 
Vielman also said that, in her last meeting with the NGOs, 
the GOG and the NGOs decided to draft joint letters to the UN 
SYG thanking him in anticipation of the UN technical team\'s 
visit in July. 
 
4. (C) Vielman said the NGOs would continue to play a role in 
CICIACS after the UN technical team\'s assessment by helping 
to select the Guatemalan commissioner, and by informing the 
debate on how to incorporate the Public Ministry into 
CICIACS.  Vielman also said the NGO community will inevitably 
serve as a primary source of information and advice during 
the CICIACS\'s investigative and conclusion-formulating 
periods. 
 
5. (C) When Acting DCM asked Vielman how the USG could 
provide further assistance, she mentioned that the UN team 
would want an international perspective during their visit 
and asked if we could meet with them.  Acting DCM assured her 
that we could accommodate that request in addition to our 
financial support. 
 
6. (C) Comment: The long-awaited arrival of the UN 
exploratory mission in July is a welcome sign that the 
establishment of CICIACS will soon get underway.  Vielman 
reassured us that the GOG has the will and the know-how to 
establish an international commission with UN and OAS 
participation.  The difficulties as Vielman laid them out 
seem to be mitigating bureaucratic delays in the UN, OAS, and 
GOG.  We share a joint interest in seeing that CICIACS is 
established before the November elections complicate domestic 
atmospherics, and stand ready to assist any attempts to 
expedite that process. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"9010","6/26/2003 21:16","03GUATEMALA1673","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001673 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, KJUS, PGOV, PREL, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: KEEPING NARCOTICS TRAFFICKERS FROM BEING RELEASED 
BY CORRUPT JUDGES 
 
 
Classified By: A/DCM DAVID LINDWALL FOR REASON 1.5 (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The Ambassador met with Attorney General de 
Leon and with Foreign Minister Gutierrez to raise, inter 
alia, our concerns that an irregular change of judges 
presiding over the case of major narcotics trafficker Otto 
Herrera\'s organization could be the prelude to releasing the 
defendants in the case.  Both officials subsequently informed 
the Ambassador that President Portillo had weighed-in with 
the Supreme Court (as did de Leon) to get deeply involved in 
the Herrera case so that the presiding judge would not be 
able to mishandle it in favor of the narcotraffickers.  End 
summary. 
 
2. (C) The Embassy learned in early June that judge Felix 
Eliseo Garcia Arenas (widely viewed as an honest judge) who 
had been presiding over the case of Byron Linares (second in 
command of the Otto Herrera narcotraficking organization) and 
two Colombian defendants in a $14 million money laundering 
case involving the Herrera organization, had been replaced by 
judge Luis Alfredo Morales Lopez through an irregular 
procedure.  Morales was the judge who released from jail a 
number of allegedly corrupt figures with close ties to 
President Portillo -- including banker Alvarado McDonald.  At 
the same time DEA began picking up information that alleged 
trafficker Linares was informing his business associates that 
he would soon be released from jail. 
 
3. (C) In meetings with Attorney General Carlos de Leon on 
June 19 and with Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez on June 24 
the Ambassador raised our concerns that the irregular 
switching of judges in this important case and judge 
Morales\'s track record of releasing well known criminals from 
jail could lead to the release from prison of Byron Linares 
and the two Colombian defendants in the money laundering case 
against the Otto Herrera narcotrafficking organization.  The 
Ambassador noted that we view the ongoing case against the 
Herrera organization as being emblematic of the GOG\'s ability 
to prosecute major narcotics traffickers, and any irregular 
action by a judge to release the defendants in this case 
would be a severe blow to the war against drugs in Guatemala. 
 He urged the senior GOG officials to weigh-in with the 
Supreme Court to ensure that they are vigilant and that this 
case will not be mishandled. 
 
4. (C) Attorney General de Leon and Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez, after discussing the matter with President 
Portillo and members of the Court, assured the Ambassador 
that the President of the Supreme Court had been apprised by 
President Portillo, and, separately, by de Leon, of the 
potential problem, and had guaranteed that the full court 
would be made aware of the situation and would follow the 
case closely, requesting regular updates from the presiding 
judge. 
 
5. (C) Comment: The high court did not offer an explanation 
for why the judges in this important case had been switched, 
nor did it offer to return the case to the original judge. 
However, everyone from President Portillo on down is now 
aware that the Embassy is following the case closely, and it 
is encouraging that the Attorney General, Foreign Minister 
and President all jumped on it when it was brought to their 
attention. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9011","6/26/2003 21:23","03GUATEMALA1674","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001674 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, CVIS, PREL, PGOV, PINS, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: RECENT GOG ACTIONS TO COMBAT ALIEN SMUGGLING 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The GOG cooperated fully with us in the 
expulsion through the US of alien smuggler Karla Chavez, 
wanted by US law enforcement authorities in connection with 
the May 13 death of 19 illegal aliens in Victoria, Texas. 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez also informed the Ambassador that 
the GOG was replacing a large number of Consuls believed to 
be involved in inappropriate issuance of visas to intending 
immigrants to the US, in response to complaints by the 
Ambassador that new GOG visa regulations would favor alien 
smuggling.  End summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) On June 14, Guatemalan immigration authorities 
expelled alleged alien smuggler Karla Chavez Joya to her 
native Honduras, through Houston, where she was arrested by 
US law enforcement authorities in connection with the deaths 
of 19 illegal aliens in Victoria, Texas on May 13.  Chavez is 
believed to be the head of the smuggling ring responsible for 
the incident in Victoria, Texas.  The June 13-14 operation, 
which resulted in Chavez\'s arrest by Guatemalan authorities 
for an immigration violation and her subsequent expulsion to 
Honduras via Houston, was carefully coordinated between the 
DHS office in Embassy Guatemala and GOG Immigration Director 
Oscar Contreras and his deputy Ramon Canek.  Guatemalan 
cooperation was critical to the success of this operation. 
 
3.  (SBU) On June 24, Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez 
informed the Ambassador that the GOG had taken a number of 
measures to address concerns raised earlier by the Ambassador 
that new Guatemalan visa policy (i.e. increased flexibility 
for issuing Guatemalan visas for nationals of certain Latin 
American countries with high illegal immigration rates) could 
result in increased transit through Guatemala of illegal 
aliens heading to the US.  Gutierrez told the Ambassador that 
indeed the GOG believes that inappropriate issuance of 
Guatemalan visas by a number of consuls had contributed to 
this problem, and that as a result of an extensive 
investigation, the MFA had decided to replace all of its 
consular officials in Mexico, El Salvador, Honduras, 
Colombia, Ecuador and the Dominican Republic.  Gutierrez said 
that the new consuls would be drawn exclusively from the 
MFA\'s professional consular corps, and that they would 
undergo training on immigration fraud before being sent to 
their new posts. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment:  The recent GOG actions to combat alien 
smuggling, responding to our specific requests, will create 
further disincentives for alien smugglers to see Guatemala as 
a country of safe passage. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9038","6/27/2003 17:24","03GUATEMALA1683","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/27/2013 
TAGS: MARR, PREL, MOPS, PGOV, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER ASKS FOR TIME TO CONSIDER ARTICLE 
98 AGREEMENT 
 
 
Classified By: A/DCM David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez told the 
Ambassador on June 24 that the MFA is seeking interagency 
comments on the proposed bilateral Article 98 Agreement, and 
is engaged in internal political consultations on the 
desirability of signing the agreement.  He asked that we give 
the MFA until mid-July to come up with a coordinated GOG 
position on an Article 98 Agreement before seeking bilateral 
consultations.  End summary. 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador met on June 24 with Foreign Minister 
Edgar Gutierrez to offer, inter alia, that a USG negotiating 
team meet with senior MFA officials on June 27 to discuss the 
status of the USG proposal for a bilateral Article 98 
Agreement.  The Ambassador noted the priority the US attaches 
to signing an agreement with Guatemala, particularly in view 
of the large number of humanitarian joint exercises carried 
out every year in Guatemala.  The Ambassador told Gutierrez 
that, although Guatemala has not yet ratified the Statute of 
Rome, the lack of guarantees for US military personnel 
created by the absence of an Article 98 Agreement will be a 
disincentive for continuing humanitarian exercises at the 
levels of previous years.  Foreign Minister Gutierrez said 
the GOG fully recognizes the importance of this issue, and 
said he had had a positive meeting on the USG proposal with 
A/S Rademaker on the margins of the OASGA in Santiago.  He 
thanked us for the counter-proposal given to him by A/S 
Rademaker, and said that the MFA\'s legal division had already 
sent the draft around to other ministries for their comments. 
 Gutierrez said the MFA was disappointed that the U.S. had 
not accepted an operative paragraph counter-proposed by the 
GOG, but said the MFA Treaty Office is producing an 
evaluation of the current proposal.  Gutierrez said that he 
had tasked Ambassador Maritza Ruiz de Vielman, his special 
advisor, with ensuring that the MFA and other ministries 
complete their review of the proposal expeditiously. 
 
3. (C) Gutierrez said that, besides the technical/legal 
review of the current text, he was also engaged in a round of 
political consultations on the matter more generally.  The 
Foreign Minister pointed out that he had been a member of the 
historical clarification commission which had fingered 
General Rios Montt for human rights violations during the 
internal conflict.  His subsequent decision to join the FRG 
government (note: Rios Montt is the Secretary General of the 
FRG. End note) had come as a big shock to the human rights 
community.  He said, \"if now I am perceived as the one who is 
pushing an international agreement that could protect Rios 
Montt from international justice, I will have lost all 
credibility.\"  The Ambassador pointed out that the ICC will 
have no jurisdiction over Rios Montt as there is no 
retroactivity in its actions.  Gutierrez acknowledged the 
point, but said human rights groups in Guatemala are not 
convinced.  Gutierrez said he has begun a consultation with 
the leading human rights groups and others to form a more 
educated position on an Article 98 Agreement.  He said that 
he was departing for a two week visit to European capitals 
and would be back in Guatemala by mid-July.  He believes that 
by that time the GOG will be prepared to discuss an Article 
98 Agreement more formally.  Gutierrez asked if we could give 
him until then to revisit the issue. 
 
4. (C) Comment:  Foreign Minister Gutierrez recognizes that 
securing an Article 98 Agreement is one of the USG\'s highest 
priorities in Guatemala at this time.  He is also aware that, 
even absent Guatemala\'s accession to the Statute of Rome, the 
lack of an Article 98 Agreement could have consequences for 
our military-to-military relationship.  When Gutierrez 
returns from Europe in mid-July we will broach the issue with 
him again. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9039","6/27/2003 19:27","03GUATEMALA1686","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001686 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/26/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, MOPS, KDEM, PREL, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: XAMAN CASE REOPENED 
 
 
Classified By: Human Rights Officer Katharine Read, reason 1.5 (b and d 
) 
 
1. (C) Summary: On June 17, Human Rights Officer attended a 
public session of the Xaman trial in San Pedro Carcha, Alta 
Verapaz.  This trial is the third attempt to prosecute 25 
soldiers for the October 5, 1995, massacre of eleven 
civilians in the community of Aurora 8 de Octubre, Finca 
Xaman, Alta Verapaz province.  The trial opened on June 3 and 
is expected to last several months.  Neither MINUGUA nor 
human rights groups maintain that the measure was 
premeditated; but neither do they expect a sentence that 
reflects the gravity of the excessive use of force they 
believe was perpetrated by the army.  End Summary. 
 
The Xaman Massacre 
------------------ 
 
2. (U) On October 5, 1995, a patrol of 25 soldiers led by 
Lieutenant Lacan Chaclan entered the community of Aurora 8 de 
Octubre, Finca Xaman, Alta Verapaz during a memorial ceremony 
for the returning refugee community.  There was a dispute of 
some kind (the details of which are being debated in the 
trial), tensions exploded, and the patrol opened fire on the 
community. Eleven civilians were killed, including several 
women and children. 
 
Lead-up to the Trial 
-------------------- 
 
3. (C) According to Gustavo Meono, Director of the Menchu 
Foundation, Rigoberta Menchu herself was the private 
plaintiff in the Xaman case until 1999.  The Menchu 
Foundation had worked in returning the Aurora 8 de Octubre 
community from Mexico to the Xaman Farm in Chisec, Alta 
Verapaz, before the massacre.  Meono told HROff that Menchu 
grew increasingly concerned about corruption in the Public 
Ministry and the Courts, and withdrew from the case to avoid 
tarnishing her name and organization.  In April 2000, the 
Supreme Court annulled previous sentencing and appellate 
courts\' decisions and ordered a new trial.  However, only 14 
of the 25 accused are currently in state custody due to 
complications with the pre-trial detention process. 
 
4. (C) Meono said that, in response to delays and corruption 
in the Guatemalan legal system, the Menchu Foundation filed 
the case with the Inter-American Human Rights Commission in 
1996.  Meono hoped that the case would move to the 
Inter-American Court this fall. 
 
MINUGUA\'s take 
-------------- 
 
5. (C) MINUGUA\'s regional coordinator for Alta and Baja 
Verapaz provinces, Christine Beauchot, told HROff that they 
hold little hope for convictions and punitive sentences for 
the fourteen soldiers.  Beauchot said that MINUGUA believes 
the army was guilty of excessive use of force on October 5, 
1995, but that it was unclear whether it was a premeditated 
counterinsurgent action ordered by the military hierarchy. 
Either way, she doubted that the soldiers being tried would 
receive sentences any more severe than time already served 
since the GOG was devoting so little effort to their 
prosecution.  The soldiers, including Lieutenant Lacan 
Chaclan, who led the patrol, have already served more than 
the seven-year sentences they could receive if convicted for 
accidental homicide, the charge most widely expected in this 
case. 
 
Ex-Prosecutor Tells his Story 
----------------------------- 
 
6. (C) The special prosecutor for the case from November 1995 
to 1999, Ramiro Contreras, told HROff that he was fired after 
an arduous battle with the leadership in the Public Ministry. 
 Contreras faced scant resources, disappearing evidence, and 
death threats throughout his three-plus years on the case, 
and left the country after the Attorney General ordered his 
removal from the case. (Note: Menchu Foundation and others 
believe Contreras was doing a good job, which is why he was 
removed.)  After Contreras\' departure, current prosecutor 
Alejandro Munoz Pivaral was appointed to the case. 
 
Trial times three 
----------------- 
 
7. (C) On June 17, HROff attended the public audience of the 
Xaman trial held in the regional sentencing court of San 
Pedro Carcha, Alta Verapaz.  The courtroom, a converted 
municipal auditorium, was empty save representatives from 
MINUGUA, the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s office of Coban, and a 
few family members of the defendants.  On the defense\'s side 
there were fourteen orange-uniformed defendants, three 
defense attorneys, and six Mayan language interpreters (three 
paid for by the defense and three court-appointed.)  On the 
prosecution\'s side there was one prosecutor and no staff. 
8. (C) The agenda on June 17 involved hearing the testimonies 
of the remaining fourteen defendants.  Patrol leader Lacan 
Chaclan testified the week before, and all six defendants 
testifying on June 17 repeated virtually identical versions 
of the events of October 5, 1995.  The soldiers maintained 
that they accidentally stumbled upon the Aurora 8 de Octubre 
community during a highly-emotional commemoration ceremony, 
that the villagers surrounded and attempted to disarm the 
soldiers, and that they opened fire on the crowd in 
self-defense. 
 
9. (C) The fourteen defendants speak three different Mayan 
languages and Spanish, and thus most used an interpreter for 
their testimony.  The defendants are all from local ethnic 
populations in Alta Verapaz, except for Lacan Chaclan, who is 
from a different Guatemalan province.  HROff noted that all 
three court-appointed interpreters sat and socialized with 
the defendants throughout the trial, in addition to the three 
language experts hired by the defense.  MINUGUA believes that 
this was unprofessional behavior.  However, prosecutor Munoz 
Pivaral has not lodged any complaints, nor has he requested 
any language experts to assist the prosecution. 
 
10. (C) The trial is expected to last through the end of 
July, with some family members of the victims testifying for 
the prosecution in a later phase.  MINUGUA and the Menchu 
Foundation staff told us that many of the family members are 
reluctant to participate in the trial because they lack faith 
in the justice system.  Meono told us that the families have 
spent the last eight years watching the army and the state 
delay and corrupt their access to justice by filing dilatory 
appeals, removing able prosecutors, and allowing evidence to 
disappear. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (C) While not a paradigmatic human rights case, the Xaman 
case does raise concern about the influence the army 
continues to wield in Guatemala\'s weak judicial system.  With 
highly paid lawyers, and mysterious allies allegedly 
confiscating evidence or bribing judicial operators, the 
defense has effectively maneuvered to keep responsibility at 
the level of the patrol.  This strategy seems unnecessary, 
given that experts such as MINUGUA have concluded that this 
massacre was probably not premeditated army policy, but a 
terrible error by the patrol leading to the excessive use of 
force.  The lack of commitment devoted to investigating and 
prosecuting the case by the Public Ministry is one more facet 
of the great challenge communities face in seeking 
investigation and prosecution of human rights crimes 
committed during Guatemala\'s 36-year internal conflict. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9051","6/29/2003 20:39","03GUATEMALA1692","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001692 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, PGOV, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: MAJOR COCAINE SEIZURE IN GUATEMALAN HIGHLANDS 
 
1. At 09:45 local time on June 27 a Bell 212 helicopter 
carrying 757 kilos of cocaine crashed near the town of San 
Francisco el Alto, in Totonicapan Department, near the border 
with Mexico.  Its three crew members, injured in the crash, 
escaped and remain at large.  Local police immediately 
arrived at the scene and informed the SAIA (Guatemalan 
counter-drug police) and the Public Ministry, which came and 
took charge of the drugs and the investigation.  The cocaine 
was transferred to the SAIA headquarters in Guatemala City 
where it is being cataloged as evidence before being 
destroyed.  Minister of Government Reyes Calderon told 
reporters that the SAIA had knowledge of and was 
investigating this cocaine shipment, which was destined for 
Mexico and had apparently been delayed by bad weather. 
 
2.  This seizure brings the GOG\'s total cocaine seizures for 
the first six months of 2003 to 3,668 kilos (611 kilos a 
month); up from a total of 2,400 kilos seized in all of 2002. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9052","6/29/2003 20:40","03GUATEMALA1693","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001693 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, PGOV, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: SAIA INTERNAL REGULATIONS SIGNED BY MINISTER OF 
GOVERNMENT 
 
1.  Minister of Government Jose Adolfo Reyes Calderon told 
the Ambassador on June 27 that he had signed the global 
internal regulations of the SAIA (Guatemala\'s 
counter-narcotics police).  These new internal regulations, 
which were drafted in consultation with the Embassy, 
represent a major step in the reorganization of Guatemala\'s 
counter-drug police after the dissolution of the DOAN in 2002. 
 
2.  By signing the SAIA internal regulations, the GOG has 
complied with an important benchmark in our counternatcotics 
certification dialogue. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9116","7/1/2003 21:19","03GUATEMALA1698","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1548","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: INCREASED POLICE PROTECTION FOR ANTHROPOLOGISTS, 
ENVIRONMENTALISTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1548 
 
Classified By: POLOFF Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b). 
 
1. (C) Summary: In response to increased threats targeting 
forensic anthropologists conducting exhumations, Ambassador 
Hamilton met with Minister of Interior Reyes Calderon on June 
27 to press for an enhanced GOG response.  Reyes Calderon 
said he had already given orders in the case of the 
anthropologists working in the Rabinal area after 
election-related violence there (reftel) and volunteered that 
he had detailed protection to CONAP, Guatemala\'s 
environmental protection agency, after police officers were 
caught in the Peten stealing tropical hardwoods.  Until the 
GOG aggressively pursues those making the threats, however, 
there will always be more individuals threatened than there 
is protection available for them.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) In a June 27 meeting, the Ambassador informed Minister 
of Interior Jose Reyes Calderon of the increasing threats 
against forensic anthropologists conducting exhumations in 
Rabinal, Baja Verapaz.  The Ambassador told Reyes Calderon 
about a recent threat against Fredy Peccerelli, head of the 
anthropologist team, which was communicated to the boyfriend 
of Peccerelli\'s sister and pointed out that although 
Peccerelli and his immediate family have protection, the 
boyfriend did not and would be the next to \"suffer\" if the 
exhumations continue.  Reyes Calderon assured the Ambassador 
that his Ministry took these threats very seriously, but said 
the Ministry could not provide round-the-clock protection to 
everyone related to anyone involved in the exhumations.  He 
added that due to increased tensions in Rabinal, he had 
already given orders to find additional resources to devote 
to protecting the anthropologists. 
 
3. (C) Reyes Calderon also told the Ambassador that in 
response to concerns from CONAP, he had ordered protection 
for the CONAP warehouse in the Peten where evidence against 
two police officers was being stored after they were arrested 
transporting stolen tropical hardwood in a police vehicle. 
Reyes Calderon said he had spoken with CONAP Director, a 
personal friend, and concluded that the safety of the 
evidence and the CONAP personnel in Peten were at risk. 
 
4. (C) Comment: Reyes Calderon admitted that criminal 
elements who are determined to intimidate those who stand in 
their way can easily identify victims that fall outside the 
limited ability of the police to provide protection. 
Although he has been responsive in directing police 
protection toward threats we identify, Reyes Calderon has 
been less successful in investigating those who make the 
threats.  These new cases illustrate the need for CICIACS or 
a similar outside investigative entity that can do more than 
redirect protective resources which are spread increasingly 
thin. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9117","7/1/2003 21:21","03GUATEMALA1699","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE175664","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001699 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT, UNGA, UN 
SUBJECT: 58TH UNGA DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO GOG 
 
REF: STATE 175664 
 
In the absence of the Director General for Multilateral 
Affairs at the Foreign Ministry, Acting PolCouns delivered 
the Spanish translation of reftel talking points to Acting 
Director, Marco Tulio Chicas on June 26, 2003.  Chicas 
expressed interest in the USG priorities, remarking that the 
MFA had anticipated our positions on cloning and budget 
discipline.  Chicas said that the GOG is still in the process 
of formulating its own positions for the UNGA, and welcomed 
the input from us.  He promised to seek a meeting with us 
closer to the UNGA to provide a better informed response on 
our positions, and to seek support for the GOG\'s priorities 
at the UNGA. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9118","7/1/2003 21:40","03GUATEMALA1700","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001700 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, PINR, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND HUMAN RIGHTS OMBUDSMAN DISCUSS 
VIOLENCE AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS WORKERS 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Ambassador Hamilton met with Human Rights 
Ombudsman Sergio Morales on June 26 to express concern over 
the recent murder of an Auxiliary Ombudsman and new threats 
against human rights defenders and journalists.  The 
Ambassador also praised Morales\' efforts to promote the 
prompt establishment of an International Commission to 
Investigate Clandestine Groups (CICIACS).  After the meeting, 
the Ambassador condemned the murder and intimidation in 
comments to the press.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On June 26, the Ambassador and HROff met with Human 
Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales to express condolences for 
the recent murder of Chimaltenango Auxiliary Ombudsman Israel 
Lopez.  The Ambassador also expressed concern to Morales 
about threats against fourteen other auxiliary Ombudsmen, and 
briefed the Ombudsman about USG diplomatic efforts to urge 
the GOG to protect the Ombudsman and human rights defenders. 
The Ambassador pledged further moral and technical support. 
Morales thanked the Ambassador for all of his efforts and 
said that USG assistance is an important pillar of support 
for human rights work in Guatemala.  Morales also praised 
newly-named prosecutor Thelma de Lam for the excellent job 
she is doing of investigating the Lopez murder. 
 
3. (SBU) The Ambassador expressed our concern over the June 
24 domestic break-in and threatening of El Periodico 
publisher Jose Ruben Zamora.  Morales agreed that this was a 
troubling incident that merited a quick and thorough 
investigation, which he and his staff were doing their best 
to provide.  Morales also mentioned that six different 
journalists had been threatened in different parts of the 
country over the previous 72 hours, and that he was worried 
about them as well. 
 
4. (SBU) Morales said he hoped the new wave of violence 
against human rights activists, journalists, and justice 
operators would justify the human rights community\'s urgency 
to see the commission to investigate clandestine groups 
(CICIACS) established quickly.  Morales said that he, Foreign 
Minister Gutierrez, and human rights leaders were looking 
forward to UN Rep Predendergrast\'s visit on July 4, as well 
as the UN technical mission in mid-July.  The Ambassador 
commended Morales\' leadership on the CICIACS and reiterated 
USG support for the expeditious establishment of CICIACS. 
 
5. (U) In statements to the press on departure from the 
Ombudsman\'s office, the Ambassador condemned the murder of 
Auxiliary Ombudsman Israel Lopez and called for a thorough 
investigation.  He said that the international community 
remains concerned over the intimidation of human rights 
workers, and expressed the hope that the Government would 
bring to justice those who are making these threats. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9204","7/7/2003 14:09","03GUATEMALA1727","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE186063","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2013 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, CA, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: CAFTA LABOR TRACK TWO DEMARCHE: GUATEMALA 
 
REF: A. STATE 186063 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1313 
 
Classified By: Labor Attache Erik Hall.  Reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1.  (C)  Summary:  Embassy welcomes Department\'s proposal, 
outlined in Ref A, to demarche Central American Ambassadors 
in Washington to emphasize the need for progress on labor 
rights protections in the context of CAFTA negotiations, and 
appreciates the opportunity to provide input for the demarche 
to the Guatemalan Ambassador.  Such a demarche complements 
the bilateral consultation process begun in the context of 
review of GSP petitions and on the margins of the Guatemala 
round of CAFTA in May.  Given that bilateral consultations 
are ongoing, Embassy recommends that the demarche reemphasize 
the themes of putting an end to impunity for attacks on labor 
leaders, streamlining of the labor justice system, and 
effective enforcement of judicial reinstatement orders.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) The next meeting of the bilateral working group on 
labor rights issues will be held on July 10.  The Ambassador 
will attend the meeting, convoked by the MFA at our request. 
The GOG will be represented by the Labor Minister, Attorney 
General, Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Trade 
Unionists, a Supreme Court magistrate, and other interested 
GOG representatives.  We requested the meeting to maintain 
momentum and show sustained USG interest in progress on key 
labor rights problems in the context of GSP review and CAFTA 
track two efforts. 
 
3.  (SBU) The three issue areas we have consistently 
emphasized, in coordination with the Department, have been: 
 
-- Combating Impunity for Violence Against Trade Unionists: 
by achieving progress in open investigations of violent 
crimes against union leaders; 
 
-- Streamlining the Labor Justice System:  to strengthen 
labor rights and rule of law by making labor justice more 
swift; and 
 
-- Enforcing Reinstatement Orders for Illegally-Fired 
Workers:  to add credibility to the labor justice system by 
making judicial orders enforceable and providing relief to 
workers in egregious cases of illegal firings for unionizing 
activities. 
 
Specific Cases 
-------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Within the three thematic areas listed above, there 
are some specific cases which could be cited to the 
Guatemalan Ambassador.  The investigation of the June 23, 
2000 murder of Transport Union General Secretary Oswaldo 
Monzon Lima is one such case, among six assassinations of 
trade unionists since 1999, where evidence implicates 
management for responsibility for the crime.  On the issue of 
labor justice, we have noted the GOG\'s recent procedural 
reforms submitted to Congress, but emphasize the need to 
redouble efforts to achieve further-reaching consensual 
reforms in the National Subcommission on Labor Justice, which 
involves active participation by the Ministry of Labor, the 
judiciary, employers, unions, academics, and others. 
Ironically, the Minister of Labor bypassed the Subcommission 
when introducing his reform package to Congress (where it 
remains pending), perhaps preferring that more visible step 
to consensus building.  The most egregious unresolved case of 
unenforced labor court orders for reinstatement of illegally 
fired employees is the case of the agricultural workers at 
the Finca Maria Lourdes, in Quezaltenango province.  There, 
the courts have issued seven separate rulings, none of which 
have been carried out,  reinstating 55 workers illegally 
fired in 1995 for attempting to organize a union.  There are 
many other similar cases. 
 
Some Signs of Progress 
---------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) By convoking the ministerial working group, we hope 
to build on the initial meeting on May 13, where some 
positive steps were reported by the GOG (Ref B), including: 
the naming of a new Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Trade Unionists, new labor rights reforms introduced to 
Congress by the Portillo Administration, expansion of labor 
court access to every Guatemalan province, and specific 
updates from the Special Prosecutor\'s office and the 
judiciary on the status of open investigations and labor 
court cases, respectively.  On July 10 we hope to learn of 
additional efforts, and plan to emphasize the need for 
continued sustained efforts on the part of the GOG to protect 
fundamental labor rights. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (C)  By focusing on thematic issues and problems, rather 
than imposing specific benchmarks, we have allowed the GOG 
leeway to establish priorities in addressing the different 
areas where labor rights protections need to be strengthened. 
 The creation of an inter-governmental working group, 
suggested by the GOG and modeled on bilateral efforts to 
address counter-narcotics issues, has already borne fruit by 
increasing communication between the diverse GOG institutions 
which have roles to play in labor rights protection.  One 
downside to this approach has been the Labor Minister\'s 
inclination to attempt to use USG interests to advance his 
own agenda.  We have seen this in the case of the Minister\'s 
labor code reform package, which was submitted to Congress 
without adequate consensus-building with civil society; 
unions oppose key elements in this package.  The Minister\'s 
efforts, in tandem with the Minister of Economy, to threaten 
the withdrawal of export privileges from the Choi 
Shin/Cimatextiles plants has also been overplayed by the GOG, 
threatening the loss of the only two unions that exist in the 
for-export maquila sector.  These cases illustrate the need 
for sustained USG engagement with the GOG to improve 
effective labor rights protections in Guatemala. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9205","7/7/2003 14:09","03GUATEMALA1728","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1658","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001728 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER COMMENTS ON ASSAULT AGAINST 
PUBLISHER 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1658 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The Ambassador met on June 27 with Interior 
Minister Reyes Calderon to express concern over the June 24 
criminal attack of the home of newspaper publisher Jose Ruben 
Zamora, and to urge a thorough investigation.  Reyes Calderon 
said that the Public Ministry was investigating the case, 
despite the lack of cooperation by Zamora.  He stressed that 
he has no reason to doubt that the assault had occurred the 
way Zamora described it, but added that the facts that have 
surfaced so far do not add up.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador paid a call on Minister of Interior 
Jose Reyes Calderon on June 27 to raise, inter alia, our 
concerns over the June 24 criminal attack on the home of \"El 
Periodico\" editor and GOG critic Jose Ruben Zamora (reftel). 
The Ambassador told Reyes Calderon that it is critical that 
the GOG conduct a thorough investigation of the incident. 
Reyes Calderon acknowledged the importance of resolving this 
case and said that his Ministry was doing everything it could 
to assist the Public Ministry which, he repeatedly pointed 
out, is legally in charge of the investigation.  Reyes 
Calderon said he hoped Mr. Zamora would cooperate more fully 
with the investigation because it was extremely important to 
get to the truth of what happened in such a high profile 
case, and his cooperation, which has so far been limited, was 
essential. 
 
3. (C) Reyes Calderon stressed that he had known Zamora 
personally for many years and considered him to be a man of 
honor.  He commented, however, that a number of factors in 
Zamora\'s account of the incident are unusual.  For example, 
Reyes Calderon said that in \"typical\" acts of intimidation, 
the aggressors use masks to terrorize the victim and usually 
destroy some of the victim\'s property to heighten the terror 
and to demonstrate their control of the situation.  According 
to Zamora, the group that attacked him included a woman and 
wore no masks.  They spent around two hours threatening 
Zamora in his house.  According to Reyes Calderon, two hours 
would be an extremely risky and unnecessary amount of time to 
spend in the home if the goal was simply to deliver the 
message that Zamora should tone down his attacks on the 
government or on organized crime. 
 
4. (C) Reyes Calderon said he had been able to inspect the 
entire house and observed no sign of violence (Note: RSO and 
PolOff visited the Zamora house about six hours after the 
incident and observed no signs of violence in the rooms they 
visited.  Zamora appeared unhurt and one of his teenage sons 
with whom they spoke showed no sign of physical abuse and 
seemed unusually calm given his recent ordeal (reftel). End 
note).  No fingerprints have been found in the house except 
for those of the family and household staff, according to 
Reyes Calderon, who finds it strange that the attackers would 
make no attempt to hide their faces, yet manage not to leave 
fingerprints during two hours in the house.  He also pointed 
out that the Zamora house is less than one hundred yards and 
in the direct line of sight of a guarded gate controlling 
access to the residential area.  According to Reyes Calderon, 
all of the license plates recorded by the guards the morning 
of the incident belonged to residents of the neighborhood 
(Note: EmbOffs entered the neighborhood by a different gate 
several blocks from the main entrance in an Embassy vehicle. 
The guards at this gate were unsure of the location of 
Zamora\'s house, and granted access without requesting 
identification.  Typically residential security guards 
provide very little security and would have nothing to gain 
and possibly their lives to lose if they admit to witnessing 
an assault such as the one on Zamora. End note). 
 
5. (C) The Ambassador told Reyes Calderon that, especially in 
view of the political tension surrounding the electoral 
campaign, clarifying the Zamora case was in everyone\'s 
interest.  He urged Reyes Calderon to continue providing all 
assistance to the Public Ministry to carry out a serious and 
thorough investigation. 
 
6. (C) Comment: The attack against Zamora and his family 
continues to generate significant interest in the press, and 
other journalists have stepped forward to say that they, too, 
have been threatened.  The incident has generated concern 
that political or criminal sectors opposed to change could 
engage in further violence during the election campaign in 
order to protect their interests.  The GOG recognizes the 
importance of investigating the incident, and Reyes Calderon 
has told us that he is committed to providing all assistance 
to the investigation.  Important facts about what happened at 
the Zamora residence on the morning of June 24, however, are 
still not known, and the success of any investigation will 
depend to a large extent on cooperation between government 
investigators and Zamora. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9215","7/7/2003 19:57","03GUATEMALA1743","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA1479|03GUATEMALA1530|03GUATEMALA1561","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: SUPREME COURT STRIKES DOWN RIOS MONTT CANDIDACY, 
LEAVING CONSTITUTIONAL COURT AS FINAL ARBITER 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1479 
     B. GUATEMALA 1530 
     C. GUATEMALA 1561 
 
1. (U) On July 4, the Supreme Court denied the appeal of FRG 
presidential candidate Efrain Rios Montt against a decision 
of the Registry of Citizens (Ref A) which stated that he 
could not be a candidate for President based on prohibitions 
contained in Article 186 of the Constitution.  Twelve of the 
Supreme Court magistrates voted to uphold the decision of the 
Registry of Citizens, and one voted against.  The Supreme 
Court decision was widely expected, following an earlier 
ruling by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (reftels). 
 
2. (U) Rios Montt\'s legal representatives appealed the 
Supreme Court decision to the Constitutional Court, which has 
ten days to rule.  The Constitutional Court has the final say 
in the matter, and its decision can not be appealed.  Press 
reports claim that Rios Montt told followers that four of the 
seven Constitutional Court magistrates favor overturning the 
decision of the Registry of Citizens, thus allowing him to 
run for President. It is widely believed that the 
Constitutional Court in fact may be favorable to a 
constitutional interpretation that would enable Rios Montt to 
be a candidate. 
 
3. (U) Opposition and civil society leaders quoted in the 
anti-government press lauded the decision of the Supreme 
Court.  They called on the Constitutional Court to follow the 
lead of the Registry of Citizens, the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal and the Supreme Court. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9252","7/8/2003 18:54","03GUATEMALA1751","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE192000","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, SOCI, GT, ECOSOC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA DEMARCHED ON OCCUPIED TERRITORIES 
RESOLUTION AT ECOSOC 
 
REF: STATE 192000 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Deputy Director for 
Multilateral Affairs, Marco Tulio Chicas, on July 7.  Chicas 
was familiar with the perennial nature of the resolution, and 
expressed hope that this year\'s resolution will not be a 
one-sided condemnation of Israel as in years past.  Guatemala 
believes this year\'s resolution may be more balanced 
according to Chicas.  Chicas said Guatemala would have to 
wait for the actual text of the resolution before taking a 
position. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9253","7/8/2003 18:54","03GUATEMALA1752","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001752 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KSCA, GT, USUN 
SUBJECT: HUMAN CLONING DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: 186073 
 
1.  In the absence of more senior officials, PolOff conveyed 
the Spanish version of reftel points to Marco Tulio Chicas, 
Deputy Director for Multilateral Affairs on July 2 and 
followed up on July 7.  Chicas said our points had been 
instrumental in preparing a briefing for his superiors, but 
that they had not yet reviewed the material or formed a 
position.  Chicas promised to inform us of the official 
Guatemalan position on the issue of cloning as soon as it is 
decided. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9318","7/10/2003 20:13","03GUATEMALA1774","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1760","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001774 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: RECUSAL OF CONSTITUTIONAL COURT MAGISTRATES 
GENERATES GREATER UNCERTAINTY OVER RIOS MONTT CANDIDACY 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1760 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary:  The recusal of one Constitutional Court 
magistrate and attempted recusal of five others on July 9 
created a temporary crisis in the Court\'s consideration of 
the case involving the eligibility of Efrain Rios Montt to be 
a presidential candidate.  The crisis was resolved when the 
Court accepted the recusal of the first magistrate, but then 
turned down the recusal of the remaining five.  The Court 
replaced the recused magistrate with the only alternate that 
did not attempt to recuse himself, and the public hearing of 
the Rios Montt case is scheduled to proceed on the evening of 
July 10.  The court has five days after the hearing to 
present its ruling.  The recusals and consequent replacement 
of one magistrate create greater uncertainty over the outcome 
of the case, as the magistrate that recused himself was 
widely viewed as pro-Rios Montt, and the loyalties of the 
replacement is uncertain.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) The decision by President of the Constitutional 
Court Mario Ruiz Wong to select two alternate members of the 
court hearing the Rios Montt candidacy case by a lottery that 
was not transparent (reftel), led permanent member Nery Saul 
Dighero on July 8 to recuse himself from hearing the case. 
Dighero was widely viewed as being sympathetic to Rios 
Montt\'s candidacy, and his departure threatened the presumed 
4 to 3 majority Rios Montt was believed to have in the court. 
 In response, on July 9 two other permanent members of the 
court and three alternates (all viewed as opposing Rios 
Montt\'s candidacy) wrote the President of the Court to recuse 
themselves also from the case.  These recusals, if accepted, 
would have deprived the Constitutional Court of the quorum 
necessary to decide the Rios Montt case. 
 
3. (SBU) Court President Ruiz Wong called an urgent meeting 
of the Court (which the recused members attended), and voted 
on the recusals.  The Court, by a one vote majority accepted 
the recusal of Dighero, replaced him with alternate 
magistrate Carlos Reynoso Gil, and turned down the recusals 
of the other five magistrates.  The action permitted the 
Court to go ahead with the public hearing of the Rios Montt 
case, scheduled for the evening of July 10.  The Court has 
five days after the hearing to render a verdict. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment:  Opponents of Rios Montt\'s candidacy viewed 
the recusal of the five magistrates as a way to force 
Constitutional Court President Ruiz Wong to re-hold the 
lottery for the two alternate magistrates in a transparent 
manner that would ensure that the composition of the Court 
was not manipulated in favor of Rios Montt.  The decision of 
the Court, by a majority vote with all magistrates present, 
to not accept the five recusals, however, allowed the Court, 
as conformed, to proceed with the hearing.  The only question 
now is how the new magistrate, Carlos Reynoso Gil, will vote. 
 Opponents of Rios Montt\'s candidacy suspect, from his 
refusal to join the other magistrates in recusing themselves, 
that he may favor Rios Montt and be the vote tipping the 
Court in favor of the former General, but this remains to be 
seen. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9418","7/15/2003 16:29","03GUATEMALA1805","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1774","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001805 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, MOPS, PHUM, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: CONSTITUTIONAL COURT DECLARES RIOS MONTT ELIGIBLE 
TO RUN FOR PRESIDENT 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1774 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1760 
 
1. (U) By a vote of 4 to 3, the Constitutional Court issued a 
decision on the evening of July 14 striking down the earlier 
findings of the Registry of Persons, the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal and the Supreme Court (reftels), which had found 
that former de facto President Efrain Rios Montt was not 
eligible to be a candidate for President, based on Article 
186 of the Constitution.  The Constitutional Court decision 
goes against a 1990 decision by the Constitutional Court and 
a 1995 decision by the Supreme Court (Note: In 1995 the 
appeal was not raised to the Constitutional Court. End note), 
which found that Article 186 of the Constitution did apply to 
Rios Montt, and that he could not be a candidate. 
 
2. (U) The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) must now register 
Rios Montt as a candidate.  Some civil society leaders and 
representatives of some opposition political parties have 
called on the TSE to refuse to register Rios Montt, arguing 
that they can not be compelled to carry out an instruction 
that violates the law.  Others, however, have said that the 
Constitution does not allow for an appeal to the 
Constitutional Court\'s decision, and say that rebellion by 
the TSE would only compound the damage to Guatemala\'s fragile 
democratic process begun by the questionable decision of the 
Constitutional Court. 
 
3. (U) Reaction to the widely anticipated decision was swift. 
 Rios Montt ran a paid add on TV only minutes after the 
announcement of the decision in which he heralded the 
Constitutional Court finding as a victory for the rule of 
law, and called on FRG members to refrain from celebrating in 
the streets.  Nobel Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu told 
reporters that the Supreme Court decision had been a 
\"constitutional coup.\"  Private Sector leader Dionisio 
Gutierrez said the Court\'s decision had wrought \"irreparable 
damage on Guatemala\'s democratic institutions.\"  GANA 
presidential candidate Oscar Berger called on all Guatemalans 
to defeat Rios Montt once and for all at the ballot box.  The 
Ambassador used the Department\'s previously cleared press 
guidance on the morning of July 15: basically, that while the 
decision is final, we are perplexed by a decision that, in 
the absence of new facts, runs counter to two previous 
findings on the issue. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment: The decision, while following the 
procedures outlined in the law, goes against the previous 
findings of the Court and smacks of partisan manipulation. 
Opponents of the FRG view the decision as the opening act of 
electoral fraud in the current election campaign, and are 
expressing concern that it sets a precedent for the ruling 
FRG to perpetrate \"further fraud\" during the elections.  OAS 
election observation chief Paniagua, in town on an initial 
visit, told the Ambassador (when he phoned to ask that we 
lobby other donors for financing) that he did not plan to 
comment until he was better grounded in the situation here. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9421","7/15/2003 17:02","03GUATEMALA1806","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001806 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DRL A/S CRANER AND DWALTERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, EAID, KJUS, GT 
SUBJECT: SUPPORT REQUEST FOR HUMAN RIGHTS PROSECUTOR 
 
REF: 02 GUATEMALA 3269 
 
1.  This is an action request for DRL.  See para 8. 
 
2.  Summary:  Attorney General Carlos De Leon has requested 
USG support for the Public Ministry\'s Office of the Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes Against Human Rights Workers.  De Leon 
cited the Public Ministry\'s resource constraints and the 
critical role the Special Prosecutor\'s office is playing in 
defense of human rights workers.  Thelma Pelaez De Lam, the 
new Special Prosecutor, has also expressed concern that she 
does not have adequate funding to achieve her mission of 
bringing to justice those who threaten the lives of human 
rights workers.  We consider De Lam an energetic new GOG ally 
in the fight against impunity and believe providing USG 
support to her office could significantly improve the climate 
of human rights in Guatemala.  End Summary. 
 
3.  At a meeting with the Ambassador on June 27, Attorney 
General Carlos De Leon requested USG support for the work of 
newly named \"Special Prosecutor For Crimes Against Human 
Rights Groups, Indigenous Groups, Civil Society and NGOs,\" 
Thelma Pelaez Pineda De Lam.  De Leon noted that De Lam\'s 
energy and courage had already led to successful 
investigations and the arrest of suspects in the case of 
murdered human rights activist, Manuel Garcia de La Cruz 
(Reftel), and that her investigations into the murders of 
three other human rights workers unveiled suspicions of 
police involvement in the crimes.  De Leon said that De Lam 
is exposed, and his office doesn,t even have funds to 
adequately meet the equipment needs she has to carry out the 
job.  He asked that the USG give consideration to providing 
equipment support to her office. 
 
4.  In meetings with HROff on June 10 and 23, De Lam said she 
had initially operated with a staff of only three until early 
June when her staff jumped to 24.  However, De Lam had yet to 
receive a paycheck and her staff had not been reimbursed for 
investigation expenses. She lacks computers, adequate 
transportation, and support from auxiliary prosecutors.  By 
virtue of her sensitive position, De Lam,s security is in 
jeopardy and she is regularly escorted by a three-person 
security detail. 
 
5.  De Lam gave HROff a list of items that would aid her 
office in successfully prosecuting human rights violators. 
The list included:  four 4x4 vehicles in order for her to 
carry out investigations simultaneously in rural areas; three 
laptop computers and a printer to document and report 
information while on the road and before rural tribunals; ten 
desktop computers with printers for the office; and various 
courses in investigations, ballistics, criminology, 
pathology, crime scenes, interrogation, and others for her 
team. 
 
6.  NAS has agreed to include De Lam\'s investigators in 
training program as appropriate and USAID is also seeking 
funding to support De Lam,s office. 
 
7.  Lack of resources impedes this key GOG office from 
conducting thorough investigations, handling evidence, and 
successfully prosecuting human rights violators. 
Nevertheless, De Lam has indeed been making credible progress 
in important investigations.  Increased funding and resources 
would enable the Special Prosecutor to investigate and 
prosecute more cases and thereby advance our human rights 
agenda here by bringing to justice those who threaten or take 
the lives of human rights defenders. 
 
8.  ACTION REQUEST:  Embassy requests special Department 
funding to provide material support requested by De Lam in 
para 5.  We estimate that at relatively low cost to the USG, 
we can help the GOG achieve disproportionate results.  We 
estimate that providing all the material requested would cost 
$200,000.  However, lower levels of support would also 
substantially add to the Special Prosecutor\'s investigative 
and prosecutorial productivity. 
 
9.  For example, with a USG grant of $85,000, De Lam could 
purchase 2 vehicles ($35,000 ea.), 3 laptops ($2000 ea.), 7 
desktop computers ($1000 ea.), 4 printers ($300 ea.), and 
$800 worth of training materials and classes.  This level of 
support would permit De Lam and her team to conduct 
simultaneous investigations (versus the current serial 
efforts she is making) in rural areas where 90% of crimes 
again human rights workers take place. 
 
10.  A lesser grant of $45,000 would purchase one vehicle, 2 
laptops, 5 desktops, 3 printers, and leftover funds for 
classes and training materials. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9425","7/15/2003 22:10","03GUATEMALA1813","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1313|03GUATEMALA971|03STATE186063","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 GUATEMALA 001813 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/PPC:CHARLOTTE ROE 
USTR FOR VIONDETTE LOPEZ AND BUD CLATANOFF 
USDOL FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: SECOND LABOR WORKING GROUP:  LIMITED PROGRESS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 971 
     B. GUATEMALA 1313 
     C. STATE 186063 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador attended the second 
bilateral working group meeting on labor issues with the GOG 
on July 10 and emphasized the need for concrete progress 
prior to submission of a CAFTA to the U.S. Congress.  He 
reiterated USG concern about impunity for violence against 
union leaders, the need to streamline the labor justice 
system, and the importance of enforcing court rulings to 
reinstate workers illegally fired for unionizing activities. 
The GOG reported some progress from the Executive branch 
protecting labor rights, especially in the maquila sector. 
The report of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Trade 
Unionists was disappointing for lack of progress, while 
prospects for expedited reform to the labor justice system 
are not great.  The Ambassador noted international concern, 
including from AFL-CIO President John Sweeny, over the 
imprisonment of Guatemalan labor leader Rigoberto Duenas in 
the Social Security Institute (IGSS) corruption scandal. 
Recognizing that there are few quick fixes to labor rights 
enforcement, we have begun stressing these labor themes to 
opposition candidates in the upcoming elections.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) The bilateral labor working group was formed at the 
GOG\'s suggestion during a visit by USTR and DOS labor 
officials in March (Ref A).  The first working group meeting 
took place on May 13 (Ref B) and was attended by the GOG, 
Embassy, USTR and USDOL officials.  To maintain momentum on 
outstanding labor issues, the Ambassador requested that the 
MFA convoke the second working group meeting, which took 
place on July 10.  Though initially a response to GSP 
petition review, this meeting coincided with USG \"Track Two\" 
demarche (Ref C) to encourage improvement in labor rights 
enforcement prior to submission of an eventual CAFTA 
agreement to Congress. 
 
3.  (U) GOG participants included 24 GOG officials from the 
Labor Ministry, Economy Ministry, Foreign Ministry, Tax 
Authority, FONTIERRAS, Social Security Institute, Attorney 
General\'s Office, Supreme Court and Judiciary, Congress, and 
the Solicitor General\'s Office.  Labor Minister Moreira led 
the GOG side, and explained that, to broaden its range, the 
GOG,s \"Multi-institutional Work Committee for Labor 
Relations in Guatemala\" had expanded its membership since the 
last bilateral meeting to include the Social Security 
Institute (IGSS), the Fund for Land (FONTIERRAS), the tax 
authority (SAT), and the land dispute resolution body 
(CONTIERRA).  From the GOG, speakers included MFA Director 
General of Bilateral Affairs Jose Arturo Rodriguez, Minister 
of Labor Victor Moreira, Supreme Court Magistrate Otto 
Marroquin,  Labor Court Magistrate Beatriz de Leon de 
Barreda, and Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Journalists and Trade Unionists, Antonio Cortez Sis.  The 
Ambassador was accompanied by LabAtt. 
 
The Ambassdor,s Pitch 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) The Ambassador thanked the group for the 
opportunity to exchange views and shared his perception after 
a recent trip to Washington that concerns about labor rights 
form the greatest challenge to a CAFTA and will be central to 
US Congressional review of a possible CAFTA.  In response to 
a call for comment on labor aspects of CAFTA, several US NGOs 
(WOLA and US/LEAP) and the AFL-CIO had submitted extensive 
commentaries critical of labor rights protections throughout 
the region, which reveal negative perceptions of the issue in 
the U.S. (he provided copies of the three submissions to USTR 
to the group).  The Ambassador told the group that the USG 
had instructed all its embassies in Central America to pursue 
bilateral consultations such as this one to emphasize the 
need for concrete advances to protect labor rights in the 
region, and a senior-level group would be sending the same 
message to Central American ambassadors in Washington.  The 
Ambassador reiterated the USG,s main concerns about labor 
rights protections in Guatemala, emphasizing the damage to 
Guatemala,s international reputation caused by murders of 
labor leaders and impunity;  delays in the labor justice 
system; and the need to enforce labor court sentences 
reinstalling workers illegally fired for unionizing 
activities. 
 
MOL Takes the Lead 
------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) MFA Director General of Bilateral Affairs Jose 
Arturo Rodriguez turned the meeting over to Labor Minister 
Moreira, who described his ministry\'s efforts to protect 
labor rights.  He listed seven reforms to the Labor Code 
pending in Congress: 
 
a)  Elimination of child labor and the worst forms of labor 
for children; reduction of the work day for children, 
sanctions and fines for violations; 
 
b)  Changing the reference to domestic work to \"work in 
private homes;\" training in labor rights for these workers; 
and their incorporation into the Social Security system; 
 
c)  Prohibition of sexual harassment and confinement (\"acoso 
y hostigamiento sexuales\"); procedures to prevent it; and 
making it grounds for dismissal; 
 
d)  Universal severance: severance based on time served (one 
month salary for each year worked) for workers who quit or 
leave voluntarily by mutual agreement;  option for 
reinstallation in cases of unjustified firing; 
 
e)  Procedural code reforms:  strengthening oral procedures; 
shortening the hearing process; eliminating recourse to 
complaints over procedures; reducing the hearing process to 
one non-appealable hearing; embargo of assets of legal 
representatives and partners and associates of accused 
companies; requiring a deposit in cash or guarantee 
sufficient to cover the cost of the demand to lift the 
embargo on assets; obligatory authorization of precautionary 
measures, even before the complaint is heard, or at any time 
during the process; court costs in cases where the complaint 
is for unpaid non-renounceable benefits owed to the worker; 
first oral hearing within two months of presentation of the 
complaint;  (Note:  Moreira argued that by cutting short the 
complaint process the reforms improve efficiency and also 
give employers an incentive to resolve cases out of court. 
Moving precautionary measures to seize employer assets to the 
beginning of the process will also encourage employers to 
settle justified demands without going to court, further 
clearing the clogged labor justice system.  End Note.) 
 
f)  Creation of the Institute for Public Sector Worker 
Recreation independent of the Labor Ministry (it is currently 
a part of the Ministry); 
 
g)  Creating a fund to administer scholarships for Guatemalan 
workers funded by fees from employers of foreign workers 
($1,282/foreigner/year). 
 
6.  (SBU) The Ambassador congratulated the Minister for the 
reforms, especially the reforms to the labor procedural code, 
which address one of the USG,s main concerns on labor. 
Asked about their status in Congress, Congressional Deputy 
Julio Contreras (FRG) said that the reforms had their first 
reading May 9 and are pending a recommendation of the Labor 
Commission.  That recommendation will be favorable, he said, 
and the reforms will pass to the plenary.  Contreras said he 
was authorized by President of Congress Rios Montt to say the 
FRG has the votes to approve the reforms in August.  He added 
that the FRG will allow amendments in an attempt to achieve 
consensus on the reforms with opposition parties.  Asked by 
the Ambassador if he thought there was any prospect of 
support from the opposition, Contreras said he thinks some 
support will be possible. 
 
7.  (SBU) Moreira also described the following MOL actions 
since the first meeting of the bilateral labor working group: 
 
-- He announced the GOG\'s withdrawal of Article 5 of 
Government Accord 60-2002, (announced in February 2002), 
which (reportedly under IMF guidelines) prohibited public 
sector salary increases in collective bargaining agreements 
(Note:  This provision, protested by public sector unions, 
was ruled unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court.  End 
Note.) 
 
-- Institutional Reforms:  modification of the Ministry\'s 
internal regulations and strategic planning processes (a 
strategic plan has been finalized), and restructuring, 
including reclassification of positions and salaries to be 
negotiated with the Ministry\'s union, and new structures to 
address child labor, the implementation of ILO Convention 169 
on the rights of the indigenous and the handicapped.  He said 
new labor inspectors will be hired by January 2004, raising 
the number of inspectors from 833 to 1300 (130 will be 
dedicated to thematic areas mentioned above).  He said the 
Ministry\'s budget will increase from $7.2 million in 2003 to 
$17.7 million for 2004, and, for the worker recreation fund, 
from $1 million to $2.1 million.  (Comment:  These budget 
increases must be approved by Congress, and could be modified 
by the next government.  End Comment.) 
 
-- Efforts to Address Labor Relations Problems in the Banana 
Sector:  including creation of inter-governmental and 
tripartite committees to discuss structural problems in the 
industry;  defining options for worker-owned cooperatives, as 
provided by Chiquita in Panama, with participation of 
CONTIERRA and FONTIERRAS (the Minister said he would visit 
Panama soon to discuss this program with workers and the 
GOP); advances in collective bargaining negotiations on the 
El Real and El Atlantico plantations, facilitated by a team 
of five new inspectors to supplement existing coverage; and a 
compromise reached through MOL mediation between workers and 
employers in the Bobos district of Morales, Izabal to avoid 
the use of roadblocks in labor conflicts. 
 
-- Efforts in the Maquila Sector:  the MOL has put into 
practice procedures with the Ministry of Economy to denounce 
employers which have failed to comply with labor rights 
obligations, to begin legal procedures and eventual 
withdrawal of tax privileges (30 cases are now pending in the 
Economy Ministry); the first such case processed was against 
Choi Shin/Cimatextiles, which is near resolution (SepTel); a 
sub-commission of this inter-institutional group is meeting 
with employers (VESTEX) and NGOs (FLA, COVERCO) and worker 
representatives to develop responses to problems in the 
sector.  Moreira asserted that its selection of Choi 
Shin/Cimatextiles as the test case was not an effort to 
threaten the only existing unions in the sector, nor was it 
selected for its foreign ownership.  Rather, it was chosen 
because of the strong international attention generated by 
violence at the plants in July 2001, and the management\'s 
lack of compliance with MOL decisions on worker petitions. 
The list of 30 other companies includes many Guatemalan-owned 
firms. 
 
--  The introduction of a 24-hour module on labor rights in 
the second and third grades of secondary school.  The 
Ministry hopes to expand this education effort in future to 
lower grades and to the university level with ILO support. 
 
Little Progress on Impunity 
--------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Journalists 
and Trade Unionists Antonio Cortez Sis reported that his 
office now consists of himself, two agents and two support 
staff.  He expects one more agent to be assigned soon.  He 
highlighted the following \"progress\" in several murder cases 
and submitted a list of 100 cases of violence or threats 
against trade unionists received since the Special 
Prosecutor\'s office opened in July 2001, 46 of which have 
been closed as a result the complaint being dropped; other 
cases were transferred to other offices, leaving a total of 
42 cases under investigation. 
 
-- Carlos Francisco Guzman Lanuza ) Secretary General of the 
Union of Municipal Workers of Nueva Concepcion, Escuintla; 
murdered November 27, 2002.  Status:  An ex-municipal council 
member has been arrested for this and other murders.  The 
case has been transferred to Special Prosecutor for 
Corruption for prosecution. 
 
-- Baudilio Amado Cermeno Ramirez ) Light and Power Union; 
murdered December 21, 2001.  The Attorney General\'s Office 
filed a motion contesting the dismissal of the case against 
his live-in lover by the 6th first instance court. 
 
-- Oswaldo Monzon Lima ) General Secretary of the Union of 
Gas Truckers; murdered June 23, 2000.  Status:  His son did 
not show up for a scheduled meeting with prosecutors on July 
7, 2003, despite his offer of witness protection. 
 
-- Baldomero de Jesus Ramirez ) General Secretary of the 
Union of Municipal Workers of Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa; 
murdered June 22, 1999.  Status:  Meeting planned with the 
Municipal Union of Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa for 7/15/03 to 
evaluate the request for legal process against Mayor Cesar 
Augusto Duarte Soto as presumed intellectual author of the 
murder. 
 
-- El Arco plantation case ) head wound from machete 
delivered to Marcos Alvarez Tzoc on January 17, 2003.  The 
prosecutors are appealing the judge\'s decision to fine the 
owner of the plantation, Julio Enrique de Jesus Salazar 
Pivaral, $641 for the crime, arguing for jail time.  (Note: 
LabAtt told Cortez that Amnesty International reports more 
recent threats of violence by the owner against workers. 
Cortez was aware of the new threats.  End Note.) 
 
-- Two SITRABI Witnesses ) subject to death threats 
(presumably from the notorious Mendoza brothers of Morales, 
Izabal, who committed the crime against the SITRABI union and 
paid fines in lieu of jail time).  The two witnesses were 
paroled into the U.S. in 2002 for their protection.  The 
prosecutor wants to send someone to interview them, but has 
not made contact. 
 
9.  (SBU) In response to this underwhelming progress report, 
the Ambassador emphasized the resonance in the U.S. of cases 
of murdered labor leaders.  The strongest argument against 
Guatemala heard in Washington is that labor leaders are being 
killed and nobody is being prosecuted.  He asked Cortez if 
there is any way the USG can help him get results.  Cortez 
responded that he recently took stock of his office\'s efforts 
and is not satisfied with progress made to date.  He assured 
the Ambassador that his office \"has the will to advance.\" 
 
Judiciary 
--------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Supreme Court Magistrate Otto Marroquin and Labor 
Court justice Beatriz de Leon de Barreda described efforts by 
the judiciary to expand labor court coverage and train 
justice workers and judges in labor issues.  To improve 
coverage the judiciary has created 22 labor courts, one in 
each departmental capital, and permitted justices of the 
peace in five other municipalities to hear labor disputes, 
bringing the total number of labor courts nationwide to 38. 
It has also trained labor judges in conciliation and 
arbitration of labor disputes.  In addition, there are seven 
labor courts in the capital; one in Coatepeque, which is not 
a provincial capital but is in an area with many labor 
disputes (coffee plantations); three appeals courts in the 
capital and one appeals court in the interior.  This is still 
not enough to meet demand, Marroquin admitted, but funds to 
expand coverage are limited. 
 
11.  (SBU) On another front, the UNDP has funded a study of 
the penal code and pilot reforms in the capital and 
Escuintla, but lacks funding to expand the project.  A 
seminar for judges on ILO conventions was recently held.  In 
addition, the Labor Justice Sub-Commission of the National 
Commission to Strengthen the Justice System, founded by the 
Peace Accords, held a seminar July 3-4 to analyze the need 
for reforms to the labor procedural code.  A report on the 
seminar is being drafted. 
 
12.  (SBU) Marroquin agreed with the Ambassador that the 
issue of non-compliance with judicial sentences is a problem. 
 Non-compliance should cause the judge to initiate a penal 
case against the violator, but many times this does not 
happen.  In some cases, severance pay to illegally fired 
employees can cause economic hardship on the employer.  The 
case of Salama Horticulture, cited in the AFL-CIO\'s pending 
GSP petition against Guatemala, is pending in the 
Constitutional Court, where 52 illegally-fired workers have 
appealed an injunction won by the company blocking 
reinstatement. 
 
13.  (SBU) More generally, the judiciary has developed a 
Modernization Plan which includes emphasis on creation of a 
judicial civil service, training of judges and magistrates, 
including in labor issues, and new disciplinary procedures 
for all judicial sector workers.  Computers are being 
distributed to courts around the country.  Meanwhile, the 
judiciary is negotiating a new collective bargaining 
agreement with its employees, the first since 1991. 
 
Rigoberto Duenas, Imprisonment 
------------------------------ 
 
14.  (SBU) Before closing the meeting, the Ambassador raised 
the case of the imprisonment of prominent union leader 
Rigoberto Duenas for his alleged role in the corruption 
scandal surrounding the National Social Security Institute 
(IGSS), where he served as the worker representative on the 
IGSS governing board.  The Ambassador noted that he had 
received 10 letters from the U.S. about Duenas, 
imprisonment, pending a hearing on July 17, including a copy 
of a letter from AFL-CIO President John Sweeny to President 
Portillo requesting a speedy adjudication of the case and 
adequate protection for Duenas in prison.  Cortez responded 
that he had met with union representatives after Duenas was 
jailed, and said responsibility for the case now lies with 
the courts. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
15.  (SBU) The GOG deserves credit for its willingness to 
explore new ways to protect labor rights, but its performance 
in some areas leaves much to be desired.  The new Special 
Prosecutor\'s report was particularly disappointing.  While he 
may be distracted by a recent wave of attacks and threats 
against journalists and short on staff resources, we will 
look for ways to provide material support for labor 
investigations.  Labor justice is another area where 
prospects for rapid change seem dim.  The prospects for 
passage of legislative reforms to shorten the judicial 
process pending in Congress are complicated by the FRG\'s 
ever-narrowing margin and other priorities.  Nevertheless, 
the Labor Justice Sub-commission is doing good work building 
consensus on that issue.  We have recently expanded our labor 
lobbying efforts on the same themes to include labor advisors 
the business group CACIF and to the GANA coalition, the main 
opposition challenger to the FRG in the presidential 
elections, since quick fixes are few and any steps taken by a 
lame-duck administration will need to be expanded by the next 
government, which will take office in January, 2004. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9426","7/15/2003 22:11","03GUATEMALA1814","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1313","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001814 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/PPC: CHARLOTTE ROE 
USTR FOR VIONDETTE LOPEZ AND BUD CLATANOFF 
USDOL FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: CHOI SHIN/CIMATEXTILES LABOR AGREEMENT REACHED 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1313 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  After being threatened with withdrawal of 
tax exemption privileges by the Ministry of Economy, 
management of the Choi Shin/Cimatextiles maquila plants met 
GOG requirements by successfully concluding and signing on 
July 9 a collective bargaining agreement with each plant 
union and achieving two other agreements with the union on 
other pending labor complaints.  On July 10, the GOG 
acknowledged these efforts and withdrew its threat to close 
the plants for labor violations.  The resolution of the Choi 
Shin/Cimatextiles case sets an important precedent in 
Guatemala:  while other collective bargaining agreements have 
been achieved in the sector, all resulted in the closure of 
the plant and loss of unionized jobs.  This agreement is the 
first result of the GOG\'s new forceful application of a 
mechanism to compel respect for labor rights in the maquila 
sector.  Thirty similar cases of factories with unresolved 
labor complaints under GOG threat of closure remain.  End 
Summary. 
 
Background 
 
2.  (U) The Choi Shin/Cimatextiles plants share Korean 
ownership and are co-located in the same complex in the Villa 
Nueva municipality adjacent to the capital.  They employ a 
total of 1300 workers.  Liz Claiborne Inc. is one of the 
major buyers of clothing made in these factories.  Anti-union 
violence, encouraged by management, broke out in July 2001 
when some workers filed a petition with the Labor Ministry 
announcing a unionization drive.  After international 
attention and GOG intervention, two plant unions (SITRACHOI 
and SITRACIMA) were organized.  Since then, union members 
reported a climate of low-level anti-union harassment which 
prevented the unions from achieving the 25% threshold of 
worker support to compel collective bargaining negotiations. 
Meanwhile workers filed complaints with the Ministry of Labor 
regarding unjustified firings (approximately 40 cases since 
July 2001) and other issues. 
 
Minister\'s Role 
 
3.  (SBU) Minister of Labor Moreira told visiting USTR and 
USDOL officials in May (RefTel) that President Portillo had 
authorized the use of the Minister of Economy\'s power to 
grant import and export tax privileges to compel resolution 
of labor complaints pending against maquila employers.  At a 
bilateral labor working group on July 10 (SepTel), Minister 
Moreira told the Ambassador that the Labor Ministry has sent 
a list of 30 maquilas with outstanding labor violations to 
the Minister of Economy.  It chose Choi Shin/Cimatextiles as 
the first case, not to threaten the existence of the only two 
unions currently in existence in the maquila sector, he said, 
but because it is the case that has generated the most 
international attention.  If the GOG\'s three conditions were 
met by July 10 (two had already been met by an earlier 
deadline of July 7), he said, the GOG\'s threat to withdraw 
tax privileges would be rescinded.  The outstanding 
requirement was to present a signed collective bargaining 
agreement. 
 
4.  (SBU)  Liz Claiborne\'s local representative and an agent 
of the Fair Labor Association kept the Embassy informed of 
the status of negotiations between Choi Shin/Cimatextiles\' 
management and the unions throughout the negotiation and 
played important roles encouraging an agreement.  Agreement 
was reached on the final issue of a monthly wage raise (of 
$12.85) on July 9.  The GOG acknowledged the agreement on 
July 10. 
 
5.  (SBU) Privately and publicly, industry employer groups 
have reacted strongly against the use of the threat of 
closure by the GOG to compel collective bargaining.  CACIF 
Labor Commission chief Carlos Arias told LabAtt that 
employers believe the GOG should close the plants for 
violations rather than force them to negotiate a CBA \"with a 
gun to (management\'s) head.\"  VESTEX maquila employer 
association labor advisor Rolando Figueroa accused the GOG of 
\"acting under political pressure\" from international 
organizations which \"don\'t understand the economic realities 
in Guatemala.\"  \"(The GOG) should give appropriate attention 
to labor violation complaints, but follow the course of the 
law.\" 
 
Comment: 
 
6.  (SBU) If implemented, the Choi Shin/Cimatextiles 
collective bargaining agreement will be the first in the 
Guatemalan maquila sector (previous agreements prompted 
management to close their plants and reopen elsewhere to 
break their unions).  As such, it will set a precedent not 
lost on other maquila labor violators.  The GOG believes this 
new coercive mechanism is legal and is an important new tool 
to punish and prevent labor violations in plants which 
benefit from export tax privileges.  While the GOG\'s strategy 
in this case was high-risk (it might have resulted in the 
closure of the only two unionized maquila plants in Guatemala 
and the loss of 1300 jobs), the GOG deserves credit for 
achieving an outcome which may strengthen labor rights and 
cause violators to change their behavior. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"9427","7/15/2003 22:15","03GUATEMALA1815","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE193839","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 001815 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN; G/TIP:GREG HOLLIDAY; CA/VO AND CA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PHUM, SMIG, PREL, ASEC, KSEP, KFRD, CA, CVIS, GT 
SUBJECT: BILATERAL TIP WORKING GROUP FORMED 
 
REF: STATE 193839 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  In response to RefTel, on July 7, the 
Ambassador and visiting G/TIP Program Officer Greg Holliday 
met with an inter-governmental group including the Minister 
of Government, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, Vice 
Minister of Labor, Secretary of Social Welfare, a Supreme 
Court magistrate and other GOG officials to share the 
Department\'s 2003 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report 
findings and to request stepped-up GOG collaboration to 
combat trafficking in persons.  GOG participants described 
ongoing efforts to combat trafficking and alien smuggling and 
announced the formation of a GOG commission to follow-up on 
issues included in the TIP report.  The Embassy plans to 
follow-up on this result by developing and implementing a 
comprehensive anti-TIP strategy and continuing to encourage 
GOG attention to this issue.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) G/TIP Program Officer Greg Holliday visited Guatemala 
July 7-9 and met with the Embassy\'s anti-TIP working group, 
the GOG, locally-based NGOs and IOs working on anti-TIP, and 
visited NGO victims assistance projects on the 
Guatemalan-Mexican border at Tecun Uman.  Holliday also met 
with Embassy NAS staff and the GOG\'s Secretary of Social 
Welfare to discuss the results of an earlier G/TIP-funded 
project; met with the main opposition candidate\'s campaign 
advisor on social issues; discussed USG anti-TIP efforts with 
participants in a Vital Voices leadership workshop; and gave 
an interview to the leading daily \"Prensa Libre.\" 
 
3.  (U) Guatemala is rated a Tier II country in the 
Department\'s 2003 TIP report.  The GOG acknowledges TIP as a 
growing problem and is taking steps to combat it.   The 
Embassy organized the bilateral meeting to take advantage of 
Holliday\'s visit and the publication of the TIP report to 
increase GOG understanding of and will to combat trafficking 
in persons. 
 
4.  (U) The GOG responded enthusiastically to our request to 
the MFA for an inter-governmental meeting on this subject. 
Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Gabriel Aguilera hosted the 
meeting, and the following GOG officials attended: 
 
-- Supreme Court Magistrate Napoleon Gutierrez 
-- Minister of Government Dr. Jose Adolfo Reyes Calderon 
-- Minister of Public Health and Social Assistance Dr. Julio 
Molina Aviles 
-- Vice Minister of Labor Sandra Mendez de Arevalo 
-- Secretary of Social Welfare Marilys Barrientos de Estrada 
-- Director General of Migration, Oscar Contreras Hernandez 
-- MFA Director of Bilateral Affairs, Sara Solis Castaneda 
-- MFA Human Rights Advisor Mario Rene Cifuentes 
 
The Ambassador and Mr. Holliday were accompanied by Acting 
PolCouns (Embassy TIP Coordinator) and PolIntern. 
 
USG Pitch 
--------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The Ambassador acknowledged that trafficking in 
persons is a serious problem in the U.S., and appealed for 
GOG cooperation to fight this scourge.  He explained the 
difference between trafficking in persons and alien 
smuggling.  Holliday described how the USG is tackling the 
problem in the U.S. domestically (through inter-governmental 
coordination) and abroad.  He explained the findings of the 
TIP report on Guatemala and the implications of a Tier II and 
III rankings.  Holliday described G/TIP and USG programs 
worldwide totaling $55 million in 2002 to combat trafficking, 
and gave examples of means to address prevention, assistance 
to victims, and law enforcement to catch and prosecute 
traffickers. 
 
6.  (SBU) Holliday praised Guatemala\'s National Action Plan 
to Combat Sexual Commercial Exploitation of Children and 
Adolescents as a good first step and asked how implementation 
of the plan was proceeding.  He said that governments benefit 
from the expertise of IOs and NGOs working to assist victims 
of trafficking, such as the IOM and ILO and Casa Alianza in 
Central America.  He asked to hear about best practices being 
implemented to combat trafficking in Guatemala, and gave an 
example of a best practice in Nicaragua, where police visit 
schools to increase awareness of children to the risks of 
TIP.  Holliday urged GOG immigration authorities not to treat 
victims of trafficking as illegal migrants.  Instead, victims 
should be interviewed to develop investigations into 
trafficking rings, and provided assistance.  Deportation of 
victims does not solve the problem, he said, if the 
trafficker goes free.  He noted GOG efforts to combat and 
punish corruption and welcomed the start of a bilateral 
dialogue on TIP. 
 
7.  (SBU) After hearing the GOG presentations (see below) the 
Ambassador emphasized the need to implement concrete actions 
to combat TIP.  He urged a re-examination of the National 
Action Plan and Guatemalan laws to combat TIP.  Holliday said 
that efforts to combat alien smuggling can be adapted to 
combat TIP.  The hundreds of Guatemalans being deported from 
Mexico every day, for example, could be interviewed by 
Guatemalan authorities to determine if they are victims of 
trafficking. 
 
GOG Presentations:  Confusing TIP with Alien Smuggling 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
8.  (SBU) DirGen of Immigration Contreras described the 
number of Salvadoran and Honduran undocumented migrants 
deported by Guatemala (36,917 in the first six months of this 
year), the number of people charged with migration crimes 
during that period (54) and the number of buses used to 
transport deportees to their countries.  Contreras said 
President Portillo is concerned about the lack of border 
control and lack of prevention of alien smuggling and 
corruption; he then described GOG efforts to change the 
situation since 2001, including Contreras\' appointment as 
\"intervenor\" of the Migration Directorate.  117 migration 
officials have been discharged for corruption, nine have been 
charged, and 64 have been subject to disciplinary actions in 
the migration directorate, including some directors of the 
directorate\'s union.  He said that he had received threats 
linked to the case of union corruption. 
 
9.  (SBU) Continuing, Contreras said national Immigration 
Service computer networks have been established where they 
did not exist.  The Directorate is now much better equipped 
to detect false documents and has created a \"blacklist,\" 
including information on terrorists and a national 
immigration database.  The Directorate has received 
assistance from the USG and the governments of Mexico and 
Taiwan to upgrade its capabilities.  The Directorate has 
cooperative relations with many Embassy sections, he said, 
and helped in cases involving the smuggling of 50 Salvadoran 
children to the U.S. and in the arrest of the ringleader 
responsible for 18 recent smuggling deaths in Texas.  He 
cited cooperative efforts and accords with Mexico to 
modernize border crossing posts.  He said that he is willing 
to cooperate with NGOs like Casa Alianza, but said \"they 
sometimes exaggerate and criticize our efforts to protect the 
human rights of victims.\" 
 
10.  (SBU) In conclusion, Contreras said the Directorate 
cooperates with the MFA on visa matters to avoid corruption 
and said, under orders of the President, there are no 
\"political or military appointees in Immigration.\"  Since 
9/11, the GOG has tightened up immigration procedures across 
the board, he said.  He cited measure taken at the Aurora 
International Airport in Guatemala City to tighten ingress, 
and provided a report entitled \"Results of Intervention, 
December 2001-June 2003.\" 
 
11.  (SBU) MFA Human Rights Advisor Mario Rene Cifuentes said 
the GOG takes the problem of trafficking, which is really a 
modern form of slavery, very seriously.  He proposed that 
this meeting be considered the start of a bilateral process 
or dialogue on TIP.  In a formal presentation, Cifuentes 
described the GOG\'s efforts to address the problem 
bilaterally and regionally, including: 
 
-- the GOG-GOM Bi-national Group on Immigration Issues 
 
-- the GOG-GOM Bi-national Study on Immigration 
 
-- the GOG-GOM Ad Hoc Group on Temporary Agricultural Workers 
 
-- the GOG-GOM High-Level Group on Border Security 
 
-- the GOG-GOM Bi-national Group on Ports and Border Services 
 
-- similar bi-national efforts with El Salvador and 
Honduras 
 
-- the Pilot Project on Temporary Agricultural Workers with 
Canada 
 
-- Guatemala\'s pending request for a trilateral meeting on 
migration between the U.S., Mexico and Guatemala, made at the 
Regional Conference on Migration in Antigua in May 2002. 
(Note:  the Embassy facilitated a meeting of the US, 
Guatemalan and Mexican delegations to the Conference at GOG 
request.  At that time, USdel officials and the Mexicans 
offered to return to Guatemala at a later date to share 
lessons learned from US border control on the US-Mexican 
border, and US-Mexican cooperative efforts to combat alien 
smuggling.  That meeting has not taken place but would 
clearly still be welcomed by the GOG.  End Note.) 
 
-- the Regional Conference on Migration 
 
-- the Central American Commission of Directors of 
Immigration 
 
Cifuentes then listed international conventions Guatemala is 
party to related to TIP, including: 
 
-- the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, signed and pending in Congress 
 
-- The UN Convention on Protection of the Rights of Migrant 
Workers and their Families (ratified March 14, 2003) 
 
-- Numerous ILO Conventions, including Convention 182 on the 
Worst Forms of Child Labor 
 
-- the Hague Convention on Adoptions 
 
Finally, Cifuentes described inter-institutional efforts to 
address issues related to TIP, including: 
 
-- the National Immigration Commission 
 
-- the National Commission to Combat Trafficking in Persons 
(formed in June 2003 to follow-up issues identified in the 
Department\'s 2003 TIP report.) 
 
-- the proposed National Commission Against Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation of Children and Adolescents 
 
-- various port and border crossing security commission and 
border consulate meetings 
 
12.  (SBU) Supreme Court justice Gutierrez acknowledged the 
need for new legislation to combat TIP, and said the 
judiciary is developing reforms to strengthen the penal code 
that includes TIP.  He distanced the judiciary from the role 
of public prosecutors, saying the role of the judiciary is to 
judge, not to investigate.  He cited the need for control 
over civil registries to combat undocumented migration, the 
use of mobile courts to try traffickers, and better control 
over the issuance of visas. 
 
Victims Assistance Efforts 
-------------------------- 
 
13.  (SBU) Turning to victims assistance, Immigration 
Director Contreras cited GOG efforts to provide 45 
recently-apprehended smuggling victims from Ecuador with 
shelter and medicines.  One of Contreras\' assistants added 
that a project exists in cooperation with the IOM to 
interview Guatemalan deportees from Mexico to determine if 
they were victims of trafficking.  Contreras said his 
Directorate has proposed training police in humane treatment 
of victims, will construct a medical clinic for victims, and 
will continue to practice direct repatriation of aliens to 
avoid problems experienced in the past of mistreatment and 
corruption in holding centers. 
 
14.  (SBU) Social Welfare Secretary Barrientos said that 
legislation is pending in Congress to ratify the Trafficking 
in Persons Protocol and also to create a National Commission 
to Combat Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children and 
Adolescents, which would implement the National Action Plan. 
The Commission would be comprised of all GOG institutions 
involved in combating trafficking, as well as NGOs.  The 
Secretariat operates four shelters for child victims of abuse 
 
SIPDIS 
referred by the courts.  Victims of trafficking referred by 
the courts have access to these shelters.  (There are 
currently approximately 100 children in each of these 
shelters and 300 more children in selected private homes, she 
said at a subsequent meeting.)  In 2002, the Secretariat 
assisted 37 victims of trafficking, and in the first six 
months of 2003 there have been 16.  The issue of trafficking 
will be introduced to secondary schools in a 24 hour module, 
and there are plans to extend education efforts to the 
primary level to reach those most vulnerable to becoming TIP 
victims. 
 
15.  (SBU) Health Minister Molina described his Ministry\'s 
efforts to provide health services to migrant workers and 
deportees in three GOG shelters and at the Casa del Migrante 
(an NGO) on the border and in the capital. 
 
16.  (SBU) Vice Minister of Labor Mendez cited Ministry of 
Labor cooperation with the ILO\'s Program To Eradicate Child 
Labor (IPEC) in various sectors, and Ministry programs 
designed to help workers succeed in Guatemala.  She cited a 
new temporary labor pilot project with Canada which will 
provide 100 Guatemalans the opportunity to migrate legally to 
earn money for their families, rather than be trafficked. 
She also described the Ministry\'s role to permit ordered 
temporary migration for Guatemalans to work in Mexico. 
 
Comment and Action Plan 
----------------------- 
 
17.  (SBU) The assembled group of GOG officials had copies of 
the translated TIP report, which we provided in an earlier 
demarche to MFA, and appeared to be familiar with the 
difference between trafficking and alien smuggling.  Their 
responses, however, described efforts to combat the latter 
more than the former.  While there is obviously substantial 
overlap, we will need to continue to emphasize the need for 
concrete steps focused on trafficking. 
 
18.  (SBU) Nevertheless, we are encouraged by the GOG\'s 
commitment to coordinate its anti-TIP efforts and collaborate 
with us to address this problem.  This is a good first step 
and offers possibilities for future collaboration which we 
hope to capitalize on over the coming year.  By tapping the 
talents of the Embassy\'s anti-TIP agencies we hope to achieve 
concrete progress on the legal regime, law enforcement, 
victims assistance, and public awareness to combat this 
scourge.  For example, the Embassy will help focus Congress 
on ratification of the UN Protocol to Combat TIP.  We will 
press the Public Ministry (the Attorney General was invited, 
but absent at this meeting) to step up investigations of 
trafficking in the border region (where at least two 
convictions of traffickers were reported several years ago). 
The Social Welfare Secretariat\'s shelters, which G/TIP has 
supported in the past, offer a good infrastructure for child 
victims, and the Secretariat has requested our help to create 
a new center in Coatepeque (strategically located on the main 
highway route to Mexico) specially geared to helping 
trafficking victims of all ages.  We will evaluate this 
proposal and report further on these possibilities and others 
under discussion with IO and NGO partners in the fight 
against TIP. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9555","7/21/2003 14:47","03GUATEMALA1853","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001853 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT:  AIDS Worker Escapes Kidnapping 
 
 
1.  (U)  Summary:  Violence against human rights workers has 
escalated in recent months and a group working to educate street 
workers on the prevention and danger of HIV/AIDS has been the 
most recent victim of such assaults.  There have been several 
threats and acts of intimidation against workers of the 
Organization to Support Integrated Sexuality Against AIDS 
(OASIS) as a result of stigmatization and discrimination against 
those of diverse sexual orientation.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
--------------- 
2.  (U)  An estimated 67,000 people (out of a population of 12 
million) in Guatemala are HIV positive, and approximately 5,619 
people have AIDS.  Seventy-three percent of these are male.  The 
communities most at risk are homosexual males (11.5 percent), 
followed by prostitutes (4.7 percent). 
 
3.  (U)  OASIS is one of the only human rights groups in 
Guatemala working with homosexual men and prostitutes in order 
to curb HIV/AIDS infection rates among these high-risk 
communities.  The organization originated ten years ago as part 
of the Association for Integrated Health, and educates 
homosexual men on prevention issues associated with the HIV 
virus.  Approximately 100 people attend weekly meetings 
concerning HIV prevention, mental health, self-esteem and other 
health related topics.  Moreover, OASIS works with about 1,000 
prostitutes every month to prevent contraction of HIV and sells 
condoms to them for a price of ten cents, about half the street 
value of a condom. 
 
OASIS Director Receives Threats 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
4.  (U)  On July 10, POL Intern and ECON Intern met with Jorge 
Lopez Sologaistoa, Executive Director of OASIS, who has become 
another victim of the recent wave of human rights abuses 
afflicting Guatemala.  He recounted that on the morning of May 
13, 2003, two unarmed men kidnapped Lopez while he was walking 
to his car.  One of the assailants forced him into the back of 
the car, blindfolded him and restrained his head to constrict 
his sight while the other man drove away from the scene.  Lopez 
escaped during momentary confusion when his kidnappers nearly 
collided with another car.  They did not pursue him on foot. 
Lopez has also received repeated threats over the telephone. 
 
5.  (U)  Lopez wrote a full page complaint of the incident which 
appeared in el Periodico on June 7.   The complaint advocated 
human rights for all people regardless of economic condition, 
gender, or sexual orientation.  Seventy-five other organizations 
from seventeen countries signed onto the complaint expressing 
their solidarity with OASIS\'s cause. 
 
6.  (U)  Lopez noted that acts of intimidation and other human 
rights violations are frequent in his line of work.  He contends 
that low ranking police officers are believed to be involved in 
committing these acts.  He also believes that further acts of 
aggression will occur, but that he will continue his work and 
will not allow these actions to stop him from achieving the 
goals and objectives of his organization. 
 
Comment 
---------- 
7.  (U)  The kidnapping attempt against Lopez, and the frequent 
attacks against homosexuals, occur in a context of growing 
violent crime affecting all Guatemalans, and an increase in 
threats against human rights workers specifically.  Homosexuals 
and those with AIDS are targets of violent discrimination due to 
lack of education and awareness in some sectors of society.  We 
will continue to monitor and report on this situation. 
"
"9562","7/21/2003 23:22","03GUATEMALA1862","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1805","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001862 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, PHUM, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: SUPREME COURT SUSPENDS REGISTRATION OF RIOS MONTT 
CANDIDACY; OPPOSITION RALLY STRENGTHENS BERGER 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1805 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1774 
     C. GUATEMALA 1760 
 
1. (U) On July 20, the Supreme Court accepted two appeals 
filed by opposition political parties against the 
presidential candidacy of former General Efrain Rios Montt, 
and suspended registration of the candidate until the court 
hears the appeal.  The President of the Supreme Court 
immediately recused himself and the other members of the 
Supreme Court from hearing the case, based on the fact that 
they had already stated their position on the matter in their 
earlier vote (reftels).  A \"special\" Supreme Court was 
appointed to hear the case, made up of the 13 appeals court 
magistrates.  Some accounts say that this court could rule on 
the appeals as early as this week. 
 
2. (U) Jorge Arevalo, FRG Congressman and spokesman for the 
Rios Montt presidential campaign, called the Supreme Court\'s 
decision \"madness,\" saying that Guatemalan law does not allow 
for an appeal to a decision of the Constitutional Court.  If 
the newly conformed \"special\" Supreme Court were to uphold 
the appeal, however, we understand the FRG could once again 
appeal its decision to the Constitutional Court, which just 
ruled in favor of Rios Montt\'s candidacy.  By accepting the 
appeal in the first place, the Supreme Court challenged the 
constitutional (and conventional) wisdom that the 
Constitutional Court is the last court of appeals on 
constitutional matters. 
 
3. (SBU) Earlier on July 20, GANA coalition presidential 
candidate Oscar Berger held a rally in the main square of 
Guatemala City to protest the Constitutional Court\'s 
decision.  CNN estimated that 3,000 people, all dressed in 
black, attended the rally.  While the demonstration did not 
draw in the 10,000 people expected by organizers, it gave 
Berger the support of many civil society and center-left 
political leaders, who joined him on the stage to denounce 
the latest action of the FRG.  The symbolism of the July 20 
rally -- with the diverse opposition groups so disgusted with 
the FRG that they were prepared to embrace the center-right 
Berger publicly -- sent the signal to Guatemalan voters that 
the best way to defeat the FRG in the coming election is to 
swallow their differences and throw their lot behind the 
candidate with the best chance of defeating the FRG. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment:  The facts and motives behind the Supreme 
Court\'s decision to accept the two appeals against Rios 
Montt\'s candidacy are not all clear yet.  But they create an 
unfortunate perception that the Supreme Court, like the 
Constitutional Court, is not above partisan preferences.  Its 
tacit, if not explicit, disavowal of the Constitutional 
Court\'s role as court of last instance creates a 
constitutional challenge which could have broader 
implications.  We recommend press guidance that steers us 
clear of this issue, i.e. that this is an issue for 
Guatemalan institutions to decide. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9631","7/23/2003 23:22","03GUATEMALA1888","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PINS, PREL, PHUM, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: CONSTITUTIONAL COURT UPHOLDS APPEAL IN RIOS MONTT 
CASE; STREET PROTESTS BY RIOS MONTT SUPPORTERS EXPECTED 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1862 AND PREVIOUS 
 
1. (SBU) The Constitutional Court met on July 23 to hear the 
FRG\'s appeal (\"ocurso\" in Spanish) to the appeal filed by two 
political parties against the earlier Constitutional Court 
decision which allowed former de facto President Efrain Rios 
Montt to become a presidential candidate (reftels).  Again, 
one permanent magistrate recused himself, and an alternate 
(Gloria Melgar) replaced him.  When the President of the 
Court called the vote, three magistrates (including the newly 
added alternate) voted to uphold the Supreme Court\'s decision 
to accept the appeal, i.e. ruling against Rios Montt.  The 
President of the Constitutional Court and the other 
magistrate who voted for Rios Montt are reported to have 
stormed out of the session, refusing to sign the court\'s 
decision.  The newest decision by the Constitutional Court 
does not resolve the case against the General, but by 
upholding the Supreme Court\'s right to hear the appeal it 
threatens to prolong the legal debate and makes it clear that 
the ruling FRG might not be able to control the 
Constitutional Court\'s ultimate decision. 
 
2. (SBU) Rios Montt had earlier told the press that, in the 
event his candidacy continued to suffer legal hurdles, he 
could not control his supporters who would likely protest in 
the streets.  Many opposition leaders saw this as a 
not-too-thinly veiled threat of violence.  Following the 
ruling of the Constitutional Court, opposition party leaders 
have told us that they have heard radio reports calling for 
protests on July 24 in the departmental capitals of Santa 
Cruz del Quiche and Coban, as well as in the capital.  In 
Santa Cruz del Quiche, pro-Rios Montt protesters were 
reportedly summoned to protest in front of the Pollo Campero 
(owned by opposition financier Dionisio Gutierrez). 
 
3. (SBU) Comment: The Ambassador and A/DCM have placed calls 
to leading FRG legislators (who are all huddled in a closed 
door meeting) to urge them to restrain their followers and 
ensure that there is no violence.  The calls had not been 
returned as of the transmission of this cable, but we will 
continue pressing for a response. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9653","7/24/2003 17:12","03GUATEMALA1896","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001896 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: INDIGENOUS PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE DISCUSSES 
ELECTION SCENARIOS 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Indigenous presidential candidate and mayor 
of Guatemala\'s second city Rigoberto Queme told the 
Ambassador July 18 that the Constitutional Court\'s decision 
to allow Rios Montt to run for President was fracturing the 
indigenous movement politically, with some groups calling for 
a boycott of the elections (to include Queme withdrawing his 
candidacy) so as not to lend legitimacy to flawed elections. 
Queme agreed with the Ambassador that an indigenous boycott 
would only improve Rios Montt\'s odds of victory (press 
reports of July 23 have Queme staying in the race).  Queme 
said Rios Montt\'s support is underestimated and lamented his 
own lack of campaign finances.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) The Ambassador and A/PolCouns breakfasted with 
indigenous presidential candidate and Mayor of Quezaltenango 
Rigoberto Queme at the Residence on July 18.  In a 
sophisticated analysis, Queme concluded that Rios Montt\'s 
support in the countryside, especially among indigenous 
communities, is widely underestimated.  Due primarily to lack 
of education, indigenous communities tend to view their 
problems in a local, horizontal context, i.e. their enemies 
are neighbors who were civil defense patrol members, without 
understanding the vertical context, i.e. their enemies were 
organized and directed by the military high command, which 
included Rios Montt.  As a result, Rios Montt largely escapes 
blame among poor, indigenous Guatemalans for the human rights 
abuses of the internal conflict. 
 
3. (SBU) Queme characterized the indigenous as \"faithful\" to 
their employers and feared that, for many, the act of voting 
would be considered as just another job to be carried out as 
instructed by the \"patron,\" rather than a civic duty to be 
carried out in the privacy of the voting booth.  Although 
communities that suffered massacres during the internal armed 
conflict still fear the military, Queme argued that this fear 
also translates into great respect for the law and order only 
the military is perceived as bringing.  Rios Montt will be 
able to appeal to that respect, Queme predicted, and his call 
for \"strong hand\" government will resonate.  As an example, 
Queme pointed to the tax uprising two years ago in majority 
indigenous Totonicapan where the houses of the mayor and 
Congressman (both members of Rios Montt\'s ruling FRG party) 
were burned.  The police needed military assistance to 
restore order.  When the Constitutional Court recently ruled 
Rios Montt could run for President, Totonicapan threw its 
largest party in recent memory to celebrate. 
 
4. (SBU) Queme criticized what he called the \"privatization\" 
of electoral campaigns which he said drives up costs and 
prevents small parties from getting their messages out.  He 
compared the tens and even hundreds of millions of Quetzales 
some political parties were prepared to spend with the less 
than 100 thousand his movement had been able to raise 
(roughly USD 13,000).  Queme mentioned that he receives some 
international financial assistance for his campaign and that 
the Rigoberta Menchu Foundation provided a house as campaign 
headquarters.  Queme lamented the difficulty of organizing 
with only sporadic resources, but also said it kept him 
focused on the grassroots.  Word of mouth is still his best 
tool. 
 
5. (SBU) Queme acknowledged his electoral prospects were 
minimal, but said he was carving out a space at the end of 
his political life that other indigenous leaders would be 
able to use as a starting point.  Queme is fond of pointing 
out that patience is a Mayan virtue and that it took 25 years 
of determined effort for an indigenous candidate to win the 
Mayor\'s office in Quezaltenango.  He often adds that the most 
difficult part of that effort was uniting various indigenous 
groups.  Queme said he was considering offers to run as 
vice-president on other tickets, but felt that doing so could 
dilute the impact of indigenous votes.  In a recent press 
interview, Queme stated that the left-leaning ANN party was 
considering throwing its weight behind his campaign.  (Note: 
Queme\'s current campaign structure consists of Xel-Ju, the 
social movement behind his mayoral campaigns, and an alliance 
with two small political parties (Transparencia and CASA). 
Transparencia is threatening to pull out of the alliance 
since it cannot compete with the ANN in terms of resources. 
End Note.)  In the same interview, Queme indicated that he 
was considering a proposal to run as Vice President on the 
UNE ticket.  On July 23, newspapers reported that Queme, 
after meetings with party supporters, will stay in the race. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: Soft-spoken, articulate, and widely read, 
Queme projects a polished image.  Twice elected mayor of 
Guatemala\'s second city, Queme has proven an able 
administrator and consensus builder capable of reaching 
across racial lines.  Queme\'s primary success as mayor lay in 
managing his growing city\'s public services problems and 
allying fears that an indigenous mayor would be able to 
govern a city divided almost equally between indigenous and 
non-indigenous citizens. Although Queme is proud of his 
indigenous heritage, he told the Ambassador that he does not 
speak any indigenous languages.  Queme\'s foray into 
presidential politics, while not expected to draw much 
national attention even among indigenous voters, will set a 
precedent that new generations of indigenous political 
leaders will benefit from. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9660","7/24/2003 22:02","03GUATEMALA1900","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1888","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND CA/OCS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/23/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, CASC, ASEC, KDEM, PINR, PINS, GT 
SUBJECT: FRG ORGANIZES VIOLENT PROTESTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1888 
 
Classified By: Ambassador J.R. Hamilton for reason 1.5 (b). 
 
1. (C) Summary: In response to a major legal reversal in Rios 
Montt\'s bid for the Presidency (reftel), thousands of 
well-organized Rios Montt supporters took to the streets of 
the capital on July 24, closing off strategic intersections 
with burning tires.  Mobs have targeted opposition newspapers 
as well as surrounding the Constitutional and Supreme Court 
buildings.  One journalist is confirmed dead from a heart 
attack as he was covering events.  Another was beaten and 
doused with gasoline before being pulled to safety.  The GOG 
has been slow to mobilize police resources and the Ambassador 
has called President Portillo, Minister of Interior Calderon 
and Foreign Minister Gutierrez, to urge restoration of order. 
 Portillo announced at 3:00 PM that he has ordered combined 
police/military elements to restore order.  A warden message 
has been transmitted, visa applicants were sent home, 
services for Amcits continue, but we will be on an \"essential 
staff\" basis July 25.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On the morning of July 24, pro-Rios Montt protesters 
launched coordinated actions across the city.  The mobs, 
which include thugs in ski masks armed with guns, molotov 
cocktails, and sticks initially targeted the opposition news 
media and the offices of opposition financier Dionisio 
Gutierrez.  Buses are reported to be bringing more protesters 
in from the countryside.  Mobs are reported to be forming 
outside the Constitutional Court building, vowing not to 
leave until Rios Montt is registered as a candidate.  Another 
group has taken positions outside a single-gated residential 
community where numerous politicians and diplomats, including 
U.S. Mission personnel, live.  The protesters vow to block 
the entrance for at least three days and have set up tents 
and are passing out food.  Human Rights Ombudsman, Sergio 
Morales has been threatened and has abandoned his office. 
The Ministry of Education has recommended all classes be 
canceled tomorrow.  The Bi-National Center has also closed. 
 
4. (C) In response to reports that police were withdrawing 
from areas where protesters were gathering, the Ambassador 
twice informed Minister of Interior Calderon that the Embassy 
would be harshly critical if the police allowed the mobs to 
become violent or if the situation descended into general 
disorder.  During the second conversation, Calderon told the 
Ambassador he was sending reinforcements to the offices of 
newspapers Siglo 21 and El Periodico as well as to the 
business center that seem to be most threatened.  Shortly 
thereafter, Foreign Minister Gutierrez told the Ambassador he 
would seek to promote a gentleman\'s agreement for keeping a 
lid on the situation once the immediate situation is 
contained.  Gutierrez said President Portillo supports the 
idea.  At 3:00 PM, state television broadcast a Portillo 
announcement pledging to restore public order through a 
combined police/military response.  In a telephone 
conversation with the Ambassador, Portillo offered to focus 
police attention on disturbances in residential areas and 
said he would appeal to the FRG leadership to turn the 
disturbances off. 
 
5. (C) Earlier, on the evening of July 23, the Ambassador 
spoke with FRG Congressman Aristides Crespo to urge the FRG 
to resist the temptation to engage in public disorder in 
response to the court decision.  A testy Crespo denied that 
any mobilization was centrally planned, and pointedly refused 
to commit to the need for protests to remain peaceful. 
During the morning commute of July 24, Embassy officers noted 
a large number of portable toilets had appeared overnight in 
a park over a major intersection.  Other officers heard 
reports of trucks laden with food and water circulating in 
areas where demonstrations later \"spontaneously occurred.\" 
 
6. (C) The Embassy has not been targeted in any of the 
disturbances.  Employees have restricted their movements, 
security forces have been pulled inside the fence line to 
prevent accidental encounters with protesters.  Approximately 
150 visa applicants were given new appointments and sent 
home.  A warden message advising Amcits of the situation has 
been cleared with CA and transmitted.  Amcits still have 
access to the Embassy building.  The EAC convened at 2:30 PM 
local time and developed staffing plans, alternate lodging 
for those living in affected areas, and considered ways to 
reunite separated families.  We will operate with only 
essential staff on July 25. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9661","7/24/2003 23:34","03GUATEMALA1902","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1679","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001902 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/23/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, KDEM, PGOV, KJUS, KCOR, KCRM, GT 
SUBJECT: STATUS OF GUATEMALAN COUNTER-NARCOTICS COOPERATION 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1679 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1693 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: GOG cooperation in the war on drugs has had 
several concrete successes in the past six months, and there 
has been further progress since the June 30 Inter-Agency 
meeting in which the Ambassador participated.  A quick run 
down on 
our benchmarks: cocaine seizures have increased fourfold; 
extraditions have resumed; more than $19 million in drug 
profits have been seized; Guatemala\'s major trafficker is on 
the run; five tons of cocaine evidence held by the courts has 
been destroyed; an asset forfeiture law was passed by 
Congress, and the courts have accelerated the sale of seized 
assets; a counter-narcotics maritime agreement has been 
signed and passed to Congress for ratification; and 
regulations controlling precursor chemicals have been 
officially published.  Not all benchmarks have been fully 
met, however.  And the GOG is clearly not keen on 
investigating a (non-drug) corruption case that may involve 
President Portillo. Nonetheless, we believe a decision to 
fully recertify Guatemala is warranted. We recommend 
developing new benchmarks for evaluating the GOG\'s 
counter-narcotics cooperation for the next year.  End summary. 
 
2. (C) Three years of steadily declining cooperation by the 
GOG in the war on drugs came to an end in March when, as a 
result of our decertification, the GOG put together an 
inter-institutional team (including members of the executive, 
judiciary, legislature and Attorney General\'s Office) to 
provide concrete actions in response to our counter-narcotics 
concerns.  The inter-agency process in Washington identified 
nine benchmarks that would be the measures by which 
\"recertification\" would be considered.  The GOG has dedicated 
considerable energy and political capital to meeting each of 
these benchmarks over the past six months.  Several of the 
benchmarks have been fully met; others have been 
substantially met.  Reftels outlined the status of compliance 
with the benchmarks through the end of June.  During the past 
four weeks there have been several further advances, 
especially in the areas of the bilateral counternarcotics 
maritime agreement, SAIA institutional development, 
police-prosecutor cooperation, asset forfeitures and 
collaborative efforts to make seizures. 
 
3. (C) Other areas have not seen the same level of successes. 
 The Attorney General\'s office is prosecuting a major scandal 
of the Social Security Institute (IGSS) and removed the 
ineffective money laundering prosecutor Lilly Chinchilla (at 
our request), but has just named her to head the 
anti-corruption prosecutor\'s office.  While that office 
focuses on official corruption cases, not narcotics cases, 
the naming of Chinchilla to head that unit was a setback for 
anti-corruption efforts in Guatemala.  The Attorney General\'s 
decision was widely viewed as aimed at protecting President 
Portillo from potential prosecution in a corruption scandal 
known locally as the Panama Case.  Whether that case involves 
drug money laundering is not clear. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
PROGRESS SINCE THE JUNE 30 IAWG MEETING 
--------------------------------------- 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
BILATERAL COUNTER-NARCOTICS MARITIME AGREEMENT SIGNED AND 
AWAITING RATIFICATION 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
4. (U) On June 19, Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez and the 
Ambassador signed the bilateral counternarcotics maritime 
agreement. The agreement had its first of three required 
readings before Congress in early July, and was assigned to 
the International Affairs Committee for review. The agreement 
was approved by the committee on July 15 and returned to 
Congress, where it will be considered in the next 
extraordinary session.  In committee it enjoyed the support 
of all the major parties, and we do not anticipate 
significant opposition to it when it is considered in 
extraordinary session. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
SAIA REGULATIONS AMENDED TO PROVIDE FOR PERIODIC POLYGRAPH 
AND URINALYSIS TESTING 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
5.  (U)  The GOG provided us with the final copy of the 
internal regulations for the anti-narcotics police (SAIA in 
Spanish).  The regulations were signed by the Director of the 
National Police and placed into effect on June 25. The 
regulations only provided for polygraph and urinalysis 
testing to be conducted upon initial entry into the unit, and 
not at irregular intervals throughout an officer\'s career as 
we had recommended.  The Ambassador raised this with the 
Minister of Government, and NAS Director raised with the 
director of the SAIA, and they amended the SAIA regulations 
to include periodic retesting.  The target is for testing 
every six months, beginning in August.  We will continue to 
monitor the implementation of this initiative to evaluate its 
overall effectiveness. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
POLICE-PROSECUTOR NARCOACTIVITY TASK FORCE FORMING 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6. (U) Per ref A, on June 17 the Attorney General and the 
Minister of Government signed an agreement that commits the 
two institutions to form combined task forces in the areas of 
money laundering and narcoactivity.  The agreement states 
that these task forces were being formed as a result of the 
success of the existing task force on anticorruption.  We 
have received a copy of the internal regulation for the 
pre-selection and periodic retesting of personnel assigned to 
the unit. This screening will include local polygraph and 
urinalyses testing for involvement in corrupt activities and 
the use of illicit substances. It will have the first ever 
financial disclosure and periodic background investigation. 
Though still in its developmental stages, this initiative 
will be a model for other programs. 
 
---------------------------------- 
LIQUIDATION OF SEIZED ASSETS 
---------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) The Judicial Branch has begun auctioning off seized 
aircraft. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the 
chief of the judicial warehouse met with NAS Director to 
explain the process for the sale of seized assets. The 
legislation they are using is Decree 69-71, which was signed 
in 1971. It was further amplified last November with 
Agreement 81.002, which establishes a period of two months 
for interested parties to claim seized property. This 
agreement only affects those items in the warehouse that were 
seized before January 1, 1999. Currently there is a list of 
fourteen aircraft that are available for auction. The 
aircraft were seized as far back as 1983.  The judicial 
warehouse is also auctioning off other items. It is estimated 
that approximately 10% of all of the seized property was 
derived from narcotrafficking activities. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
ITINERANT JUDGES TO EXPEDITE WARRANT PROCESS AND MAKE IT 
SECURE 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
8.  (U) In an effort to expedite the issuance of search 
warrants and prevent the release of sensitive law enforcement 
information, the Supreme Court has agreed to name two judges 
to serve as itinerant judges in the nationwide service of 
warrants and arrests. The chief magistrate told us this week 
that he now has the two judges identified, but that he was 
awaiting the vehicles and assigned PNC personnel. The naming 
of these judges will greatly enhance the ability of the 
courts to move to any given location and conduct enforcement 
activities with a minimum of detractors or loss of 
information. Its will also increase the speed at which law 
enforcement activities could be conducted. 
 
------------------------ 
SEIZURES RISING 
------------------------ 
 
9. (U)  Between January 1 and July 24, 2003, the GOG seized 
3,718 kilos of cocaine.  Since March, JIATF)South has 
reported 41 suspect air tracks. Although the Guatemalan 
military has not responded to every event, they have 
responded to every event they have been asked to by us. Given 
communication limitations, often information does not reach 
the Guatemalans with sufficient time to respond adequately. 
They have however, developed a response plan, which includes 
dedicating aircraft in the various parts of the country to 
respond with the SAIA and Public Ministry to just such 
events. Of those 41 reported events, the Guatemalans were 
able to respond to ten.  Two of these resulted in the largest 
seizure this calendar year.  Since the GOG improved its 
response mechanisms, suspect tracks have diminished over 
Guatemala.  We are also seeing traffickers switching to 
nighttime flights; to overflights of Guatemala directly into 
Mexico; and to flights that include stops for random periods 
of time in neighboring countries and which start up too close 
to Guatemala to permit an opportune launch. 
 
10. (U) Control of drug trafficking at the points of entry 
(i.e. airports, land border crossings and seaports) remains 
deficient, especially at the airport.  In conjunction with 
DEA, NAS and TAT at post, the GOG has targeted major 
trafficker Otto Herrera, and has conducted important 
disruption operations against his organization.  Herrera 
himself is on the run, after losing over $14 million in drug 
proceeds seized by the GOG at one of his former safe houses. 
 
 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
11. (C) A comment on seizures:  According to CNC data, 
Guatemala seized an estimated 5.6% of the cocaine moving 
through, over or around Guatemala in 2002. Seizures in 2003 
at mid-year stood at 150% of the total for 2002, thus 
increasing the seizure rate by a significant but 
indeterminate amount (since we have no data on illicit 
narcotic flows for 2003). For purposes of comparison, CNC 
estimates the USG seizure rate of cocaine entering the US at 
only 12.2%. The two situations are not all together 
comparable, however, in that Guatemala lacks an end-game 
capability for overflights, whereas the U.S. does have an 
end-game capability. Our point is that the relatively low 
seizure rate here is not in and of itself a measure of 
political will or the lack thereof. 
 
12.(C) Further comment: If Guatemala is recertified, it is 
critical that momentum be maintained by presenting the GOG 
with new benchmarks that would represent our standard for 
measuring continued cooperation for the next year.  With a 
new government assuming office in January, 2004, it will be 
important to get movement on the new benchmarks started by 
the current government so that time is not lost in the 
transition.  Post welcomes inter-agency views on priorities 
for benchmarks for the coming year. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9691","7/25/2003 16:33","03GUATEMALA1904","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1900","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, PHUM, KDEM, PINR, PINS, GT 
SUBJECT: FRG PROTESTS CONTINUE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1900 
 
1. (U) An estimated 3,000 to 5,000 pro-Rios Montt protesters 
remained overnight at several locations in the capital and 
continue to surround the Constitutional Court, the Supreme 
Court, and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal building.  A tense 
calm has returned to Guatemala City for the moment, with very 
light traffic flowing and no tires burning as of 8:30 a.m. 
local time.  Radio reports indicate that busses with FRG 
supporters have left Coban, Totonicapan and the south coast 
bringing more protesters into Guatemala City.  Protests are 
expected to resume later this morning. 
 
2. (U) Around 6:00 PM, July 24, security forces successfully 
evacuated some 900 people from a commercial center owned by 
opposition financier Dionisio Gutierrez.  Protesters later 
withdrew from the entrance of La Canada, allowing numerous 
officials, politicians, and diplomats to reach their 
residences.  All U.S. mission personnel were able to spend 
the night in their own homes. The Embassy opened on July 25 
with essential personnel only. 
 
3. (U) Rios Montt gave a press conference at 8:00 PM on July 
24 in which he implausibly denied that the disturbances were 
organized by \"the Executive Committee of the FRG,\" while 
acknowledging that the protesters were his supporters.  He 
dodged questions about the activities of FRG Congressmen, 
such as Juan Santa Cruz, who were shown on television 
coordinating activities of the protesters. When asked why the 
FRG protesters had targeted the offices of Dionisio 
Gutierrez, he said \"I didn\'t send them to (Gutierrez\'s 
office), I told them to go to the Supreme Court.\"  Caught in 
the apparent contradiction with his earlier statement that he 
had not been involved in the organization of the protests, 
his handlers called an immediate end to the press conference 
and removed the 76 year old former general from the room. 
 
4. (U) President Portillo gave a seven minute address to the 
nation on the afternoon of July 24, saying that the police 
and army would maintain order and protect private property. 
There was a noticeable absence of police, however, throughout 
the day at most protest locations. 
 
5. (SBU) On the evening of July 24, the Ambassador met with 
representatives of civil society, the private sector and 
political parties (at their request).  Participants, whose 
spirits were clearly inflamed by the violent events of the 
day, accused the GOG of being complicit along with the FRG in 
the violence, noting that despite public assurances from 
President Portillo and Minister of Government Reyes Calderon, 
police did nothing to stop the violence.  Many saw the 
violent protests as aimed at intimidating the opposition by 
showing them that the FRG knows where they live and work, and 
the police will do nothing to protect them.  Several civil 
society leaders noted that the FRG\'s willingness to use 
violence makes it important that the election observation 
effort be expanded.  Others said it was time for the OAS to 
call a special Permanent Council session and invoke the 
Democratic Charter.  The Ambassador told the opposition, 
civil society and private sector leaders that our efforts in 
the immediate term would be aimed at securing the restoration 
of public order, and that following the return of normalcy it 
would be important to take stock of where the electoral 
process stands. 
 
6. (SBU) The Ambassador is seeking meetings on July 25 with 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez, Minister of Government Calderon, 
and National Pol 
"
"9693","7/25/2003 21:07","03GUATEMALA1906","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1904","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001906 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, PHUM, KDEM, PINR, PINS, GT 
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON VIOLENT POLITICAL PROTESTS IN GUATEMALA 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1904 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1900 
 
Classified By: A/PolCouns Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b). 
 
1. (U) At 2:00 PM local time on July 25, the disturbances 
seem to be winding down.  In a second day of protests, 
pro-Rios Montt demonstrators focused their morning activities 
around the Constitutional Court, Supreme Court, and Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal buildings--all related to Rios Montt\'s 
efforts to register his Presidential candidacy.  Riot police 
and combined police/military patrols were seen moving in the 
area, but took no action.  Four journalists were beaten by 
demonstrators, who also destroyed their cameras and other 
equipment. 
 
2. (U) Rumors circulated that the demonstrators were being 
relieved by fresh replacements in a synchronized fashion and 
seemed to be confirmed by reliable reports that some 80 
bus-loads of protesters were bound for the capital.  By 12:30 
PM, new rumors circulated that Rios Montt had released a tape 
recording asking the demonstrators to cease action and go 
home.  Journalist broadcast images of protesters boarding 
buses near the Constitutional court and by 1:30 PM, the area 
was nearly deserted.  The inbound buses have not appeared. 
We continue to monitor the situation. 
 
3. (C) A haggard Minister of Interior admitted to the 
Ambassador and RSO that police had not always carried out his 
orders and that the FRG\'s purpose was sheer intimidation. 
Minister Calderon agreed that heads should roll within the 
police once the immediate situation is contained.  Calderon 
was ambivalent at best about the President\'s July 24 order 
for joint police/military forces to restore order, pointing 
out that the Minster of Defense is outside the country and 
arguing that the Chief of Staff (son of Rios Montt) was not 
providing much assistance. 
 
4. (U) Legal questions about Rios Montt\'s ability to campaign 
may not be resolved soon.  The President of the Supreme 
Court, Carlos Larios Ochaita, announced in a noon press 
conference that the Court was closing because of the protests 
and had evacuated its personnel due to complete lack of 
security.  Ochaita called the response to bomb threats and 
the level of police protection outside his building 
\"completely inadequate.\" 
HAMILTON 
"
"9695","7/25/2003 22:52","03GUATEMALA1907","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001907 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, PHUM, KDEM, PINR, PINS, GT 
SUBJECT: VIOLENT STREET PROTESTS OVER--FOR NOW 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1906 AND PREVIOUS 
 
As of 1700 local time, police and media sources confirm that 
the pro-Rios Montt street demonstrations have ended. 
Television broadcasts show the areas around the various court 
buildings previously occupied by protesters are now deserted. 
 The buses that brought the protesters into the capital are 
now carrying them back into the interior.  While this round 
of demonstrations is over for now, protests could emerge 
again as Rios Montt\'s legal case proceeds through the courts. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9705","7/27/2003 18:58","03GUATEMALA1908","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/27/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINS, KDEM, PREL, PINR, PHUM, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: FRG PROTEST AFTERMATH: GUATEMALA MORE FRAGMENTED 
THAN EVER 
 
Classified By: A/DCM David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Unexpected legal setbacks to the registration 
of former General Rios Montt\'s presidential candidacy have 
led to profound frustration among FRG leaders.  They view 
Rios Montt as the only FRG candidate who has a chance of 
winning the elections, and the biggest draw for voters to 
support their congressional slate.  The possibility that 
legal appeals could derail Rios Montt\'s candidacy led the FRG 
to use violent street protests July 24-25 to send the signal 
that they are prepared to raise the stakes in order to ensure 
that Rios Montt can run.  Most of the opposition, which with 
civil society has formed a \"Civic Front for Democracy in 
Guatemala,\" is equally determined to keep him out of the 
race, although some might be willing to accept a new 
Constitutional Court decision if its magistrates were 
selected in a transparent manner.  Both sides are insisting 
that international mediation favor their all-or-nothing 
positions.  Contacts in the opposition and the police believe 
violence will escalate following the next ruling of the 
Supreme Court (expected in the next ten days), which is not 
expected to favor Rios Montt.  OAS Election Observation 
Mission chief Paniagua arrived in Guatemala on July 25. In a 
meeting with the Ambassador on July 27, he seemed to have a 
good grasp of the immediate crisis and, while cautious, he 
did not rule out a de facto mediation role.  It will not be 
an easy task.  End summary. 
 
2. (C) Violent street protests on July 24-25 organized by the 
FRG have raised the stakes significantly in the confrontation 
between the ruling party and practically all organized 
sectors of Guatemalan society, and have planted the flag that 
the FRG is prepared to use violence to keep their candidate 
from being disqualified in the upcoming elections.  The 
highly orchestrated protests were sparked by the FRG\'s 
frustration over setbacks in their legal fight to register 
former General Efrain Rios Montt as their presidential 
candidate.  The FRG viewed the decision by the Supreme Court 
to hear an appeal to the Constitutional Court\'s decision that 
Rios Montt could run not only as illegal (note: some of our 
viscerally anti-FRG contacts agree that the Supreme Court\'s 
challenge was at a minimum unprecedented, and probably 
unconstitutional. End note), but also signaled that the 
opposition could manipulate the courts to keep Rios Montt 
out.  Having been deprived of the legal recourses they 
thought they had secured through painstakingly packing the 
Constitutional Court, the FRG leadership chose to fall back 
on violence and intimidation.  Spray-painting epitaphs 
against the rich and bringing the violence for the first time 
to wealthy neighborhoods, the FRG has shown that they are 
prepared to add class conflict to their unsteady mix of 
populism. 
 
3. (C) Foreign Minister Gutierrez told the Ambassador that 
the protests were organized by the FRG (despite Rios Montt\'s 
public denials), and that the General had assured President 
Portillo that they would be peaceful.  Gutierrez said that 
Portillo and Minister of Government Reyes Calderon were 
determined to keep order, but that sympathy by many police 
officers with the FRG and orders for the police not to 
provoke violence had led the police to not confront the 
protesters.  He speculated that the images of chaos in the 
streets of the capital carried by the media would scare most 
Guatemalans and in the end work against the FRG in the 
upcoming elections.  He argued, however, that the fight 
between the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court was a 
standoff, and opined that the only solution at this point is 
political, not juridical.  Gutierrez suggested that only the 
Ambassador, Archbishop Quezada and OAS Electoral Observation 
Mission (EOM) head Paniagua have the credibility to mediate 
an agreement between the parties which could resolve the 
tension without further violence. 
 
4. (C) GOG Ambassador to the U.S. Antonio Arenales and FRG 
Congresswoman (and daughter of the FRG Presidential 
candidate) Zury Rios told us separately on July 25 that the 
only solution to the crisis is electoral, i.e. the opposition 
needs to withdraw its appeals before the Supreme Court, Rios 
Montt must be allowed to run for President, and let the 
people decide.  Both said that the party faithful \"would not 
sit back with their arms crossed\" if the courts do not allow 
Rios Montt to run.  Both told us that on that point there is 
no space for compromise.  Zury Rios said that her father is 
the only candidate who can secure votes for their 
congressional candidates, and that for Rios Montt to be 
excluded from the elections would mean the \"extinction of the 
party.\"  She said \"the party faithful\" would never give up 
Rios Montt\'s candidacy, and Ambassador Arenales said that the 
FRG would \"do what ever it takes\" to ensure Rios Montt could 
run.  Both echoed Foreign Minister Gutierrez\'s call for the 
Ambassador to be a mediator, but it was clear their 
interpretation was for us to pressure the opposition to allow 
Rios Montt to become a candidate and have the matter resolved 
once and for all at the ballot box. 
5. (C) The Supreme Court must resolve the appeals to Rios 
Montt\'s registration as a candidate by August 6.  The FRG and 
the opposition expect the Court to uphold the appeals and 
deny Rios Montt\'s candidacy.  The FRG would then appeal the 
case again to the Constitutional Court, where the FRG has 
more influence, but has no ironclad guarantee of winning. 
Even if the Constitutional Court did reaffirm its decision to 
allow Rios Montt to run, new appeals (not contemplated in the 
Constitution, but accepted by the Supreme Court as they did 
the last ones) could be filed, effectively tying up his 
candidacy beyond the September 9 deadline for filing.  Chief 
of Police Manchame told us that any further legal setback for 
the FRG would likely lead to more violence, and that the 
police is inadequately prepared to contain it.  Opposition 
leaders have also told us that they view the July 24-25 
violence as only a foretaste by the FRG of greater violence 
to come. 
 
6. (C) Meanwhile, the political opposition, civil society and 
the private sector have been further galvanized by the events 
of July 24-25 into a \"Civic Front for Democracy in Guatemala\" 
against the FRG (Note: A similar \"National Assembly\" was 
formed by many of the same groups and individuals in May, 
1993, in opposition to the Serrano \"auto-golpe.\" End note). 
Sensing the possibility that the legal process can be used to 
keep Rios Montt from becoming a candidate, there is a growing 
determination to press on.  Civil Society reps told the 
Ambassador that they had already engaged the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights (which issued a statement 
condemning the violence), and are seeking support for an OAS 
Permanent Council session to invoke the democratic charter. 
The opposition believes that the FRG\'s violent actions 
greatly undermined any benefit of the doubt the international 
community was prepared to extend to the ruling party, and the 
opposition hopes to parlay the revulsion at the violent 
protests into greater international opposition to Rios 
Montt\'s candidacy.  Similarly, the FRG recognizes that the 
violence of July 24-25 may have burned a bridge with the 
international community, and Zury Rios told us the FRG 
believes the USG has cast its lot in with GANA candidate 
Oscar Berger. 
 
7. (C) OAS Election Observation Mission (EOM) head Valentin 
Paniagua arrived in Guatemala on July 25 for a visit 
scheduled to last through August 4.  Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez told the Ambassador he had asked Paniagua to come 
straight from the airport to the MFA in order to engage him 
immediately in seeking a solution to this latest crisis.  By 
the time the Ambassador and A/DCM met with Paniagua on July 
27, he had (through facilitators) met with three top FRG 
leaders (but not Rios Montt), and seemed to have a good grasp 
of the psychological dynamics and legal architecture of the 
candidate registration crisis.  He was clearly unenthusiastic 
about playing a formal mediation role, but did not rule a de 
facto one out. 
 
8. (C) Comment: The FRG is desperate, and, rather than 
recognizing that its authoritarian style has deepened the 
confrontation, believes its electoral ambitions are being 
frustrated by a greedy private sector, a scheming political 
opposition and an unforgiving international community. 
Isolated and \"misunderstood,\" the FRG has little to lose by 
pushing the limits of electoral campaign conduct.  It is not 
clear how the courts will ultimately rule in the General\'s 
case or what other legal strategies the FRG may be 
contemplating, but it appears certain that tensions will grow 
as a compromise is not expected in the short term.  Letting 
both sides stare into the abyss a little longer may be 
necessary to induce a modicum of flexibility on both sides. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9789","7/30/2003 15:28","03GUATEMALA1928","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE184648","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001928 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/UNP (NARANJO), IO/PPC (HUGHES), USUN 
(ZAID), AND WHA (LOKKO) 
NSC FOR DICARLO. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, OTRA, GT, UNGA, UNAUS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN PRESIDENT PORTILLO TO ATTEND 58TH UNGA 
 
REF: STATE 184648 
 
1. (SBU) The following preliminary information is keyed to 
reftel\'s format requesting information on the GOG delegation 
to the 58th UNGA. 
 
A. Attendance of Head of State: 
-- Alfonso Portillo, President 
-- Portillo currently plans to arrive on September 22 (NFI). 
We understand that he is 9th speaker on the first day and 
intends to depart shortly after speaking. 
-- First Lady Evelyn Portillo will NOT/NOT accompany her 
husband. 
-- Translation in Spanish will be required in any bilateral 
meetings. 
 
B. Attendance of Head of Government: 
-- Portillo serves as both Head of State and Head of 
Government. 
 
C. Attendance of Foreign Minister: 
-- Edgar Gutierrez, Foreign Minister 
-- Will travel with the President 
-- Maria Aiza de Gutierrez is unlikely to travel 
-- Translation in Spanish would be required 
 
D. Attendance of Other VIP\'s 
-- Gabriel Aguilera, Vice Foreign Minister and several 
members of Portillo\'s staff are likely to accompany the 
delegation.  No further information is currently available. 
 
E. Attendance of Foreign Ministry Official Responsible for IO 
Affairs: 
-- Giovanni Castillo, Director General for Multilateral 
Affairs 
-- Travel dates not yet available 
-- Spouse will not travel 
-- Translation in Spanish would be required 
LINDWALL 
"
"9794","7/30/2003 21:44","03GUATEMALA1944","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA1908","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, ASEC, GT, PJUS 
SUBJECT: POLICE CHIEF MANCHAME FIRED; CONSTITUTIONAL COURT 
REJECTS LATEST FRG APPEAL 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1908 
 
1. (U) Summary: Responding to accusations that the Police did 
not ensure public order during the protests of July 24-25, 
Government Minister Reyes Calderon fired Police Chief 
Manchame on July 27.  On July 28, the Constitutional Court 
rejected the FRG\'s latest appeal on behalf of Rios Montt. 
The FRG has filed a new appeal before the Constitutional 
Court, while the Supreme Court is expected to rule soon on 
the original appeal to the decision that Rios Montt can be a 
candidate.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Accusations that the GOG did not fulfill its 
obligation to ensure public safety during the violent 
protests by the FRG on July 24-25 led the GOG to remove 
Police Chief Raul Manchame on July 27. It remains unclear who 
was responsible for the lack of police action to maintain 
order during the protests, with some sectors blaming 
Manchame, others blaming the Minister of Government and 
others saying the police officers in the street did not 
follow orders. The Minister of Government named Oscar Segura 
Sanchez to replace Manchame on July 28, and promised to 
provide police protection for citizens during future 
protests.  Manchame later gave a press conference in which he 
loyally refused to blame his superiors.  Little is known 
about Segura Sanchez, who has only been named Acting Police 
Chief and who may yet face fallout for last weeks 
disturbances given his role as Chief of Police Operations. 
 
3. (SBU) On July 28, the Constitutional Court rejected one of 
the FRG\'s petitions to order the Supreme Electoral Tribunal 
to obey the Constitutional Court\'s July 14 decision to 
register (ret.) General Rios Montt as a presidential 
candidate.  The Court again had to draw at random on an 
alternate justice to replace a permanent magistrate who had 
recused himself.  The alternate, as in the previous draw, was 
one of the justices opposed to Rios Montt, giving the Court a 
3-to-2 majority against the FRG\'s motion. The FRG has filed a 
new appeal before the Constitutional Court in the hopes that 
the draw to replace the missing permanent member will this 
time favor the FRG.  Meanwhile, the Supreme Court continues 
to hear the appeal to the Constitutional Court\'s original 
decision to allow Rios Montt to be a candidate.  A decision 
is expected before August 6. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment: Rightly or wrongly, former Police Chief 
Manchame was made the scapegoat for the GOG\'s inaction to 
preserve public order during the recent FRG protests.  He was 
the Portillo Government\'s seventh Chief of Police.  We have 
worked well with Manchame during his brief tenure as Police 
Chief, and will begin engaging his successor as soon as he is 
settled in his office. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment continued: Sooner or later the FRG expects 
to draw an alternate member on the Constitutional Court who 
will favor them (as occurred the first time on July 14), and 
secure a ruling which would instruct the Supreme Court to 
reject the appeals currently before it and register Rios 
Montt as a candidate.  With two pro-Rios Montt alternates, 
three anti-Rios Montt alternates and an evenly split sitting 
Court, the law of averages dictates that sooner or later the 
Court could have a pro-Rios Montt majority.  The filing of 
appeals in this case has already set precedents in Guatemalan 
jurisprudence, and any judicial decision will need to have an 
accompanying political decision if it is to be respected by 
all sides. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9823","7/31/2003 17:54","03GUATEMALA1952","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1944","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001952 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, PHUM, KJUS, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: RIOS MONTT REGISTERED AS PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1944 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affiars David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and ( 
d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: FRG leader Efrain Rios Montt was registered 
as a presidential candidate on July 31, following a ruling by 
the Constitutional Court ordering the electoral institutions 
to carry out its decision to that effect of July 14 and void 
all appeals.  Opposition and civil society leaders called the 
decision \"illegitimate\" and \"the beginning of electoral 
fraud,\" and presidential candidates called on the people to 
defeat Rios Montt at the ballot box.  OAS Electoral 
Observation Mission reps expect the decision to put an 
effective end to legal challenges to Rios Montt\'s candidacy. 
While recognizing the lack of transparency of the decision, 
the OAS reps did not question its constitutionality.  With 
the standoff over Rios Montt\'s participation in the elections 
now, apparently, resolved, attention will shift from the 
courts to the campaign trail.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) On July 30, the Constitutional Court ordered the 
Registry of Persons and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal to 
enforce its decision of July 14, allowing the registration of 
former General Efrain Rios Montt as a presidential candidate 
in the upcoming elections.  The decision of the high court 
further instructed the Supreme Court to dismiss all appeals 
against this ruling, and to not accept further appeals which 
would frustrate the ruling of the Constitutional Court.  The 
Constitutional Court ordered the lower courts to comply with 
this decision within twelve hours. The Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal and Registry of Persons convened during the night of 
July 30 to carry out its instruction.  Rios Montt was given 
his credentials as a presidential candidate before the 6 a.m. 
deadline. 
 
3. (U) Opposition and civil society leaders immediately 
criticized the court\'s decision.  The decision was described 
as \"partisan\" and \"illegitimate\" by practically all 
opposition leaders quoted in the press, and some called it 
\"the beginning of electoral fraud.\"  GANA presidential 
candidate Oscar Berger told reporters that \"the resolution 
may be legal, but it is illegitimate.  Our strategy should be 
to win at the ballot box on November 9.\"  Presidential 
candidates Bueso and Paiz said that the decision was a bad 
one, but said it had to be accepted (\"acatado\").  Others in 
civil society argued that the ruling was unconstitutional, 
and that no one was obligated to carry out illegal orders. 
 
4. (C) Members of the Dialogue Group (made up of Ambassadors 
of donor nations and heads of international organizations and 
international financial institutions) were meeting at the 
time the Constitutional Court\'s decision was announced.  The 
unexpected decision by the court was viewed across the board 
as a manipulation by the FRG, but there was a consensus that 
resolving the issue once and for all -- even in Rios Montt\'s 
favor -- did less violence to the electoral process than the 
possibility of endless appeals and potential legal actions 
against other candidacies. 
 
5. (C) OAS Election Observation Mission member Moises Benamor 
told us on the evening of July 30 that they believe the 
Constitutional Court\'s decision will effectively put an end 
to legal challenges to Rios Montt\'s candidacy.  While there 
are other appeals that could be filed and courts that may be 
prepared to accept them, the Constitutional Court\'s decision 
will put Rios Montt on the ballot and will deprive further 
appeals of their basis in law.  Benamor believes the Court\'s 
finding will increase the level of political tension and 
distrust in the electoral process, but stopped short of 
questioning its constitutionality. 
 
6. (SBU) The Constitutional Court\'s unexpected July 30 ruling 
came about when the FRG filed a motion calling on the high 
court to enforce its ruling of July 14.  To hear this 
request, the Court held a lottery (note: there is some debate 
about the transparency of this lottery. End note) to select 
an alternate justice to replace recused judge Saul Dighero. 
Francisco Palomo (an FRG loyalist) was selected  (Note: 
Anti-FRG justices had been selected in the two previous 
lotteries.  With two out of five alternate magistrates being 
supporters of the FRG, it was only a matter of time before a 
lottery selected one of them, giving Rios Montt a 3-to-2 
majority. End note).  This newly conformed Court voted to 
have the original members who issued the July 14 decision 
resolve the FRG\'s request to have its decision enforced. 
Predictably enough, they voted to order the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal and Registry of Persons to implement their decision. 
 
7. (U) There has been little popular reaction to this latest 
development.  News reports claim that FRG leaders met at the 
Presidential Palace on the night of July 30 to celebrate. 
There were also unconfirmed reports of small numbers of FRG 
supporters gathered at the Supreme Electoral Tribunal on the 
morning of July 31 to celebrate.  There have been no reports 
of opposition protests. 
 
8. (C) Comment:  As one presidential candidate told 
reporters, \"nothing should surprise us anymore.\"  The legal 
actions for and against Rios Montt\'s candidacy have broken 
new ground and stretched the interpretations of Guatemala\'s 
constitution in precedent-setting ways.  Those who have used 
the courts to challenge Rios Montt\'s candidacy can be 
expected to continue seeking legal avenues for their appeal. 
However, the Constitutional Court\'s decision will effectively 
move the debate from the legal arena to the campaign trail. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9848","8/1/2003 18:39","03GUATEMALA1981","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA1952","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/01/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: POLITICAL TENSIONS RELATED TO RIOS MONTT\'S 
CANDIDACY SUBSIDE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1952 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affairs David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and ( 
d). 
 
1. (SBU) Following the Constitutional Court\'s controversial 
July 30 decision to order the Supreme Electoral Tribunal 
(TSE) and Registry of Persons to register FRG leader Efrain 
Rios Montt as a presidential candidate in the November 
elections (reftel), the political opposition and civil 
society groups have changed their strategy from opposing Rios 
Montt\'s candidacy in the courts to a strategy of getting out 
the anti-Rios Montt vote on election day.  Two political 
parties (the UNE and Partido Patriota) filed motions with the 
TSE calling on it to disqualify Rios Montt\'s candidacy, but 
 
SIPDIS 
the action was largely symbolic as the TSE has already made 
it clear it will not go against the instructions of the 
Constitutional Court.  Editorials in all the leading 
newspapers focused on the importance of educating voters 
about the ills of keeping the FRG in power, and tacitly 
accepted that Rios Montt is now a candidate and the decision 
will be made at the ballot box. 
 
2. (U) In statements to the press, OAS Election Monitoring 
Mission Chief, Former President of Peru Valentin Paniagua 
called on all sides to refrain from electoral violence, 
saying that the events of July 24-25 only cloud the process 
of free and fair elections.  When questioned about the 
Constitutional Court\'s decision to allow Rios Montt to be a 
candidate, Paniagua responded that the Mission would not 
comment on the legal qualifications of any candidate as that 
was up to Guatemalan courts to decide. 
 
3. (C) Paniagua\'s deputy, Moises Benamor, told us that the 
Mission was in contact with numerous political sectors on 
July 31, and all had come around to accepting, however 
reluctantly, the Constitutional Court\'s decision.  He said 
that at the July 31 meeting of the OAS-sponsored Forum of 
Political Parties, the opposition parties did not discuss 
challenging the finding of the Constitutional Court, and 
spent most of the session discussing ways to bring the FRG 
back into the forum (Note: opposition party reps expelled the 
FRG from the forum after the FRG-led violent protests of July 
24-25. End note).  Benamor told us that there were reports 
that some in the Supreme Court were upset about the 
Constitutional Court\'s decision, but had not been able to 
come up with a legal strategy to challenge it.  Benamor\'s 
assessment was that the phase for challenging Rios Montt\'s 
candidacy in the courts was now effectively over, and that 
all sides would focus on winning votes. 
 
4. (C) Comment: Avenues for prolonging the constitutional 
challenge to Rios Montt\'s presidential candidacy were 
effectively closed by the Constitutional Court\'s July 30 
decision, and the registration of his candidacy by the 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal on July 31.  While procedural 
challenges, like the ones filed by UNE and the Partido 
Patriota, may continue to crop up, all sides now recognize 
that Rios Montt will be a candidate and the battle will take 
place on election day. 
LINDWALL 
"
"9937","8/6/2003 23:30","03GUATEMALA2014","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","03GUATEMALA1908","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 GUATEMALA 002014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
USDOL FOR ILAB:ROBERT WHOLEY 
USTR FOR VIONDETTE LOPEZ/BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETRD, SNAR, ELAB, CASC, GT 
SUBJECT: CODEL BALLENGER VISIT ADVANCES U.S. INTERESTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1908 
 
Classified By: PolOff Erik Hall.  Reason 1.5 (b). 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  A U.S. Congressional delegation led by 
Rep. Cass Ballenger, and including U.S. Representatives Kevin 
Brady, Jerry Weller, and Marsha Blackburn, visited Guatemala 
August 4-6.  The CoDel conveyed to the GOG, civil society, 
the private sector and the press USG concern over recent 
election-related violence, our interest in assuring free and 
fair elections in Guatemala, Congressional support for a 
CAFTA agreement including strong labor rights and IPR 
protections and the need for continued GOG progress in 
combating drug trafficking.  The CoDel visit demonstrated 
strong U.S. Congressional interest in Guatemalan democracy at 
this crucial juncture, and advanced our other highest 
priority goals in Guatemala.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
2.  (U) Congressman Cass Ballenger, Chairman of the Western 
Hemisphere Sub-Committee of the House International Relations 
Committee, headed a Congressional delegation that visited 
Guatemala August 4-6.  The CoDel included U. S. 
Representatives Kevin Brady, Jerry Weller and Marsha 
Blackburn, as well as Mrs. Donna Ballenger, HIRC staffers 
Caleb McCarry, Jessica Lewis and Ted Brennan, State 
Department H officer James Hagen, and military escort Maj. 
William McCollough.  The CoDel met with the Country Team and 
Embassy Homeland Security Working Group, with Acting 
President Francisco Reyes Lopez and selected ministers, with 
Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez and the GOG\'s 
Inter-Institutional Counter-Narcotics Cooperation Group, with 
representatives of the Guatemalan Congress, employer groups, 
civil society representatives and human rights NGOs.  Press 
coverage of the visit was positive and straightforward. 
 
Meeting the GOG:  Narcotics, CAFTA, Elections 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) The CoDel met with GOG officials at a reception 
hosted by the Ambassador on August 4, and again on August 5 
at a lunch hosted by Acting President Francisco Reyes Lopez. 
The Vice President was accompanied by key members of the 
Economic Cabinet.  They met with Foreign Minister Gutierrez 
and the Inter-Institutional Counter-Narcotics Cooperation 
Group on August 5, and attended a dinner hosted by the 
Guatemalan Congress in honor of the delegation that evening. 
In each event, CoDel members raised concerns over recent 
pre-electoral violence (RefTel), the need for an honest 
election process in the run-up to Presidential elections on 
November 9, the unprecedented opportunities offered by a 
possible CAFTA agreement, the strong Congressional interest 
that labor and IPR protections be incorporated into such an 
agreement.  They also highlighted the importance of continued 
GOG cooperation in combating narco-trafficking. 
 
4.  (C) Senior GOG officials used the inter-ministerial 
counter-narcotics meeting to underscore GOG efforts to meet 
each of nine counter-narcotics problem areas identified by 
the USG.  After the GOG presentation, CoDel members 
acknowledged GOG efforts, but urged continued commitment to 
combat narco-trafficking, and noted the issue would come up 
in the context of Congressional debate on CAFTA.  Rep. 
Blackburn pressed for a firm GOG commitment and additional 
GOG resources to continue the fight.  Attorney General Carlos 
de Leon cited resources already committed by all 
participating institutions to address the problem areas, and 
said the creation of the inter-ministerial group also 
embodied the GOG\'s commitment.  Vice Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Gabriel Aguilera said the GOG is firmly committed to 
address each problem area completely, and emphasized that the 
inter-institutional working group has been formally 
constituted into a permanent body.  Rep. Brady also said that 
counter-narcotics cooperation will factor strongly in the 
CAFTA debate expected in the U.S. Congress and asked whether 
the Guatemalan Congress was funding the resource requests of 
the institutions present.  Minister of Government Reyes 
Calderon said his ministry\'s money-laundering unit had 
received an 18% budget increase from Congress over the past 
year.  Supreme Court Justice Napoleon Rojas said no US 
extraditions were pending (Comment:  Not quite right; the 
Ambassador corrected.  End Comment.), and that the court has 
auctioned seized assets and used the profits to create two 
new courts dedicated to trying cases involving organized 
crime. 
 
5.  (C) In a separate meeting with Foreign Minister Gutierrez 
(Defense Minister Moran was also present, but did not speak), 
Rep. Ballenger said his comment in October, 2002 to the 
effect that Guatemala should not be certified as cooperating 
fully in the counter-narcotics fight was not meant to offend, 
but to encourage stronger efforts in this mutual endeavor. 
He noted positive actions taken since de-certification by the 
GOG.  Gutierrez described those efforts, including progress 
in meeting the USG\'s 9 benchmarks, but said he was still \"not 
fully satisfied\" with the results.  \"We are determined to do 
more,\" he said, \"and have formed the inter-institutional 
counter-narcotics working group to continue improve 
cooperation.\"  In response to a question from Rep. Ballenger, 
he also described GOG negotiations with Belize and the 
current status of border talks.  While not resolved, he said, 
incidents in the adjacency zone have declined and the OAS has 
opened an office in the zone as a means to build mutual trust 
between the two nations.  Rep. Weller expressed hope that a 
fair and balanced CAFTA will be achieved, which incorporates 
the labor and IPR protections of the US-Chile FTA. 
 
6.  (C) Rep. Brady described Congressional debate over CAFTA 
and the importance of the labor issue in the U.S.  Gutierrez 
responded that a CAFTA is not limited to commercial relations 
but also expresses shared values and is a means to modernize 
Guatemala\'s business sector, which has profited from 
protectionism and lax enforcement of labor laws in the past. 
The GOG is pursuing an \"aggressive\" policy on CAFTA labor and 
commercial offers, and has been criticized by some other 
governments in the region for doing so.  The current 
government has achieved major labor law reforms and major 
(more than 50%) increases to the minimum wage, and President 
Portillo is asking the ILO to evaluate Guatemalan labor law. 
Weak enforcement is unfortunately a result of weak state 
structures.  Greater fiscal and social reforms are needed to 
form the basis for a CAFTA and a later FTA with the EU.  In 
response to a question about the status of Article 98 
discussions, the Foreign Minister said the GOG was studying 
the USG proposal, but could not take a position on an 
agreement when it has not yet ratified the Treaty of Rome. 
(Comment: This was bad news.  The Ambassador raised this with 
Guatemalan Ambassador to the U.S. Antonio Arenales on August 
5, telling him that Gutierrez needed to hear from him how 
important an issue this is to the USG and asking him to speak 
with the Foreign Minister; he said he would.  The Ambassador 
told Gutierrez on August 6 in a TelCon that his reply to the 
CoDel was like a bucket of cold water to our hopes of getting 
an Article 98 agreement soon and that it did not make sense, 
inasmuch as our proposed text does not even refer to the ICC 
or Rome Treaty.  Gutierrez replied that he may have listened 
too much to his legal advisors and said he would reconsider. 
The Ambassador suggested he seek Arenales\' views as to the 
importance of this issue in Washington; Gutierrez pledged to 
consult with Arenales on both legalities and political 
importance.  End Comment.) 
 
7.  (C) Asked by Rep. Ballenger for his views on the violent 
FRG protests of July 24-25, Gutierrez responded that these 
events \"are not easy to understand and are harder to 
explain.\"  The upcoming elections will be historic, he said, 
because this will be the first election where former 
guerrilla combatants will stand directly for election 
(referring to the URNG party, which has nominated Rodrigo 
Asturias (AKA Comandante Gaspar Ilom) for President, and 
which previously stood only in coalition with other parties). 
 It is also historic because never before in Guatemalan 
history has a second consecutive democratically-elected 
government passed power to a third.  President Portillo has 
made a firm commitment to a clean, credible election, but the 
pre-electoral campaign has become very controversial, causing 
great public confusion.  He has asked the OAS to monitor the 
use of state funds for electoral purposes.  \"I personally 
reject the July 24-25 demonstrations, but also believe it is 
not helpful to exaggerate the facts.  For example, the word 
\"rioters\" was incorrectly used here.  What I saw was a 
well-organized and highly controlled movement.  It is vital 
for Guatemalans to keep a cool head.\"  The Ambassador 
responded that it is important to note that the demonstrators 
carried machetes, clubs and guns, and while they did not use 
them, they were acting in a way clearly intended to 
intimidate.  He urged all sides to work to improve the 
electoral climate. 
 
8.  (C) At a Congressional dinner on August 5, host Vice 
President of Congress Zury Rios toasted the CoDel and said a 
majority of the Guatemalan Congress fully supports the 
counter-narcotics fight and will continue to do so.  She also 
said Congress would support CAFTA approval.  In response, 
Rep. Ballenger toasted US-Guatemalan friendship and told 
representatives that \"the eyes of the world will be on 
Guatemala\" during this election year, and urged the GOG to 
conduct free and fair elections, free from violence and 
intimidation.  He pledged to return to Guatemala to observe 
the elections himself.  In private conversations with Rios, 
Rep. Ballenger and the Ambassador urged her and other FRG 
leaders present to prevent violence and intimidation of the 
sort witnessed on July 24-25. 
 
Civil Society 
------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) On August 4 the CoDel met with the Guatemalan 
Forum, a group formed in August 2002 to promote social 
dialogue.  The Forum comprises individuals drawn from a 
variety of civil society organizations, including human 
rights groups, indigenous organizations, academic 
institutions and think tanks, private sector groups and 
unions, and religious organizations.  Miguel Angel Barcacel, 
a director of a prominent socio-economic analysis think tank 
(ASIES), described for the Congressmen an atmosphere of 
repression and intimidation of rural voters by the ruling 
party, which erupted in violent riots on July 24-25 in the 
capital (one journalist died of a heart attack).  The Forum 
has since issued position papers on national issues including 
security, economic revitalization, rural development, justice 
and electoral reform.  The Forum recently joined with other 
civil society groups to form the \"Civic Front\" to address 
fraud in the upcoming elections.  He requested USG support 
for clean elections and international observation of the vote 
in November. 
 
10.  (SBU) Carmen Aida Ibarra Moran of the Myrna Mack 
Foundation, criticized the lack of access to education, 
employment and health care for Guatemala\'s poor, and the 
continued effective exercise of power by \"clandestine forces\" 
linked to the ruling FRG, the Army, and retired Army 
officers.  The threat from these forces, which have roots in 
all the political parties, represents an even greater threat 
to Guatemala\'s democracy that Rios Montt\'s candidacy per se. 
Human rights activist Mario Polanco warned that electoral 
fraud will occur well before voting day, and cited the July 
24-25 riots as a direct consequence of the FRG\'s alleged 
re-activation of the network of civil self-defense patrols 
created by Rios Montt during the civil conflict.  Of 
particular concern is the security of journalists in this 
context.  On the brighter side, Federico Licht of the 
Guatemalan Jewish Community cited a rebirth of civil society 
groups willing to defend democratic freedoms, including the 
Guatemalan Forum.  Rep. Ballenger commented that in the 
elections in El Salvador immediately after the peace accords 
were signed, 85% of voters turned out on election day despite 
numerous death threats.  He encouraged civil society to 
educate voters about the secrecy of each vote and said he 
would be among those observing the vote in November. 
 
11.  (U) At a meeting on August 5 with human rights groups 
hosted by Frank LaRue, Director of the Center for Legal 
Action in Human Rights (CALDH), the delegation met with Fredy 
Peccerelli, Director of the Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology 
Foundation (FAFG); Iduvina Hernandez, Director of the 
Association for the Study and Promotion of Security in 
Democracy (SEDEM); and Nery Rodenas, Director of the 
Archbishop,s Office on Human Rights (ODHA).  The human 
rights leaders described a deteriorating security situation 
facing human rights workers, their initiative to create an 
international commission to investigate clandestine groups 
(CICIACS), and the increase in threats to the opposition from 
politically-motivated violence. 
 
12.  (U) Peccerelli spoke about his work exhuming clandestine 
cemeteries dating from the internal conflict, many of which 
were attributed to the counterinsurgency campaigns of the 
Rios Montt government in 1981-1982.  Peccerelli recounted 
numerous death threats he and members of his staff have 
received, and described the GOG\'s protective efforts as weak. 
 Hernandez and Rodenas alleged that the bulk of these threats 
are posed by \"clandestine groups\" linked to state structures 
through networks of retired military officers now involved in 
organized criminal activity.  They expressed hope that the 
CICIACS would help identify and prosecute these networks and 
their members and requested USG financial and political 
support.  The Ambassador responded that the USG has strongly 
supported the proposal politically, and is in the process of 
identifying financial support.  More support will be needed 
from other donors, he said.  LaRue showed the delegation 
several video clips from the riots of July 24-25, which he 
characterized as a blatant effort by the ruling Guatemalan 
Republican Front (FRG) to intimidate voters and the courts. 
Congressman Ballenger responded that the \"world will be 
watching\" the elections in November.  Representative Brady 
said the Congress continues to make support for human rights 
in Guatemala a high priority. 
 
CAFTA, Labor and IPR 
-------------------- 
 
13.  (SBU) At a lunch on August 4 with Marcio Cuevas, Vice 
President of the main private sector group (CACIF) and 
President of the Non-Traditional Export Association 
(AGEXPRONT); Peter Lamport, former Guatemalan Ambassador to 
the U.S. and business leader; William Stixrud, a 
representative of the coffee exporters; and Mario Montano, 
ex-President of CACIF; CoDel members emphasized the 
opportunity presented by a potential CAFTA agreement. 
Congressional debate over CAFTA will be affected by the 
unemployment situation in the U.S. when the agreement is 
submitted to Congress, probably in March or April of 2004, 
Representative Ballenger said.  There is great concern over 
labor conditions in Central America, he said, and urged 
business leaders to provide Congress evidence of adequate 
labor protections in law and effective enforcement of those 
laws.  Rep. Brady emphasized that the vote on CAFTA in the 
U.S. Congress will be a close one, and may be determined by a 
small group of currently undecided Congress members concerned 
about labor rights protections in the region.  The U.S.-Chile 
FTA is a good model for CAFTA labor provisions, but U.S. 
labor groups are skeptical about labor conditions in Central 
America.  He encouraged business leaders to provide 
information about how Guatemalan worker rights are better 
protected today, citing Abraham Lincoln\'s dictum that 
\"examples are not just the best form of persuasion, but 
rather the only form of persuasion.\"  In addition, he said, 
the USG hopes CAFTA will help to integrate the region and 
build productive capacity.  Representative Weller noted that 
2004 is an election year in the U.S., and suggested that the 
later CAFTA is presented to Congress, the more difficult it 
will be to pass.  He emphasized the importance of labor law 
enforcement, while also raising the importance to many U.S. 
Congressional members that IPR protections are fully 
respected.  Rep. Blackburn expressed concern about IPR 
protections and agriculture provisions of a CAFTA. 
 
14.  (SBU) Cuevas said that successfully achieving a CAFTA 
agreement is CACIF\'s highest priority, to encourage greater 
foreign investment and joint ventures in Guatemala.  He 
expressed \"total agreement\" that the Labor Ministry\'s 
inspectorate will require support to better enforce existing 
labor laws.  He also expressed concern over the $15 million 
maximum sanction for labor rights violations under the 
US-Singapore agreement.  Lamport said that beyond its effect 
on trade, a CAFTA will help strengthen Guatemalan democracy 
by strengthening the rule of law.  Guatemalans view a CAFTA 
as a tool to help maintain the competitiveness of exports 
from the region, and as a way to counter-balance potential 
dominance by Mexican firms.  He claimed Guatemalan labor law 
to be \"more than adequate,\" and cited voluntary industry 
efforts to improve working conditions out of a recognition 
that Guatemala cannot compete successfully \"based on cheap 
labor alone.\"  Unionization, however, is not the best way to 
benefit workers, he argued, citing the closure of the 
Phillips Van Heusen factory after a collective bargaining 
agreement was achieved in the mid-1990s.  Lamport also cited 
the newly-created Civic Front as evidence of a mature, 
non-violent reaction by civil society to the inscription of 
Efrain Rios Montt as a candidate for the Presidency.  In 
response to the Ambassador\'s query of what the Front will do, 
Lamport said the Front will begin observing election fraud or 
abuse of public resources now, and would encourage voters not 
to be discouraged by FRG intimidation tactics. 
 
Press Gets Message 
------------------ 
 
15.  (U) The visit received extensive coverage by local 
media.  On August 5, Rep. Ballenger was interviewed by 
journalist Carlisle Johnson on his English-language morning 
show and asked about the delegation\'s views on CAFTA, the 
fight against drugs and upcoming general elections in 
Guatemala.  Later the same day, following a lunch meeting 
with Vice President Reyes Lopez, Rep. Ballenger was 
interviewed by major newspapers, news radio and TV regarding 
efforts made by the Government of Guatemala to combat 
narcotics trafficking.  Finally, later that day, the media 
attended a press conference immediately following a meeting 
with human rights groups where reporters inquired about the 
CoDel\'s views on the violent demonstrations that took place 
in Guatemala City on July 24 and 25.  In total, press items 
appeared in four daily newspapers, on two TV news reports, 
and three radio stations. 
 
16.  (U) Leading daily \"Prensa Libre\" ran a headline on 
August 6 that said \"US warning:  If there\'s fraud, no CAFTA; 
eyes of the world will be on the elections, signal U.S. 
Congress members.\"  While predictably the press tried to draw 
Rep. Ballenger out on the possible effect of a Rios Montt win 
on CAFTA, Rep. Ballenger\'s response was that if Rios Montt 
wins in a free and fair election, he doubted that it would 
affect the vote on CAFTA.  Reps. Ballenger and Brady strongly 
emphasized the need for continued progress on 
counter-narcotics cooperation, saying Congress will give that 
issue significant consideration when debating a CAFTA 
agreement.  On narcotics certification, Rep. Ballenger told 
the press that encouraging progress has been made, and noted 
that it is President Bush\'s decision whether we certify or 
not. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
16.  (C) This was a timely, extremely useful visit and we are 
grateful for the CoDel\'s interest and support.  The CoDel 
visit was well received by all sectors here, including the 
press, and supported USG interests and Embassy efforts on a 
range of issues.  For its part, the GOG rolled out the red 
carpet, with the VP hosting a lunch and Congressional Vice 
President Zury Rios hosting a gala dinner with all but the 
GANA Congress members present (they were invited but 
declined).  Guatemalans who had contact with the CoDel went 
away convinced of U.S. Congressional interest in Guatemalan 
democracy at this critical juncture:  in the wake of 
pre-electoral violence and in the context of the 
unprecedented opportunity offered by CAFTA negotiations.  At 
a reception hosted by the Ambassador for a broad 
cross-section of Guatemalan civil society, government members 
and opposition figures, Rep. Ballenger made a strong 
statement about the need for clean, peaceful elections, the 
importance of CAFTA to the region, and the need to address 
labor rights issues. 
 
17.  (U) This cable was not cleared by CoDel members prior to 
their departure. 
HAMILTON 
"
"9964","8/7/2003 17:53","03GUATEMALA2017","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002017 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, EAIR, PREL, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S NO SHOOT-DOWN POLICY 
 
 
Classified By: PolMil Officer Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (a) and ( 
b). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Following the April 14 downing of a civilian 
aircraft carrying cocaine in Honduras, we have met with 
senior Guatemalan military officials to confirm that the GOG 
has a strict policy against firing on civilian aircraft 
believed to be transporting narcotics and to ensure that they 
understand that the shootdown of drug laden civilian aircraft 
would not/not help the GOG get recertified as a cooperating 
partner on the war on drugs.  Senior GOG military officials 
at every level assured us that the necessary safeguards are 
in place.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The April 14 shoot down by the Honduran Air Force of a 
civilian aircraft carrying narcotics raised our concern that, 
in the GOG\'s interest in obtaining USG counternarcotics 
\"recertification,\" some in the Guatemalan military may have 
considered relaxing their strict rules against shooting down 
suspect aircraft.  The Ambassador instructed MilGroup and DAO 
to engage the Guatemalan military at the highest levels to 
restate our policy against shootdowns, and to make it clear 
that violations of it would be devastating in the USG\'s 
evaluation of GOG counter-narcotics cooperation. 
Furthermore, a shootdown would lead to the immediate 
suspension of USG information sharing on potential narcotics 
flight tracks. 
 
3. (C) The USG Military Group Commander met separately with 
Minister of Defense Moran, Army Chief of Staff Rios Sosa and 
Air Force Commander Hasse to deliver this message.  The 
senior GOG military leaders assured us that the GOG has firm 
guidelines in place to ensure that a shootdown will not 
happen, and that they fully understood our message that a 
shootdown would kill rather than help \"recertification\" 
consideration. 
 
4. (C) The DATT met with the MOD again in July to reinforce 
our concerns about the possibility of an \"accidental\" 
shootdown.  The MOD assured DATT that strict guidelines had 
been issued, that in no case will the Guatemalan Air Force 
fire warning shots at civilian aircraft.  He further 
indicated that the only situation in which Air Force pilots 
were authorized to use their weapons was in self defense 
after being fired upon. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10039","8/12/2003 0:00","03GUATEMALA2040","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 002040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/AS NORIEGA AND DAS FISK FROM THE AMBASSADOR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/11/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, KDEM, PHUM, ETRD, GT 
SUBJECT: GETTING AHEAD OF THE POLICY CURVE IN GUATEMALA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 1. (C) Summary:  We need to be planning now as to how we 
would respond to a variety of contingencies during the 
campaign and as a result of the November 9 elections.  I 
believe we have in place most of the policy elements we need: 
a sound public position on the Rios Montt candidacy in the 
May 27 Boucher statement (relations with a Rios Montt 
government would not be \"cordial\"); a robust ($2.4 million) 
program of support to the elections, including both national 
and international (OAS) election observation; grants to 
monitor possible misuse of state resources; support to the 
elections tribunal and a campaign to educate the rural poor 
in particular that the ballot is genuinely secret.  Among 
these, the OAS mission may require plus-ing up from its 
current $640,000 budget.  Although legal challenges to the 
candidacy of General Rios Montt are still being filed, the 
political opposition, sensibly, has decided to oppose him at 
the polls, not pull out of the elections.  But in persistent, 
loud cries of fraud, the opposition and civil society are 
laying the groundwork for challenging the legitimacy of a 
putative Rios Montt victory, however remote that appears now. 
(He stands at 11% in the polls, with disapproval ratings 
above 60%.)  Our major challenge during the elections is to 
encourage a high rate of participation.  We are doing that 
through campaigns to convince the public the ballot is secret 
and that the safeguards against election-day fraud are 
adequate. 
 
2. (C) Rios Montt is determined to run and, if wins in a 
reasonably fair process, we should recognize his victory and 
deal with him, albeit coolly, and by putting down tough 
markers on organized crime, corruption, human rights and 
reform of the military.  We need not/not be concerned that he 
would refuse to deal with us: to the contrary, our problem 
will be fending off a charm offensive designed to gain 
legitimacy through U.S. acceptance of him.  If he wins in a 
badly flawed election, however, we should re-jigger CAFTA to 
exclude Guatemala and go to the OAS to seek new elections (as 
in the Dominican Republic in 1994) or, at the very minimum, 
an OAS-monitored reform process (as in Peru in 2000).  We 
should set the stage for that contingency by having the OAS 
election mission report to the OAS Permanent Council in 
October. 
 
3. (C) We should also plan for the more likely outcome: a 
credible victory by, say, Oscar Berger or Alvaro Colom (a win 
by any of the others is improbable).  We should embrace such 
a government publicly and provide significant new resources 
for rule of law and anti-corruption programs, peace accords 
implementation and other bilateral aid programs.  However, 
our responses would be handicapped by the historically low 
levels of DA and ESF currently being planned for Guatemala, 
especially relative to its more politically stable neighbors. 
Therefore, I urge that WHY FY 2004 DA and ESF allocations be 
flexible, in order to preserve the option of increasing them 
significantly.  Whoever wins, we need to support the 
Commission (in formation) to investigate clandestine groups 
and use our military-to-military programs to push the 
Guatemalan military toward reform.  End summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
4. (C) The intense political confrontation that has 
characterized the four years of the Portillo Government has 
effectively polarized the ruling FRG and its opposition -- 
which includes practically all sectors of Guatemalan society. 
 This has led to an increasingly poisonous electoral 
environment with growing violence (12 provincial party 
activists dead already), mutual hostility, and cries of fraud 
by the opposition to discredit FRG candidate Efrain Rios 
Montt.  Manipulation by the FRG and/and the opposition 
temporarily transferred the electoral debate to the 
judiciary, effectively damaging the credibility of both the 
Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court, and generating 
more public cynicism. Guatemala\'s now past that impasse, by 
virtue of the Constitutional Court\'s July 30 slam dunk of the 
Supreme Court, ordering the registration of Rios Montt. 
Although legal challenges to his candidacy are still being 
filed, the likelihood that one would at this point succeed is 
remote.  The opposition and civil society -- sensibly -- have 
decided to contest his candidacy at the polls, not to boycott 
the elections.  Although the Guatemalan Constitution thus 
takes a hit, the political result (assuming the General 
loses) may be better for Guatemala. 
 
5. (C) An unintended casualty of the warnings of potential 
fraud has been the discrediting of the elections themselves. 
A July poll shows that two-thirds of Guatemalans have no 
interest in the elections and don\'t believe they will change 
anything in Guatemala.  Voter turnout (traditionally low) 
will surely suffer, benefiting the party best able to turn 
out its core supporters (probably the FRG).  By convincing 
the population that electoral fraud is already in progress, 
the opposition is setting the stage to challenge the results 
of the election in the event they lose.  There is a risk that 
the new government, whoever wins, may lack the legitimacy of 
being recognized by all political actors. 
 
6. (C) The polls currently give pro-business GANA candidate 
Oscar Berger a 40% to 11% lead over FRG candidate Efrain Rios 
Montt (though conventional wisdom and past experience tell us 
that the polls underestimate the rural vote, where the FRG 
has its strength).  Alvaro Colom, of the centrist National 
Union for Hope Party (UNE), could sneak into a second round 
runoff against Berger, in which case he could emerge the 
victor.  Guatemala\'s unbroken tradition of not reelecting the 
party in power and the large number of voters who say they 
would never vote for the former dictator add to the view that 
the chances of Rios Montt winning the presidency are not 
high.  However, with three months left in the campaign and 
little popular enthusiasm for the other candidates, we can 
not rule out the possibility of a genuine Rios Montt victory. 
 
7. (C) Guatemala\'s history has led the political actors to 
view elections as a winner-take-all, zero sum game.  The FRG 
is desperate to hold onto power, in part to protect itself 
from investigations into Portillo-era corruption and to 
ensure continued access to resources.  The opposition also 
sees this as its last chance to prevent \"Colombianization,\" 
and therefore it is do or die for them, too.  Guatemala lacks 
good mediating institutions, as no one institution is above 
the political fray, able to communicate, and serve as a go 
between for all sides.  The church, which plays this role in 
some Latin American societies, suffers from weak leadership. 
The international community has played this role effectively 
since the negotiation of the Peace Accords, but at the cost 
of Guatemalans not developing their own institutions to play 
this role.  The OAS is best positioned to serve as a 
go-between, as it has the best combination of communication 
to both sides.  The U.S. has these credentials as well.  But 
there are risks for us if we get into the middle of this, as 
neither side is open to concessions and each wants us to 
impose its will on the other. 
 
8. (C) On the up side, Guatemala has a good electoral law, 
and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) is viewed as 
professional and honest.  The magistrates are politically 
divided (2 of 5 are hard-core FRG) and the three non-FRG are 
hardly made of stern stuff, but the staff is highly 
professional and neither the FRG nor the opposition question 
the impartiality of how the TSE will carry out the elections. 
 The register of voters (\"padron electoral\") is in reasonably 
good shape, and the use of indelible ink will control against 
double voting.  Each party is entitled to poll watchers who 
can prevent fraud at the ballot box.  One national and two 
international election observation missions and at least two 
quick counts will check fraud in the vote tabulation. 
 
9. (C) The greatest concern of the opposition is the 
potential for misuse of state resources for electoral ends. 
In our view, that concern is much exaggerated, as the 
Guatemalan state is chronically resource-scarce and has few 
programs (fertilizers, ex-PAC payments and school lunches 
aside) that in many countries lend themselves to electoral 
manipulation.  Anticipating this problem, we have awarded 
several grants to NGO\'s to monitor and report publicly on 
misuse of state resources.  They are already reporting 
publicly.  We are also demarching the government about some 
troubling early indications of possible misuse of state 
resources; replacement of the professional, apolitical head 
of Guatemala\'s national disaster relief organization (CONRED) 
by an FRG political hack and Guatemala\'s recent move to pull 
out of a joint customs operation with El Salvador, to set up 
its own customs (and revenue-generating) control.  Both 
decisions were taken by the FRG hard-liner Vice President 
Reyes Lopez, when President Portillo was out of the country. 
Publicity, effective work of the TSE and a robust election 
observation effort are the best ways to keep fraud in check. 
 
10. (C) The use of violence, which has increased in recent 
weeks, could become a tactic to keep the large swing vote at 
home, and there is no easy cure for that.  But as Codel 
Ballenger did during their August 4-6 visit here, we will 
continually hold up the example in our public diplomacy of 
war-era El Salvador, where as many as 85% of registered 
voters voted, despite threats.  Public and private 
admonitions to the FRG to control violence have received much 
attention.  We will use CAFTA and every other incentive and 
disincentive at our disposal to induce decent FRG (and 
opposition) behavior. 
 
How do we respond if a large portion of the opposition and 
civil society starts to boycott the elections? 
-------------------------------------------- 
11. (C) There have been calls by some segments of civil 
society to boycott the elections, claiming that the 
Constitutional Court decision in favor of Rios Montt has 
already vitiated the process.  None of the political parties 
has joined this movement, in part because at this point they 
believe the election will favor them.  Short of abuse so 
blatant as to totally discredit continuation of the election, 
we should urge continued participation, i.e., not leaving the 
field to the FRG.  We will stay in close 
coordination/communication with the observation missions. 
The Embassy placed an op ed piece under the Ambassador\'s 
signature in the August 8 press calling attention to 
safeguards against fraud and urging voter participation, 
rejection of cynicism and apathy.  We have also inserted that 
message into the op ed by Assistant Secretary Noriega. 
Washington needs to give the same message to visiting 
delegations and explain our position to the Washington NGO 
community and to Congressional staff. 
 
How do we deal with a Rios Montt government, if that comes to 
pass? 
---------------------------------------- 
12. (C) If current trends remain constant, Rios Montt will 
not win the election.  However, we should not discount the 
possibility that it could happen.  Under the assumption that 
Rios Montt were elected in elections that were reasonably 
free/fair, we should adopt a distinctly cool, cautious 
approach, putting down stringent markers.  Our biggest 
problem will not/not be to repair damage to relations with 
the FRG, but rather to deal with their charm offensive, their 
wish to cooperate with us and to be embraced by us as their 
avenue to internal and international legitimacy.  At a 
minimum, the Ambassador could be instructed to put down 
markers in a meeting following the second round of the 
elections (December 28).  Sending a special emissary from 
Washington is another possibility, although the optics of a 
special emissary (squaring that with the May 27 Boucher 
statement) are difficult.  But we should not send a 
high-level delegation to the inauguration.  We can take as a 
given the FRG/Rios Montt\'s profession of wanting to fully 
cooperate on drugs, counter-terrorism, alien smuggling and 
most international issues.  They will also be committed to 
CAFTA.  But we should insist on their breaking all ties with 
organized crime, fully supporting CICIACS (the commission to 
investigate so-called clandestine groups), purging the police 
of corrupt elements, reforming military intelligence and 
making every possible effort to put an end to threats against 
the human rights community. 
 
13. (C) Whether his victory under these circumstances would 
irreparably prejudice Congressional approval of CAFTA is 
Washington\'s call. On the assumption that it would, we have 
considered whether a direct private appeal -- possible 
through a private emissary -- would yet dissuade Rios Montt 
from running.  We are convinced that it would not and that, 
if it became public, could only make us look ingenuous for 
having attempted it. Rios Montt did not go through the huge 
effort to pack and pressure the Constitutional Court, and to 
mount the July 24-25 protests only to withdraw now.  He wants 
to run, his wife and family want him to run, and his 
followers in the FRG are convinced that they will virtually 
disappear as an institution if he does not head the ticket. 
 
14. (C) If Rios Montt wins in an election that does not meet 
minimum standards, however, we should seek to invoke the 
Inter-American Charter (or Resolution 1080) to seek new 
elections (as in the Dominican Republic in 1994) or, at a 
bare minimum, a resolution that would set up some sort of 
OAS-brokered dialogue (as in Peru in 2000) that would 
effectively put a Rios Montt government under international 
observation.  We should lay the groundwork now for that 
contingency by asking the Secretary General to report to the 
Permanent Council on the election process, once the OAS 
election mission makes its first report at the beginning of 
October.  We could take that step sooner, should some new, 
dramatic event alter the political landscape.  The 
assassination of a major candidate or prominent public 
figure, for example, would surely constitute such an event 
and, in that case, we should respond immediately and 
positively to a request for FBI investigative assistance.  We 
should also lower the boom on a fraudulent Rios Montt victory 
by revocation of GSP trade preferences and re-jiggering of 
the CAFTA to exclude Guatemala.  All sorts of lesser 
responses to an unacceptably flawed election should be 
planned in advance, including recall of the Ambassador and 
non-attendance at a Rios Montt inauguration.  The objective 
would be not to let a Rios Montt victory through fraud stand 
unchallenged. 
 
How to engage with a good government? 
------------------------------------- 
15. (C) We should also plan now for a good outcome which, at 
this stage, appears more likely.  We will want to send a 
high-level delegation to the inauguration (with a delegation 
head who will symbolize our commitment to CAFTA/economic 
prosperity; anti-corruption or aid on rule of law/public 
security issues).  We should review our bilateral programs to 
see where they could be bolstered in the short term.  Renewed 
Guatemalan commitment to the Peace Accords could be rewarded 
with increased assistance and a high-level delegation to a 
mid-year Consultative Group Meeting.  NAS and ICITAP programs 
should be increased.  The ATA anti-kidnapping training (an 
assessment team was just here) is small, but could be of 
invaluable assistance to a new government desperate to clamp 
down on organized crime.  We should also offer VIP protective 
detail training  Assuming no military misbehavior during the 
campaign, the SouthCom Commander should visit in February or 
March, to inaugurate the New Horizons exercise and to bolster 
a new Government in the eyes of its military. 
 
Using CICIACS to undermine the influence of organized crime 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
16. (C) Irrespective of who wins the elections, the next 
government will be forced early on to confront organized 
crime.  We believe the establishment of CICIACS (the 
Guatemalan/UN/OAS joint commission against clandestine 
groups) offers the greatest hope for investigating and 
containing the role of organized crime in politics and the 
economy, and putting an end to the threats of against human 
rights workers.  We should give serious consideration to 
providing new USG funding beyond the $500,000 currently 
contemplated.  We should also consider assigning a recently 
retired prosecutor or some similarly qualified person as a 
USG liaison to CICIACS during the duration of its work.  We 
need to start an inter-agency process now/now to give CICIACS 
a product, shortly after its work starts, that details the 
essence of what we know about clandestine groups and 
organized crime in Guatemala.  We should also consider 
detailing a U.S. security expert to CICIACS itself. 
 
Conclusion 
---------- 
17. (C) In conclusion, we face a difficult but by no means 
impossible situation in Guatemala, and the opportunities to 
advance our interests significantly are at least as good as 
are the possibilities that things will get worse.  A major 
concern I have is that Guatemala-bashing and a tendency to 
write Guatemala off have taken such strong hold in Washington 
that, through budget planning, we may already have precluded 
options for coming robustly to the support of a new, credible 
government.  I urge that ESF and DA allocation decisions for 
FY2004 be marked with an asterisk for the moment, pending the 
outcome of these elections, with a view toward upping them 
considerably if a government we want to support comes to 
office in January.  In the meantime, we have good 
communication with all the actors.  That includes not only 
the opposition, but the Portillo government and the FRG 
itself.  We will use every possible incentive and warning of 
disincentives to coax them into acceptable election behavior. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10063","8/12/2003 22:14","03GUATEMALA2052","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/12/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, PINR, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: NEW ELECTION POLL PUTS RIOS MONTT FIFTH, WITH 
THREE PERCENT; OTHER ELECTION NEWS 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Election poll results released on August 12 show 
GANA presidential candidate Oscar Berger leading the pack 
with 44% (up from 37% in July); followed by UNE candidate 
Alvaro Colom with 17% (up from 13% in July) and FRG candidate 
Efrain Rios Montt with 3% (down from 8% in July in the same 
poll).  Responses to polling questions regarding the 
FRG-directed violent protests of July 24-25 indicate that 
many previously undecided voters blame the FRG leadership for 
the disturbances, and decided as a result to vote against the 
FRG.  While electoral polls in Guatemala are often inaccurate 
and, at a minimum, underestimate the rural vote (where the 
FRG has its strength), anecdotal evidence developed by the 
Embassy from informal surveys conducted recently in rural 
areas supports the conclusion that Berger remains 
significantly ahead in voter preferences, not only in the 
capital, but also in much of the countryside. 
 
2. (C) Independent presidential candidate Rodolfo Paiz 
withdrew from the presidential race during the first week of 
August, and called on his supporters to vote for Oscar 
Berger.  There are reports that DC candidate Ricardo Bueso 
will pull his hat out of the electoral ring by August 14. 
Paiz, a supermarket heir who headed a small political party, 
polled 1% in August, and Bueso failed to reach 2.5%, after 
spending millions of dollars of his own money in the 
campaign.  The withdrawal of both candidates will favor Oscar 
Berger as their support base was mostly anti-FRG. 
 
3. (C) The FRG held its congressional nominating assembly on 
August 9, and, to the surprise of many, gave four prominent 
slots on the national slate of legislative candidates to 
nephews and nieces of General Rios Montt.  The strategy of 
favoring family members over local party bosses or campaign 
contributors signals a change in the FRG\'s electoral strategy 
from one of winning votes to one of insuring that their 
legislative block, in the event of losing the presidential 
election, remains loyal.  The calculated decision to 
sacrifice electoral votes in exchange for holding the FRG 
bloc in Congress together after an electoral defeat suggests 
that the FRG believes their chances of winning the 
presidential election are not high. 
 
4. (U) The Supreme Court on August 11 accepted a new appeal 
against the candidacy of Rios Montt.  With Rios Montt now 
registered as a candidate and with the Constitutional Court 
having already ruled that no appeals can be accepted that 
contradict its July 14 ruling that Rios Montt can be a 
candidate, there is no reason to expect this latest challenge 
to succeed. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10083","8/13/2003 22:34","03GUATEMALA2065","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE230096","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002065 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/AS NORIEGA, WHA/DAS FISK AND WHA/CEN TRIVELLI FROM 
AMBASSADOR HAMILTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, PREL, GT, WHA 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY GUATEMALA\'S 90-DAY GOAL PLAN 
 
REF: STATE 230096 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Embassy Guatemala\'s highest priority goals 
for the next 90 days include ensuring that the national 
elections (to be held on November 9) are free and fair; that 
Guatemala ratifies and places in force a bilateral 
counter-narcotics maritime agreement with the U.S.; and that 
Guatemala ratifies a status of forces agreement covering the 
New Horizons joint military exercise, setting a precedent for 
a future Article 98 Agreement. End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Goal 1:  National elections are held on schedule, 
and are judged to be free and fair. 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Guatemala will hold elections for President, Congress and 
local authorities on November 9.  The outcome of the 
elections, and the election process itself, will have a 
determining impact on the continued consolidation of 
democracy in Guatemala, following 36 years of internal 
conflict and an uneven history of democratic institution 
building.  Post is promoting this goal by public and private 
diplomacy to address the serious challenges that have arisen 
in this election; by providing technical support to the 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal to improve its capacity to hold a 
good election; by providing financial assistance to 
international (OAS) and national election observation 
missions; by funding NGO efforts to monitor potential 
manipulation of the election by GOG pork-barrel spending; and 
by an Ambassadorial message urging Guatemalans to not let 
rumors of potential fraud discourage them from voting. 
 
3. (SBU) Goal 2:  The Guatemalan Congress ratifies and the 
GOG places in force a bilateral counter-narcotics maritime 
agreement with us. 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Guatemala and the United States signed a bilateral 
counter-narcotics maritime agreement on May 27.  The placing 
in force of this agreement will represent a major 
disincentive for narcotics traffickers to continue to use 
Guatemala\'s coasts as transit zones for cocaine bound for US 
markets, and could encourage other countries in the region to 
sign similar accords.  The resulting operation of US law 
enforcement vessels in Guatemalan waters will also serve 
colaterally as a disincentive for alien smuggling operations, 
which currently use Guatemala as an off-loading point for 
aliens (including special interest aliens) heading north.  We 
had sought such an agreement with the GOG for ten years.  In 
recent months we have negotiated the text of the agreement, 
signed it, and President Portillo sent it to Congress for 
ratification.  The Embassy is promoting this goal by pressing 
Congress to expedite consideration of this agreement; by 
lobbying all the major parties to vote for the agreement; and 
by pressing the Portillo Government to secure prompt 
legislative action followed by immediate implementation. 
 
4. (SBU) Goal 3:  Guatemala ratifies a SOFA for the 2004 New 
Horizons joint military exercise, which contains generic ICC 
protections. 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Guatemala has not ratified a SOFA with us in more than two 
years, and ratification of the New Horizons agreement would 
not only provide essential protections needed for this 
specific exercise, it would also establish a precedent for a 
broader SOFA containing ICC protections.  The Embassy has 
negotiated a text of the New Horizons SOFA with the GOG, 
which includes generic language protecting US troops from 
extradition to an international court.  We view the 
ratification of the New Horizons SOFA as a stepping stone in 
the process of securing eventual approval of an Article 98 
Agreement.  Efforts to negotiate a separate Article 98 
Agreement, even using a generic text which does not mention 
the ICC, have not prospered.  We will continue pressing the 
Portillo government for an Article 98 Agreement, but 
realistically may have to wait for a more favorable opinion 
by the next government.  The New Horizons agreement has been 
forwarded by President Portillo to Congress for ratification. 
 The Embassy is promoting this goal by pressing the 
Congressional leadership to expedite consideration of the 
agreement; by lobbying all the major parties to secure their 
votes for this agreement; and by pressing the GOG to use its 
influence with Congress to expedite ratification. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10111","8/14/2003 17:37","03GUATEMALA2080","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH PRESIDENT PORTILLO 
 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR JOHN R. HAMILTON, REASONS 1.5 ( 
B) 
 
1. (C) Summary: In an August 13 meeting with the Ambassador 
and DCM, President Portillo promised to veto a badly flawed 
law on the new civilian presidential security force, to 
reinstate the highly-regarded, recently-fired head of the 
national disaster relief agency, to look into a decision 
taken in his absence to stand down joint customs control with 
El Salvador on their mutual border and to take vigorous 
action against any misuse of state resources in the election. 
 End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The meeting, whose main purpose was to introduce newly 
arrived DCM Bruce Wharton, took place the President\'s 
personal residence.  He was relaxed, friendly and looked fit 
after losing what he claimed was 18 pounds in six weeks. 
After pleasantries and at the mention in passing by the 
President of the new civilian presidential security service 
(SAAS), designed to replace the presidential military guard 
(EMP), the Ambassador said there was deep concern among donor 
country diplomatic missions over a number of amendments to 
the proposed law, whose net effect is to inappropriately 
reinsert the military into the business of protecting and 
supporting the president.  Portillo nodded soberly in 
agreement with the concerns and said he intended to veto the 
law, if it arrived in his office in its current form.  He 
noted he was meeting the next day with Congress President 
General Rios Montt and intended to raise the issue; he seemed 
hopeful that the mischievous amendments, which he attributed 
to military officers lobbying friends in the Congress on 
their own, could be beaten back.  But he reiterated his 
determination not to let the flawed legislation become law. 
 
3. (C) Turning to elections, the Ambassador said he knew from 
previous conversations that the President wanted Guatemala\'s 
elections to be judged free and fair by the international 
community.  Much depended on the political parties and the 
elections tribunal to preclude any possibility of 
election-day fraud.  But a major concern among civil society, 
opposition and the press is misuse of state resources.  The 
responsibility to prevent such abuse is primarily the 
President\'s, the Ambassador said.  In that regard, two recent 
developments were troubling.  One was the firing of the 
highly regarded head, Alejandro Maldonado, of Guatemala\'s 
national disaster relief agency (CONRED), which USAID and 
SOUTHCOM had supported to the tune of at least US$1 million 
in just the last year.  The new chief was a political hack 
with no visible qualifications; even more troubling had been 
the naming of a retired military officer, well and 
unfavorably unknown to us, as CONRED\'s chief of operations. 
All of this pointed at potential misuse of CONRED resources, 
especially as the fired individual had repeatedly resisted 
pressure from the Vice President to hire ruling party (FRG) 
members and to let contracts with FRG supporters. 
 
4. (C) The second troubling development was a decision the 
Vice President apparently had taken to withdraw Guatemala 
from the joint customs inspection stations with El Salvador 
along their common frontier.  We had learned about this, the 
Ambassador said, only because he Salvadoran foreign minister 
had checked with San Salvador Charge Phil French to confirm 
Vice President Reyes contention that he had made the decision 
under pressure from the U.S., supposedly to beef up narcotics 
controls.  It simply was not true that we had sought the 
change or had even expressed a view at all, the Ambassador 
said, and the decision invited suspicion that customs 
revenues would be siphoned off into FRG coffers. 
 
5. (C) Portillo was well aware of the CONRED issue, said he 
had met that day with Maldonado whom he thought highly of, 
and that he had taken the decision to reinstate Maldonado 
effective September 1.  \"Why September 1,\" the President 
asked -- \"because I am leaving for a ten-day trip to Taiwan 
and if I reinstate Maldonado before then, the Vice President 
will undo my decision while I am gone.\"  But Portillo only 
laughed merrily when the Ambassador suggested that he send 
the VP to Taiwan instead of going himself and went on to 
complain that VP Reyes had given him nothing but grief their 
whole time in office together.  Portillo said he was hearing 
about the customs issue for the first time, did not like the 
sound of it and would get on it first thing in the morning. 
He went on to say that he was determined that there would be 
no misuse of state resources in the election and that he had 
told his cabinet that any employee, high or low, who violated 
that prohibition would be fired and prosecuted.  The 
Ambassador also told Portillo that GANA VP candidate Eduardo 
Stein had told him two weeks ago of GANA\'s interest in 
keeping a direct channel of communication to the FRG open 
during the campaign.   Portillo, showing interest, said he 
would pass this on to Rios Montt. 
 
Note: The Ambassador briefed Stein on the exchange the next 
morning, Stein reiterating GANA\'s interest in a channel of 
communication. 
The President also mentioned that, in response to continuing 
legal challenges to Rios Montt\'s candidacy, the FRG is likely 
to seek to file legal actions to prevent GANA candidate 
Berger\'s registration. 
 
6. (C) Finally, the Ambassador made a pitch for the 
President\'s help in securing Congressional approval of the CN 
Maritime Agreement, signed June 17.  Portillo indicated he 
would. 
7. (C) Comment: As usual, Portillo gave every appearance of 
caring about the concerns we raised as much or more than we 
do.  He does not invariably follow through, but perhaps he 
will this time, on the SAAS, CONRED and Customs issues at 
least. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10148","8/18/2003 14:37","03GUATEMALA2094","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
For US Treasury Virginia Cantor 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT, WHA/PDA 
SUBJECT:  Vital Voices Meets With Guatemalan Women 
 
 
1.  (U)  Summary:  Vital Voices Global Partnership held a two-day 
Women\'s Leadership Retreat in Guatemala City in July.  Present at the 
conference were approximately 40 women leaders from diverse 
backgrounds.  The Ambassador hosted a reception in honor of the group 
attended by more than 100 women and civic leaders.  The goal is of a 
democratic Guatemala with an educated, uncompromising populace that 
will weed out corruption and promote transparency, ethics, and freedo 
The women were passionate about their country and exuded relentless 
perseverance to reform institutions, legal frameworks, and even 
societal mindsets.  End Summary. 
 
Vital Voices Global Partnership in Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
2.  (U)  The two-day conference itinerary focused on techniques and 
channels for women\'s leadership and ethics in a democratic society, a 
strategies to combat trafficking in women and children. The 
facilitators were joined by Virginia Cantor, Senior Counsel for Ethic 
at the Department of Treasury.  They provided thought-provoking 
questions and moderated discussions of the Guatemalan women leaders. 
Their technique was to create a forum conducive to openly and candidl 
sharing stories, thoughts, beliefs, strategies, plans, and actions; 
their modus operandi was extremely effective, and led to stimulating 
and honest dialogue and a successful conference. 
 
The Vision of Guatemalan Women 
--------------------------------------------- 
3.  (U)  POL Intern attended three hours of the conference and was 
struck by the courage and tenacity of the Guatemalan women.  Among th 
40 participants there were indigenous and ladino women, educators, 
lawyers, health workers, political staffers, journalists, 
veterinarians, and business, government, and nonprofit leaders.  They 
were from cities and rural areas with different upbringings, 
educational backgrounds, experiences, and opportunities.  They shared 
the same characteristics of leadership; they were articulate and spok 
with clarity and authority.  They shared the same vision for Guatemal 
and were willing to dedicate their lives in order to realize this 
dream. 
 
4.  (U)  In their discussion of ethics and corruption they touched up 
sexual harassment by labor inspectors in the factories, bribery, misu 
of government funds at the local and federal levels, wasting of time, 
depriving people of education as a tactic to concentrate power, and 
lack of access to power.  One of the most poignant quotes aptly 
summarizing the thoughts and desires of the women present:  \"We need 
prioritize collective interests over personal interests.  We need to 
reconstruct the social fabric that has been so fragmented.  New 
generations need to be taught these principles.  Development is 
integral for all people, not only a few.  We must become agents for 
change because the country demands it.  This is for our children.  We 
need to promote the rights of human beings to live different lives.\" 
Another woman stated, \"I hope when we leave here we have strategies.\" 
 
Future Action 
------------- 
5.  (U)  As a result of the conference, the women formed four 
commissions which will work to develop public relations and gain 
financial support.  The commissions will meet to review the proposed 
political agenda for the ongoing electoral process.  They plan to set 
an agenda that will become the basis for their joint efforts towards 
more democratic and prosperous Guatemala.  Coalition members have 
contacted other groups and individuals to build their alliance for wh 
they hope will be a national women\'s movement. 
 
Comments 
------------ 
6. (U) The Guatemalan women who convened for this conference possesse 
the passion and intellect necessary to promote economic development a 
democratic reform in their country.  They demonstrated the capacity t 
construct abstract theories and principles, strategize and plan, and 
translate their blueprints into action.  These women exhibited great 
promise as current and future leaders in Guatemala. The conference 
mobilized, strengthened, and equipped these women for the challenge 
ahead. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"10171","8/19/2003 15:42","03GUATEMALA2108","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","02GUATEMALA2682|03GUATEMALA605|03STATE193266","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOL FOR ILAB:TINA FAULKNER 
DEPT FOR DRL/IL:MARINDA HARPOLE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EIND, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI, GT, USAID 
SUBJECT: CHILD LABOR UPDATE: GUATEMALA 
 
REF: A. STATE 193266 
     B. 02 GUATEMALA 2682 
     C. GUATEMALA 605 
 
1.  Summary:  In response to Ref A, this cable provides 
update information to supplement Refs B (last year\'s Child 
Labor report, which otherwise remains valid) and C (Guatemala 
Anti-Trafficking in Persons Report).  Significant child labor 
developments over the past year include publication of a new 
authoritative report in March on child labor produced by the 
ILO, UNICEF and the World Bank, entitled \"Understanding 
Children\'s Work in Guatemala;\" the entry into effect of ILO 
Convention 182 on October 11, 2002; the installation of a 
National Commission for the Elimination of Child Labor on 
October 29, 2002; the introduction of Labor Code reforms to 
Congress by the Executive on May 5 (where they remain 
pending), to bring domestic legislation in line with ILO 
commitments; and Congressional approval of a new Children\'s 
Code in June.  While many of these developments are 
encouraging, the magnitude of the child labor problem in 
Guatemala continues to worsen.  End Summary. 
 
Major Findings of New Child Labor Report 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2.  The ILO/UNICEF/World Bank report was prepared in 
cooperation with the Government and National Statistical 
Institute, and is based on a national living conditions 
survey conducted in 2000 involving a stratified sample of 
7,276 households and a total of 38,000 persons.  Notable 
results include: 
 
-- \"The prevalence of children in the workforce appears to be 
rising in Guatemala.\"  The latest national employment survey, 
in 2002, estimated 23% of children were involved in work, up 
from 20% in 2000, 14% in 1998-99, and 8% estimated in 1994. 
Note: each of these estimates came from difference sources 
and may not reflect the same methodology. 
 
-- 507,000 children aged 7-14 years, (20% of this age group) 
are engaged in work. 
 
-- Children,s work is mainly a rural phenomenon.  Rural 
children make up three-fourths of total child workers and are 
twice as likely as urban children to work. 
 
--Around 300,000 children aged 7-14 (12% of this age group) 
perform household chores for at least four hours per day. 
(The proportion of 7-14 year old girls performing these 
chores is triple that for boys.) 
 
-- Most working children (two-thirds) are found in the 
agricultural sector and work for their families without wages. 
 
-- Children,s work involves very long hours (average: 47 
hours per week). 
 
--  Children can face hazardous conditions in many sectors, 
including domestic service in private homes, firecracker 
production, agricultural work, mining and quarrying, and 
garbage picking. 
 
-- \"Unconditional Worst Forms\" of Child Labor in Guatemala 
include child prostitution and child pornography.  Though the 
extent of child trafficking is not known, Guatemala is both a 
source for and destination of trafficked children.  The 
government indicates that the number of street children has 
increased in recent years (est. 3,500-8,000). 
 
-- Work interferes with children,s education. 
 
-- Determinants of children,s work include gender, 
ethnicity, poverty, mother\'s educational status, household 
composition, exposure to collective and individual crises, 
and lack of health insurance. 
 
-- The report suggests the following strategies to combat 
child labor in Guatemala:  reduce household vulnerability; 
increase access to and quality of education; improve access 
to basic services; promote adult literacy; in rural areas, 
increase school enrollment of child agricultural workers and 
remove children from the most hazardous forms of work; in 
urban areas, remove children from urban workplaces, 
especially girls working as domestic servants, and increase 
the ability of households to invest in their children,s 
education; fill the information gap on the worst forms of 
child labor and strengthen grassroots organizations to better 
reach street children. 
 
-- Finally, the report recommends bringing national 
legislation into conformity with international child labor 
norms and strengthening the Government\'s ability to enforce 
and monitor this legislation. 
 
ILO 182 Takes Effect: National Commission Created 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
3.  Twelve months after its ratification, ILO Convention 182 
on the Worst Forms of Child Labor went into effect.  On 
October 29, President Portillo inaugurated the new National 
Commission for the Elimination of Child Labor, presided over 
by the Vice President, and including various ministries and 
government institutions, and representatives of the ILO, 
UNICEF, Save the Children Norway, and German Technical 
Cooperation (GTZ).  The Commission\'s objective is to support 
the implementation of the National Plan to Eliminate Child 
Labor (under age 14) and Protect Adolescent Workers (ages 
14-17).  The Commission and its secretariat working group, 
which meets weekly, has been active since its creation, 
developing an operation plan to implement the National Plan. 
It proposed a funding level of $769,000 for implementation of 
the Plan in the 2004 national budget. 
 
GOG Proposes New Labor Code Reforms 
----------------------------------- 
 
4.  On May 5, the Executive submitted a package of five 
reforms to the Labor Code, including one which proposes to 
prohibit paid labor under age 14 (currently the Labor 
Ministry can issue permits for workers under age 14; the 
Ministry reported issuing 1,012 such permits in 2001, the 
latest year for which statistics are available).  The reform, 
pending before Congress, also proposes applying limited work 
hours and protections currently in place for workers under 14 
to adolescent workers (ages 14-17); holds employers 
responsible for any violations of age requirements, including 
fines not less than ten times the year in which the child 
worker was born; and prohibits all dangerous and worst forms 
of labor for workers under age 18, as defined under ILO 
Convention 182.  The ILO has submitted comments and suggested 
revisions to the draft bill to the Minister of Labor. 
 
Children\'s Code Passed 
---------------------- 
 
5.  On June 4, Congress approved the Law for Integrated 
Protection of Children and Adolescents, which took effect in 
July.  The new law modified an earlier version passed in 
1999, which proved controversial and therefore never took 
effect.  The current law codifies a long list of individual 
rights enjoyed by children, including the right to protection 
against trafficking in children and adolescents, against 
economic exploitation, against sexual exploitation and abuse; 
and creates a National Commission on Children and 
Adolescents. 
WHARTON 
"
"10461","9/2/2003 21:49","03GUATEMALA2253","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE249219","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002253 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2013 
TAGS: MARR, PARM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SUPPORTS CENTRAL AMERICAN ARMS INITIATIVE 
 
REF: STATE 249219 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall, for reason 1.5 (a), (b) and (d) 
 
(C) On August 29, the Embassy relayed to the MFA reftel 
talking points regarding the September 3-4 CentAm 
Presidential Summit in Belize.  The MFA informed us that the 
GOG supports the Nicaraguan proposal, which reinforces the 
provisions of the 1995 Democratic Security Treaty of Central 
America.  The GOG sent its multilateral negotiating team to 
Belize on September 2 to participate in preliminary talks, 
and Foreign Minister Gutierrez and President Portillo are 
scheduled to depart for Belize on the afternoon of September 
3.  There was some doubt on August 29 whether the GOG would 
participate in the summit, following its decision to reject 
the findings of the OAS facilitators.  However, the MFA 
informed us on September 2 that President Portillo will 
participate in the summit. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10462","9/2/2003 21:55","03GUATEMALA2254","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 002254 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC:CHARLOTTE ROE, AND DRL/IL:ARLEN 
WILSON, AND G/TIP FOR GREG HOLLIDAY 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB:ROBERT WHOLEY, JANE RICHARDS, 
AND JORGE PEREZ LOPEZ 
USTR FOR VIONDETTE LOPEZ AND BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PGOV, PHUM, KCRM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LABOR UPDATE #5-2003 
 
 
This message contains an action request for USDOL/ILAB--see 
para 4. 
 
1.  (SBU) The following is an update of significant recent 
developments in the labor sector.  Topics include: 
 
-- Minister of Labor\'s Priorities for Levine Bilateral in 
Brazil (para 2) 
 
-- Minister of Labor Wants Changes to USAID Labor Regional 
Project (PROALCA II) (4) 
 
-- Ambassador Again Raises Rigoberto Duenas Case with AG (3) 
 
-- Combating Blacklisting - MOL Information Request (5) 
 
-- Talking CAFTA - Prof. Feinberg Sparks GOG Interest (6) 
 
-- GOG Formalizes Labor Working Group (7) 
 
-- More Maquilas on GOG \"Hit List\" for Labor Violations (8) 
 
-- Special Prosecutor Promises Results, Wants Resources (9) 
 
-- GOG Proposes 100% Increase to Labor Ministry Budget (10) 
 
-- Canadians Launch Temporary Worker Program (11) 
 
-- TIP: Warrant Against Immigration Union Leader for 
Corruption 
 
End Summary. 
 
Brazil Bilateral 
---------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Labor Minister Victor Moreira confirmed to LabAtt 
on August 27 that he intends to attend the OAS Labor 
Ministers Meeting in Salvador, Brazil, October 24-26.  He 
gave LabAtt a copy of a declaration of Central American labor 
ministers, meeting in Managua on August 14-15, which, inter 
alia, thanks USDOL for its collaboration with the region 
through the ILO-RELACENTRO (labor relations), ILO-IPEC (child 
labor), and CERSSO (occupational safety and health) projects; 
and to USAID for its regional support through the PROALCA II 
project.  The declaration also: 
 
-- takes note of the importance of labor migration, the 
importance of job creation in free trade zones, and the 
importance of technical cooperation to strengthen 
institutional capacity of labor ministries throughout the 
region; 
 
-- approves the creation of a Regional Foundation of Support 
to Occupational Health and Safety Programs (FUNDAPROSSO); 
 
-- congratulates Minister Moreira for proposing that the 
Council of Labor Ministers create a joint webpage; 
 
-- thanks Mexican Labor Minister Abascal for attending the 
Managua meeting and sharing his country\'s experiences under 
NAFTA; 
 
-- proposes Mexico as President Pro-tempore of the 
Inter-American Labor Ministers Conference in 2005; 
 
-- notes that the next meeting of the Council of CA Labor 
Ministers will take place in Guatemala in October; and, 
 
-- pledges support for the upcoming Plan of Action of the 
13th Inter-American Labor Ministers Conference in Salvador de 
Bahia. 
 
Moreira said he would be pleased to participate in a 
bilateral meeting between U.S. DUS Arnold Levine and Central 
American Labor Ministers.  He suggested the U.S. contact the 
Honduran Minister, currently serving as President of the 
Central American Labor Ministers, to confirm such a meeting. 
Moreira said he would like to discuss the following issues 
with DUS Levine: 
 
A)  Migration:  Rights of Guatemala migrant workers in the 
U.S., including the right to carry a GOG-issued 
identification card, to facilitate access to lower 
transaction costs for remittances sent to Guatemala (from 22% 
to 13%).  Moreira said Guatemalan consulates have the 
facilities to issue cards, but most migrants are not aware of 
this service.  A statement from the USG on this issue, 
similar to the Chao-Abascal declaration of November 2002, and 
committing to mutual respect for the full labor protections 
of migrants, would be most welcome, he said. 
 
B)  CAFTA:  The labor obligations of the CAFTA agreement 
proposed by the U.S. imply significant new efforts by the 
GOG, and corresponding demands for resources.  To expand its 
services and coverage, the Labor Ministry will require new 
resources.  Among the Minister\'s priorities are programs to 
protect indigenous worker rights (by adding 25 new 
professionals, including one in every province), child labor, 
and women workers.  The GOG is already committed to more than 
double the Ministry\'s budget in 2004 to accomplish these new 
goals. 
 
C)  Cooperation (Assistance):  In addition to the new demands 
on labor ministries resulting from CAFTA, technical 
assistance is needed to help the GOG set policies to generate 
employment.  Worker training programs need to be re-focused 
and expanded.  Current job training is focused on the formal 
sector, which comprises only 25% of Guatemalan jobs. 
 
Labor Minster Comments on PROALCA II 
------------------------------------ 
 
3. (SBU) Despite the positive mention in the Managua 
declaration, Moreira expressed concerns about the PROALCA II 
labor capacity building program sponsored by USAID.  The 
consensus among the Central American labor ministers, he 
said, was that PROALCA II labor activities scheduled for the 
remainder of the year should be more focused on 
capacity-building more closely linked to the CAFTA 
negotiation.  (AID Comment:  This would require greater 
access by AID to the results of CAFTA labor negotiations. 
End Comment.) 
 
Ambassador Raises Imprisonment of Labor Leader with AG 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
4.  (SBU) At the request of Jose Pinzon, Secretary General of 
the Confederation of Guatemalan Workers (CGTG), the 
Ambassador spoke with Attorney General Carlos de Leon Argueta 
on August 14 to express concern that the charges related to 
the Social Security Institute corruption scandal against 
labor leader Rigoberto Duenas be promptly investigated and to 
request that the Attorney General meet with labor leaders to 
discuss the case.  De Leon agreed to do so.  As of September 
2, the meeting had not taken place.  The next hearing for 
Duenas will be on September 8. 
 
Combating Blacklisting - MOL Information Request 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
5.  (SBU) LabAtt expressed concern to Minister Moreira and 
Vice Minister of Labor Antonio Monzon on August 27 that 
blacklisting of workers fired for unionization activity is 
common practice in Guatemala, citing the DYMEL case, where 
members of the union executive committee continue to suffer 
discrimination in hiring.  (Note:  ex-DYMEL union leaders 
told LabAtt on August 26 that they had been hired by 
contractors for a Duke Energy project, but fired several days 
later after their link to the DYMEL labor conflict was noted 
by the employer.  LabAtt raised this with visiting Duke 
Energy public relations official on August 27, who asked for 
details on the corporate entity which executed the hiring and 
promised to follow-up on allegations.  End Note.)  Both the 
Minister and Vice Minister concurred that anti-union 
discrimination is prevalent, and both cited personal 
examples.  LabAtt urged them to explore ways to prosecute 
hiring discrimination against ex-union members, women and the 
indigenous.  Vice Minister Monzon asked how the USG confronts 
the issue of blacklisting.  LabAtt promised to seek 
information. 
 
Action Request for USDOL/ILAB:  Please provide any 
information on how the US prevents and combats blacklisting 
of workers involved in labor disputes. 
 
Prof. Richard Feinberg Discusses CAFTA Labor Issues with GOG 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Labor Minister Moreira and Economy Minister 
Patricia Ramirez told visiting Prof. Richard Feinberg, LabAtt 
and AID Trade Capacity Director Jim Stein on August 21 that 
the GOG was considering proposing to regional counterparts 
meeting in El Salvador August 26 that CAFTA members commit to 
a series of medium-term quantifiable and time-bound 
indicators derived from the eight fundamental ILO conventions 
(e.g. to halve child labor in 5-10 years, etc.).  Prof. 
Feinberg, noting he does not represent the USG, praised the 
ministers\' plan but warned that to be credible in the U.S., 
such commitments must be accompanied by implementation plans 
and resources.  The USG and other international organizations 
might possibly support implementation, including the IADB and 
World Bank, he said.  Feinberg, visiting the region under 
AID\'s trade capacity building program, encouraged the GOG to 
view CAFTA talks as an opportunity to commit to medium-term 
labor enforcement capacity building in the region, with US 
and international donor support.  He also promoted private 
sector monitoring efforts and praised the GOG for its efforts 
to enforce labor laws in the maquila sector in collaboration 
with the Fair Labor Association (in the Choi Shin case). 
 
GOG Formalizes Labor Working Group, Almost 
------------------------------------------ 
 
7.  (U) The GOG issued a decree on August 13 formally 
establishing a \"Multi-institutional Working Commission for 
Labor Relations in Guatemala,\" chaired by the Labor Minister 
and comprised of the Ministers of Economy and Foreign 
Relations, the President of the Supreme Court, President of 
Congress, the Attorney General, the Solicitor General, the 
head of the tax authority, and the general manager of the 
Social Security Institute (IGSS).  The group is charged with 
meeting at least once every four months as long as necessary 
to \"guarantee adequate treatment of labor relations during 
the negotiation and implementation of free trade agreements, 
that include labor clauses requiring labor cooperation, 
respect and effective enforcement of labor rights.\"  The 
Commission\'s decree also forms a permanent subcommission on 
Work in the Export and Maquila Sector, to enforce labor 
conditions of export privileges and create a unified registry 
of maquilas.  The decree will take effect upon publication in 
the Central American daily, the Government newspaper.  (To 
date it has not been published.) 
 
More Maquilas on GOG \"Hit List\" for Labor Violations 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Labor Minister Moreira gave LabAtt a copy of a 
letter he sent to Economy Minister Ramirez, dated August 21, 
informing her of 69 labor violations at 17 maquilas, listed 
in priority order, and requesting the initiation of 
proceedings to withdraw tax privileges if the violations are 
not remedied in a period of 30 days.  The violations include 
a wide range of complaints, including non-payment of required 
benefits, overtime, and severance; registration with the 
Social Security Institute; denial of breast-feeding breaks; 
illegal suspension and firings; etc.  The letter also 
mentions 43 new violations at nine of these same plants, for 
which another report will be prepared.  Most of the factories 
are Korean-owned.  This initiative to enforce labor laws in 
the for-export maquila sector follows the GOG\'s successful 
effort to compel the Choi Shin/Cimatextiles company to 
rectify pending violations and negotiate a collective 
bargaining agreement with its unions.  Vice Minister Monzon 
said that the companies to be sanctioned will be notified 
during the week of August 24. 
 
Special Prosecutor Promises Results, Wants Resources 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
9.  (SBU) LabAtt met with Special Prosecutor for Crimes 
Against Unionists and Journalists, Antonio Cortez Sis, on 
August 26, to review progress in investigations of these 
cases, and to express concern about the apparent lack of 
results.  Cortez responded defensively to public criticism 
from labor unions (CGTG) about lack of progress in the 
investigation of the murder of Oswaldo Monzon Lima, head of a 
trucking union, on June 22, 2000.  Cortez blamed Monzon 
Lima\'s son for not providing useful information to help 
charge Mario Ortiz Barranco, the owner of the trucking 
company, whom he suspects as the \"intellectual author\" of the 
crime.  However, he said, he will meet with a witness on 
August 30 who claims to have heard Ortiz threaten the life of 
Monzon Lima.  Cortez Sis said he would ask a judge to charge 
Ortiz with the crime if the witness\' testimony is sufficient. 
 Meanwhile, Ortiz has filed a legal complaint of defamation 
against CGTG leader Jose Pinzon for publicly accusing him of 
being involved in the Monzon Lima murder.  Cortez Sis cited 
severe resource constraints hampering his office, comprised 
of 8 officials and staff, two working computers, and one 
dedicated vehicle.  His current caseload is 55 labor cases 
and 45 involving journalists.  LabAtt acknowledged Cortez 
Sis\' letter to the Ambassador requesting material support, 
emphasizing the need for concrete progress in priority cases 
(such as the Monzon Lima murder).  (Comment:  We will give 
Cortez the benefit of the doubt for another week, but are 
disappointed by his results to date.  End Comment.) 
 
GOG Proposes 100% Increase to Labor Ministry Budget 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
10.  (U) Labor Minister Moreira provided LabAtt with a copy 
of a letter dated August 22, 2003 from Finance Minister 
Eduardo Weymann pledging to set the Labor Ministry\'s 2004 
budget at 125 million quetzals (approx. $16 million). 
(Comment: If implemented by the next government, this would 
more than double the 2003 Labor Ministry budget.  End 
Comment.) 
 
Canadians Launch Guatemalan Guest Worker Program 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
11.  (U) The Canadian Embassy announced a new legal migrant 
worker program for 167 Guatemalan workers (136 men and 31 
women) to harvest fruit in Quebec for four months.  (Comment: 
 We will monitor this program\'s results and consider its 
implications for the U.S. H2B visa program.  End Comment.) 
 
Warrant Issued For Arrest of Immigration Union Leader 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Press reported on June 19 that a judge in Peten 
had issued an arrest warrant against Rodolfo Quinonez, the 
General Secretary of the Immigration Workers Union, for 
\"passive co-action and illegal transit of persons.\"  Unnamed 
Immigration Directorate sources accuse Quinonez of corruption 
and acting as a leader of a band of alien-smuggling 
\"coyotes.\"  Earlier in June, Zoila Ochaeta, the Immigration 
delegate in Peten, was detained by authorities under similar 
charges.  Questioned in January by journalists, Quinonez 
accused the Director of Immigration of anti-union repression 
after the union denounced the Director\'s involvement in 
smuggling Asians.  Comment:  The union and Director have 
traded counter-charges of corruption over the past two years, 
and union complaints were considered by the ILO.  Both sets 
of corruption charges appear plausible to us.  End Comment. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10463","9/2/2003 22:29","03GUATEMALA2255","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2013 
TAGS: PINR, PGOV, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: RIOS SOSA SUDDENLY RESIGNS 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (U) General Enrique Rios Sosa, Army Chief of Staff and son 
of Presidential Candidate Efrain Rios Montt, retired without 
warning or explanation from the Guatemalan military on 
Monday, September 1.  He has been replaced by Deputy Chief of 
Staff General Fredy Raul Ramirez Giron.  Brigadier General 
Ramirez is widely respected within the officer corps and, 
reportedly, would have been Chief of Staff much sooner except 
for the political connections of Rios Sosa.  Embassy name 
checks reveal no derogatory information on Ramirez. 
 
2. (C) Several EmbOffs spoke at length with Rios Sosa during 
a reception on August 28.  At that time, Rios Sosa gave no 
indication he was considering retirement.  The lack of an 
official explanation for the sudden and quiet departure has 
fueled the rumor mill, with sympathizers portraying Rios 
Sosa\'s decision as designed to distance the military from the 
elections for the good of the institution.  Others report 
that the FRG needed to deny the opposition a chance to cry 
foul if Rios Montt wins.  Still others speculate that the 
steady drumbeat of corruption allegations against Rios Sosa 
reached the point that Rios Montt concluded his son had 
become a liability and allowed his removal from office.  MOD 
Moran told the DATT that he had suggested to President 
Portillo that he remove Rios Sosa due to Rios Sosa\'s alleged 
involvement in the multi-million dollar military pension fund 
scandal and press reports of military involvement in violent 
demonstrations in support of Rios Montt on July 24-25. 
 
3. (C) Comment: Rios Sosa\'s departure was welcomed by much of 
the anti-government media.  His role as Army Chief of Staff 
during this heated electoral campaign was seen by many as 
supporting his father\'s controversial presidential candidacy. 
 His departure will lower anxieties over possible military 
involvement in support of the FRG.  We will continue to 
report on Rios Sosa\'s departure as more information becomes 
available. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10514","9/4/2003 18:16","03GUATEMALA2277","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA2133","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

041816Z Sep 03

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, KTIA, MOPS, PHSA, GT, WEWWT 
SUBJECT: DECREE ENACTING COUNTERNARCOTICS MARITIME 
AGREEMENT SIGNED BY PRESIDENT 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2133 
 
The text of Congressional Decree 39-2003, which approves the 
bilateral counternarcotics maritime agreement (reftel) was 
published in Guatemala\'s official gazette on September 4. 
President Portillo signed the decree on September 1. 
Following the President\'s signature, official publication was 
the final step in the formal approval process. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10516","9/4/2003 18:17","03GUATEMALA2278","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA2132","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, PREL, MASS, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT SIGNS MINI-SOFA DECREE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2132 
 
The text of Congressional Decree 40-2003 (reftel), which 
authorizes the New Horizons 2004 Humanitarian Joint and Civic 
Assistance exercise and contains all of the terms and 
protections we seek in a long-term SOFA, was signed into law 
by President Portillo on September 1, 2003.  The decree was 
published in Guatemala\'s official gazette on September 4, 
2003.  With these steps the approval process is complete. 
The agreement will enter into force upon notification from 
the Foreign Ministry that all internal legal requirements for 
approval have been met. The terms of the agreement will only 
apply during March - June 2004 to personnel participating in 
the New Horizons exercise. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10521","9/4/2003 22:33","03GUATEMALA2288","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 GUATEMALA 002288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, KDEM, ASEC, PINR, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: VIOLENT CRIME: GROWING THREAT TO GUATEMALAN 
DEMOCRACY 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Guatemalans have become numbed by the daily 
press reports of violent crime, and an increasing number 
identify the lack of public security as the nation\'s number 
one problem.  The emergence of gangs (\"maras\") has taken the 
violence even to the remote rural areas of the country, and 
the under-funded, ineffective and corrupt justice system has 
not provided a response.  The growth of violent crime in 
recent years is undermining Guatemalans\' faith in democracy 
and influencing them to vote for a \"strong hand\" in the 
upcoming elections.  Recent polls show that voters\' faith 
that former General Rios Montt and his FRG could deliver 
security has greatly declined as a result of the FRG 
government\'s poor performance on crime during these past 
three years in office.  According to the latest polls, GANA 
candidate Oscar Berger has taken the lead in public 
perception of being able to fight crime -- although he has 
not defined his platform.  The Portillo Government\'s 
half-hearted attempts to improve public security by putting 
the military on the beat and by introducing anti-gang 
legislation will do little to change the crime situation 
between now and the January 2004 assumption of power by the 
new government.  But there is widespread hope that a new 
government will create jobs, redirect budget resources from 
the military to law enforcement and administration of 
justice, and adequately fund social programs aimed at the 
root causes of crime.  This cable is divided into three 
parts: snapshots of the daily reality with our best 
statistics, the staggering weakness of the justice system, 
and implications for democracy. End summary. 
 
The Daily Reality 
----------------- 
 
2.  (U) As a bus pulls away from its latest stop, a man in 
front stands up and randomly shoots a fellow passenger dead, 
terrifying the other passengers.  A man in the back of the 
bus announces that all passengers are to hand over their 
valuables, and then moves to the front, under the watchful 
eye of his partner, collecting cash, jewelry and cell phones 
from each passenger as he goes.  Upon reaching the front of 
the bus, the driver is ordered to stop and the men disappear. 
 In a variation on this theme, the bus is boarded by a group 
of youths who threaten all on board with an array of weapons 
that can range from grenades or handguns to assault rifles to 
home-made shotguns.  They announce that they are collecting 
\"war taxes\" or \"circulation taxes\" depending on which gang 
they belong to, and pass a hat.  If the passengers are lucky 
their cell phones, watches, and wallets will satisfy the gang 
members.  If the passengers are unlucky, these robbers are 
invading the \"turf\" of a rival gang, resulting in a 
shoot-out, with the passengers caught in the crossfire. 
Every week there are between two and three violent assaults 
reported on-board busses, according to police reports.  Bus 
owners, however, report that assaults and shake-downs of bus 
passengers and drivers by gang members average 60 a day in 
Guatemala City. 
 
3.  (U) As PolOff was purchasing fruit in the highland 
village of Tecpan, two young men with shaved heads and 
numerous tattoos strolled through the market openly stealing 
merchandise.  One of them laughingly kicked over a table 
laden with bread, ruining all of it.  No one said a word. 
Tecpan has virtually no police presence (8 percent of 
Guatemala\'s 330 municipalities have no police).  Tecpan 
residents say police are useless anyway against the criminal 
gangs that now prey on even the smallest towns.  Such is the 
frustration with the justice system that police have even 
been chased out of some towns and had their stations sacked 
when they tried to prevent mobs from taking the law into 
their own hands.  A mob in Concepcion Tutuapa recently doused 
two suspected pickpockets with gasoline and burned them 
alive.  When a police officer asked the mob to reconsider, he 
too was doused in gasoline but allowed to flee.  Back in 
Tecpan, PolOff\'s vendor shrugged off her losses saying \"we 
know who the gang members are and where they sleep; we\'re 
just waiting for a chance to hang them.\"  Mobs in rural 
Guatemala lynched 104 people last year, about forty percent 
of them for suspected theft. 
 
4.  (U) It is impossible to pick up a Guatemalan newspaper 
without reading about someone being gunned down in traffic, 
killed for their cellphone, or caught in a drive-by-shooting; 
the list is endless.  Common crime has become so widespread 
that the recent murders, in public, under separate but 
suspicious circumstances, of high-profile individuals such as 
Judge Hector Rodriguez, former Congressmen Diego Velasco and 
Jose Lobo Dubon, and opposition party leader Jorge Alberto 
Rosal caused hardly a ripple, much less sustained public 
demands for investigation.  In fact, the public has become so 
inured to daily doses of violent crime that when organized 
crime figures wish to send a message, they must go to great 
lengths--such as the October, 2002 incident in broad daylight 
at a major intersection in one of the city\'s better zones, 
where gangsters took the time to pump over 250 bullets into 
their victim\'s car--in order to distinguish their actions 
from common crime. 
 
Police Statistics - A Crime Wave by the Numbers 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
--        murders (total) murdered women  car thefts 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2000            2,905          n/a          7,072 
2001            3,210          222          7,784 
2002            3,631          244          8,650 
2003 (Jan-Jun)  2,930          158          4,891 
 
5.  (U) According to police estimates, there were 95 deadly 
assaults on-board busses in Guatemala City in 2002.  Between 
10 - 15 cars were stolen each day in the metro area. 
Murder rates have skyrocketed in the past three years, 
reaching an average of 10 per day in 2002.  The murder rate 
continues to rise in 2003, averaging 16 per day in the first 
half of 2003.  This murder rate approaches 45 per 100,000 
inhabitants.  Nearly 43 percent of residents in the Guatemala 
City metro area report being victims of a crime during the 
past 12 months, and 67 percent reported (to pollsters, not 
the distrusted police) observing activity in their 
neighborhoods they believed to be associated with narcotics. 
The same survey indicated that only one in five non-violent 
crimes is reported.  For the first time since 1997, 
Guatemalans fear crime more than losing their jobs, according 
to a July survey. 
 
6.  (U) There has been an alarming rise in the murder of 
young women in 2003.  A spate of double murders of young 
women over the last six weeks has attracted substantial media 
attention.  Many of the cases of murdered young women have 
been attributed to growing gang activity, while others are 
related to sexual crimes and narcotics trafficking. 
Investigations of these crimes by the police have not been 
effective.  There has also been an increase in kidnappings, 
especially in so-called \"express kidnappings.\"  In the first 
six months of 2003, the police reported 80 kidnappings in the 
Guatemala City metropolitan area, though many (if not most) 
kidnappings are never reported to the police.  Madres 
Angustiadas, an NGO tracking crimes against women and 
children, has recorded 240 cases of kidnapping to date for 
2003.  Most of the victims are middle class women or 
children, who are kidnapped in the city\'s better zones and 
exchanged a few hours later for relatively small ransoms, 
typically 2,000 to 5,000 dollars. 
 
7.  (SBU) Gangs (\"maras\") are a growing source of crime not 
only in Guatemala City, but even in the most remote corners 
of rural Guatemala.  The growth of gangs has been abetted by 
the lack of jobs, the breakdown of the traditional family 
(especially in indigenous areas), the return of 
Guatemalan-born gang members deported as criminal aliens from 
the U.S., a growing narcotics consumption problem in 
Guatemala, and by the ineffective rule of law.  The 
government has proposed legislation to curb gang membership 
(similar to laws being considered in other neighboring 
countries), but the law raises serious human rights concerns, 
and does nothing to address the root causes of gang 
membership.  Furthermore, recent attempts to round up gang 
members en masse have resulted in gruesome prison riots, as 
rival gangs have slaughtered each other live on TV to the 
horror of most Guatemalans. 
 
Staggering Weakness in the Justice System 
----------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Guatemala\'s judiciary has never been very effective 
in prosecuting crime and, despite procedural improvements 
during recent years (funded in part by us), popular faith in 
obtaining justice from the courts is not high.  Low salaries, 
poor training, and weak disciplinary procedures, especially 
in the police, provide fertile ground for corruption, which 
feeds public distrust in all law enforcement officials and 
the rule of law more generally.  Lack of continuity in law 
enforcement leadership (under the Portillo Administration 
there have been 4 Interior Ministers, 9 Police Directors, and 
11 heads of the special narcotics police) limits 
institutional development, contributes to infighting for 
scarce resources and reinforces counter-productive 
institutional rivalry. 
 
9.  (SBU) The Police.  The police are overwhelmed, 
undereducated and poorly paid.  The Peace Accords stipulated 
that the ranks of the police should grow to a minimum of 
20,000 officers, a level that was reached in 2000.  Since 
then budgets have been systematically reduced and in some 
cases funds budgeted for the police were transferred to the 
military (as then-Minister of Interior, retired General 
Arevalo Lacs transferred Q20 million from the Ministry of 
Government\'s budget to the EMP, or Presidential Military 
Staff).  In 2002, the Police Academy was only allocated a 
budget of 22 million quetzales (approximately $2.8 million), 
while the Military Academy was allocated Q100 million 
(approximately $13 million).  According to press reports, 
none of the 20,000 agents trained since 1997 have had 
refresher training, and the academy recently cut new recruit 
training time from 11 to 6 months in an effort to get more 
police officers on the streets. 
 
10. (SBU) Congress approved a police budget of Q1,324 million 
for 2003 ($200 million), eighty percent of which is needed 
for salaries alone.  As a result, the police lack fuel, 
radios, and spare parts for patrol cars (40 percent are 
inoperable).  In the patrol cars that do operate, police are 
rationed to 3.5 gallons of gas per day - down from 5 gallons 
per day last year.  Police stations often have no phones or 
electricity because bills go unpaid.  The ratio of police to 
residents in developed countries is about 4 officers for 
every 1,000 residents.  Guatemala has roughly one officer for 
every 2,200 residents.  Few police officers are from 
indigenous communities or speak indigenous languages. 
Another challenge, according to the current PNC Director, is 
that only one fourth of the on-duty police force is actually 
patrolling at any given time, as the rest are: guarding 
people under house arrest, transferring prisoners to and from 
courts, checking weapons permits held by the army of private 
security guards (who outnumber the police 3 to 1), providing 
protection to a growing list of threatened persons, or 
discharging administrative functions. 
 
11.  (SBU) The Prosecutors.  The Public Prosecutors are 
similarly not able to keep up with the growth of violent 
crime.  With offices in only ten percent of Guatemalan 
municipalities, prosecutors can take days to reach a crime 
scene.  According to a comprehensive study carried out by 
USAID in 1999, prosecutors in Guatemala City received around 
90,000 criminal complaints that year.  Reception clerks, left 
to their own devices without official criteria, refused to 
accept about one third of these cases, believing them to be 
without merit.  About half of the remaining cases were 
dropped because the complaintant failed to clearly identify 
the alleged guilty party.  The remaining cases were divided 
among 35 prosecutor teams.  Only about 1,100 of these cases 
resulted in actual court filings.  Of the 90,000 criminal 
complaints studied, less than one percent resulted in a 
successful prosecution. 
 
12. (SBU) A more recent three month analysis of the 
prosecutor\'s office reputed to be the best in Guatemala City 
showed that 100 percent of victims and witnesses recanted 
their testimony, refused to cooperate, or otherwise withdrew 
their complaint during the study period.  Investigators 
report that victims are intimidated, but crime victims often 
say what little faith they had in their justice system was 
crushed by contact with it.  Even assuming a wide margin of 
error in the studies and variations among prosecutors\' 
offices, the results support Guatemalan\'s perceptions that 
the justice sector does not work well.  Research released in 
August by GAM, a civil society group, shows that 
investigations have been completed in only 3 percent of the 
over 12,500 murders that have taken place in Guatemala since 
Portillo assumed power in January 2000.  Guatemalan legal 
experts consulted by the Embassy estimate that about 10 
percent of criminal complaints make it to court. 
 
13.  (SBU) The Courts.  In a recent regional study of public 
faith in administration of justice in the hemisphere, only 
Peru ranked lower than Guatemala.  The court system as a 
whole suffers from the same lack of resources and endemic 
corruption that afflict the police and the public 
prosecutors.  The majority (60.9%) of prisoners in 
Guatemala\'s violent jails are being held in pre-trial 
confinement, and by the time their cases reach a judge, many 
have spent more time in detention than they would have served 
if convicted, according to a recent PNUD study.  Judges 
assigned to the interior provinces usually do not speak 
indigenous languages, rarely live in the communities they 
serve, and frequently misunderstand or disregard the cultural 
impact of their rulings.  However, there are bright spots. 
Courts rendered landmark convictions in the Mack and Gerrardi 
trials (overturned in the Mack case and under appeal in the 
Gerrardi case) and handed down 25-year sentences to 16 former 
narcotics police for extrajudicial killings in the Chocon 
incident.  NAS has had some success with High-Impact Courts 
and USAID\'s Justice Centers are supporting case tracking 
systems, indigenous translators, and greater use of oral 
procedures for pre-trial motions.  Additionally, USAID 
supports alternative dispute resolution mechanisms in 
communities largely outside the reach of the current justice 
system. 
 
14. (U) Another indication that courts are beginning to have 
some impact -- although hardly a bright spot -- is the rising 
number of threats and attacks against judges.  More than 60 
judges have received death threats in the first half of 2003. 
 Judge Hector Rodriguez Argueta was murdered in January and 
Judge Jaqueline Espana de Olivet narrowly escaped 
assassination in February when assailants put more than 20 
bullets through her windshield.  Judges are unable to 
purchase life insurance and have asked the government to 
establish a special police force to provide protection.  Of 
the more than 700 judges in Guatemala, 31 have opted to hire 
private security guards, according to press reports.  Not all 
the threats come from narcotics traffickers -- one community 
attempted to lynch its local magistrate when he levied only a 
small fine in a theft case.  Another judge was threatened 
with his life if he ruled against recent teacher strikes. 
 
Implications for Democracy 
-------------------------- 
 
15.  (SBU) The high levels of crime, especially violent 
crime, the growth of organized crime, and the corruption of 
public officials impose significant economic and social costs 
on Guatemala; they also directly undermine the legitimacy of 
democratic governance in the eyes of its citizens.  The 5th 
Democratic Indicators Monitoring System (DIMS) study 
(published bi-annually, most recently in April, 2002) 
documents the weakness of public support for democracy in 
Guatemala during the past five years in which crime has 
spiraled.  Respondents expressing satisfaction with the 
performance of democracy in Guatemala dropped from 40% in 
1997 to 25% in 2001 (note: in Costa Rica, 68% said they were 
satisfied with the performance of their democracy. End note). 
Forty-seven percent of Guatemalans said that the government 
needs \"a strong hand\" to bring order.  Guatemalans\' support 
for specific democratic institutions (courts, Congress, 
Electoral Tribunal, public offices and political parties) is 
also low and has fallen into negative territory for the first 
time since the DIMS studies began in Guatemalan in 1993. 
These results are confirmed by other public image polling in 
which the political parties, the government, and Congress all 
have very low ratings (less than 10% positive image) compared 
with the press (67% positive), the churches (82%) and 
volunteer firefighters (90%).  There was also a notable 
increase in the number of respondents who answered \"none\" to 
a question about which institutions are best placed to solve 
problems.  In 1999, 22% said the central government was best 
placed, in 2001 only 11% agreed. 
 
16.  (SBU) Although Guatemalans have become accustomed to 
high levels of crime, over time the corrosive effect of 
increasingly violent crime feeds popular frustration with 
democratic government that apparently fails to live up to its 
promise.  Guatemalans are increasingly cynical, yet a 
majority are still looking to the next government for a 
solution to their security problems, which now outrank 
economic problems.  An election poll taken in early August 
showed that 51 percent of respondents considered crime to be 
Guatemala\'s biggest national problem, followed by 
unemployment (31%).  The FRG was elected in 1999 in part on 
General Rios Montt\'s image as a strong-handed crime fighter, 
but continued deterioration of public security during the 
FRG\'s nearly four years in office has deprived the party, for 
the most part, of that banner in the current election.  A 
recent poll shows that 41% of voters believe that 
presidential candidate Oscar Berger would do the best job of 
controlling crime, while 21% believe Efrain Rios Montt would. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
17. (SBU) The Portillo Government\'s anemic, last-minute 
attempts to address the crime problem by putting the military 
on the streets in a crime control capacity and introducing 
anti-gang legislation are not expected to have much impact on 
growing violent crime rates in the months remaining in his 
presidency.  The leading candidates in the upcoming election, 
however, have identified and promised to address the three 
leading causes for the growth of crime -- the lack of jobs, 
an inadequately funded administration of justice system, and 
the lack of an effective social policy addressing the root 
causes of crime.  The Embassy will make cooperation with the 
new government in its broad strategy to combat crime one of 
our highest priorities. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10620","9/9/2003 19:34","03GUATEMALA2331","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2080","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/09/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, SNAR, ELAB, PHUM, ETRD, GT, BZ 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S SEPTEMBER 8TH MEETING WITH PRESIDENT 
PORTILLO 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2080 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR JOHN R. HAMILTON, EMBASSY GUATEMALA, REASON: 
1.5 (D). 
 
 1. (C) SUMMARY: President Portillo says he fired number two 
in the army General Rios Sosa (Rios Montt\'s son) for 
disobeying orders to use the military to restore public order 
during the FRG violent protests July 24 and for lending 
military resources to the FRG campaign.  He has Rios Montt\'s 
support to fix a flawed bill establishing the civilian entity 
(the SAAS) that will replace the presidential military 
security service (EMP).  He thinks Rios Montt is doing far 
better than (opposition-funded) polls show, but that he will 
lose to current front-runner Oscar Berger in a second round. 
Contrary to expectations, Portillo did not mention any 
interest in visiting Washington. End summary 
 
Background: 
---------- 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador had phoned President Portillo September 
2 to congratulate him for removing General Rios Sosa from the 
number two position in the Army.  To the Ambassador\'s comment 
that it must have been a difficult decision, Portillo said it 
was, indeed, and offered to provide details in a private 
conversation.  Owing to the President\'s travel and a bad cold 
he developed in Belize September 4, the follow-on meeting did 
not take place until September 8th, at the President\'s home. 
 
Firing of Rios Sosa: 
------------------- 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador started with the Rios Sosa topic, 
asking what had prompted the decision and its timing. 
Portillo said he had been determined to fire Rios Sosa after 
he disobeyed orders to use the military to restore public 
order during the FRG violent protests July 24-25.  \"Rios Sosa 
was confused as to whom he works for,\" Portillo said; 
\"instead of me, he thought his commander in chief was his 
sister\" (Second Vice President of the Congress Zury Rios, 
reportedly -- but not confirmed as -- the brains behind the 
FRG protests).  Portillo said General Rios Montt is furious 
with him.  \"I\'ve met with the General three times since the 
firing,\" Portillo said, \"and he has not raised the subject 
once -- a sure sign that he is really ticked off; I know him 
well.\"  In fact, Portillo said, the entire FRG was angry with 
him, but in firing Rios Sosa he had won no plaudits from the 
press or opposition.  He had thus appreciated the 
Ambassador\'s call to express support, as \"this job gets 
lonely.\"  Portillo also volunteered that he had discovered 
that Army regional commander General Cruz, previously fired 
for using army resources to build a platform for an FRG 
political rally, had been acting under Rios Sosa orders. 
Portillo said he let a month go by after the July 24 riots, 
to remove the decision from the political debate.  In 
passing, Portillo had high praise for Minister of Defense 
Moran, who \"is loyal, consistently right on policy and who 
keeps me informed and consults with me on major decisions.\" 
 
Confidence Building in Elections: 
-------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador said the removal of Rios Sosa was a 
major step toward restoring confidence that the elections 
would be free and fair, but cautioned that more presidential 
leadership would be required.  He said the big challenge is 
to stem fear that there will be election-day violence, which 
arguably is being generated to keep the voter turnout low.  A 
particularly scary rumor making the rounds, the Ambassador 
said, is that imprisoned gang leaders and members will be 
allowed to escape shortly before the elections.  Mulling that 
one over, Portillo said he did not believe it but, at the 
same time, allowed that it was not impossible and that he 
would talk to Interior Minister Reyes Calderon about it.  The 
Ambassador also encouraged him personally to publicize legal 
prohibitions on use of state resources for electoral 
purposes, mentioning that this was a concern of OAS election 
observation mission chief Paniagua (with whom the Ambassador 
had just met). 
 
EMP Dismantling/SAAS Creation: 
----------------------------- 
 
5. (C) The Ambassador asked abut the current status of the 
bill to create a civilian presidential security agency (the 
SAAS) to replace the military security service (EMP), which 
has been responsible over the years for so many human rights 
abuses.  Portillo reaffirmed his intention to adhere to the 
timetable that dismantles the EMP by October 31 and said he 
had, earlier in the day, discussed the bill with General Rios 
Mont.  The General had reviewed a memorandum on the subject 
prepared by Foreign Minister Gutierrez and had agreed with 
his arguments for further amendments, to fix troublesome 
changes introduced by FRG congressmen at the behest of army 
officers lobbying on their own account.  If the changes were 
not made, Portillo reconfirmed his willingness to veto a bad 
law.  Comment: This has been a major concern to us and to 
Guatemalan and international human rights groups. 
 
Belize: 
------ 
 
6. (C) The Ambassador commented that the public disavowal of 
the OAS facilitators\' recommendation on Belize had been 
disappointing and asked what prompted it.  Echoing what the 
British Ambassador said the Foreign Minister had told him, 
Portillo said it had been necessary to pre-emptively defend 
against a legal charge of treason that an opposition deputy 
had been preparing to bring against him.  Portillo said he 
had had a good, private meeting with Belizean Prime Minister 
Said Musa, explaining the decision as necessitated by this 
threat.  Portillo said Musa was understanding and was willing 
to look at concrete steps the two countries could take to 
convey the determination of both governments to handle the 
border dispute responsibly.  Portillo is interested in 
creating a free zone along the border and increasing the 
hours of operation at a border crossing. 
 
CICIACS: 
------- 
 
7. (C) The Ambassador said we understand that the UN, which 
sent a technical mission to Guatemala in July to determine 
what was needed to set up an effective commission to study 
clandestine groups, may recommend major measures to give the 
commission legal \"teeth\" to do the job properly.  For 
example, would the Portillo government and FRG be willing, if 
asked, to enact legal reforms to give the commission 
authority to use court-sanctioned telephone intercepts? 
Portillo indicated that he would look sympathetically on any 
well-reasoned recommendation and said he would be meeting on 
the subject in New York with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan. 
 
Labor Issues: 
------------ 
 
8. (C) The Ambassador briefed the President on his meeting, 
earlier in the day, with Attorney General Carlos De Leon on 
two specific labor issues: the still unresolved murder of 
labor leader Oswaldo Monzon and the incarceration on shaky 
legal grounds of labor leader Rigoberto Duenas.  The 
Ambassador said that both issues would likely be invoked 
during a congressional debate on CAFTA.  Portillo listened, 
asked a couple of clarifying questions, and said he would 
make a run at the Attorney General on the issue. 
 
Narcotics: 
--------- 
 
9. (C) In a brief discussion of narcotics cooperation and the 
currently ongoing Mayan Jaguar joint operation, Portillo said 
he was expecting to receive shortly a report from Guatemalan 
military intelligence detailing how virtually every political 
party is receiving campaign contributions from 
narco-traffickers, the FRG included, he said.  He promised 
the Ambassador a copy, but did not yet know what else he 
would do with the report. 
 
Immigration Issues: 
------------------ 
 
10. (C) He said he had fixed a problem on the border with El 
Salvador (wherein Guatemalan had literally withdrawn from a 
jointly operated port of entry) and commented that, again, it 
had been General Rios Sosa who had been at the source of the 
problem.  He also commented that he had restored full 
authority to Immigration Director Oscar Contreras (who has 
been cooperative with us).  Vice President Reyes Lopez had 
curtailed Contreras\' authority during Portillo\'s trip abroad, 
to Taiwan.  Comment: This is the second time in as many 
meetings that Portillo has complained about the Vice 
President. 
 
Politics: 
-------- 
 
11. (C) On electoral politics, Portillo commented that FRG 
private polls (which he insisted have been professionally 
conducted to inform the FRG) shows Rios Montt running second, 
with 23 percent public support, to Bergers 32 percent.  He 
and Rios Montt had speculated together that the opposition, 
should the General win, will cite the public opinion polls 
(which in August put the General way back in fifth place, 
with single digit support) as indication of fraud.  But 
Portillo does not think Rios Montt can beat Berger in a 
second round.  Incidentally, Portillo said he had been 
favorably impressed by Berger\'s public comment that drug 
recertification was not a political issue and that it would 
be good for Guatemala.  Comment: Most of the oppostion hopes 
Guatemala will remain decertified. 
 
Final: 
----- 
 
12. (C) Comment: Portillo was, as usual, relaxed, seemingly 
confident but appreciative of the Ambassador\'s support on the 
 Rios Sosa issue.  Surprisingly, Portillo did not mention any 
interest in visiting Washington. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10621","9/9/2003 21:31","03GUATEMALA2334","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA A/S NOREIGA, WHA DAS FISK, WHA/CEN DIR. 
TRIVELLI 
NSC FOR AMB. MAISTO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: OAS MISSION WORRIED ABOUT ELECTORAL VIOLENCE 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador met with OAS Election 
Observation Mission Chief Valentin Paniagua on September 8. 
The Ambassador pledged continued USG support to the OAS 
mission, briefed Paniagua on the re-certification process, 
and raised the need for a private communications channel 
between major political parties.  Paniagua said the national 
electoral registry was relatively clean, and was forthcoming 
with his concerns about pre-electoral violence and 
appreciative of USG support.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) The Ambassador acknowledged that any USG 
re-certification announcement would be misinterpreted by some 
as having political motives.  Nevertheless, the decision will 
be taken purely on the merits of GOG actions to meet 
technical requirements.  The Ambassador also discussed the 
need for a confidential communication channel between the 
major parties. He is exploring willingness of the FRG and 
GANA to have such communication at the vice presidential 
level.  Paniagua agreed this could prove very useful, 
especially in the event of an electoral crisis.  He noted 
that the FRG\'s exit from the Political Party Forum of the 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) was unfortunate.  Some such 
a forum is needed to condemn abuses such as the July 24-25 
protests.  The Ambassador said we would help on this issue. 
 
Concerned about Violence; Need for Public Ethics Code 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3.  (SBU) The GOG\'s passive response to mounting electoral 
violence, Paniagua said, is his greatest concern.  Despite 
evidence freely available to the government, there has been 
no punitive action against organizers of the July 24-25 
protests.   The GOG passivity is totally unacceptable and 
fosters impunity.   The Ambassador encouraged Paniagua to 
press the GOG on this point. 
 
4.  (SBU) Paniagua said the press (the daily \"El Periodico\") 
has investigated a rumor that a mass shifting of imprisoned 
gang members scheduled shortly before the November 9 election 
will be used as cover for a mass jailbreak to intimidate 
voters from turning out.  He asked if the Embassy was aware 
of this rumor.  The Ambassador said yes, but gave it little 
credence (Note:  After reflecting on this, the Ambassador 
raised it with President Portillo later that day (SepTel). 
End Note.) 
 
5. (SBU) Paniagua asked for USG support to push the GOG to 
issue a \"Code of Ethics\" for public servants, to prevent 
abuse of government resources or authority.  The idea would 
not be to create new prohibitions (the existing ones are 
adequate) but to give them publicity and a higher profile. 
The VP was non-committal when he made this suggestion, but 
later issued a government directive referring to 
constitutional prohibitions.  An OAS code would go further by 
compiling all existing legal prohibitions in a coherent 
document for widespread dissemination among public servants. 
The Ambassador encouraged this effort.  Paniagua said he has 
been holding off going back to President Portillo until he 
has a full agenda to discuss and until he decides whether it 
would be more appropriate for the executive or TSE to do. 
The Ambassador urged Paniagua to raise it with both; Portillo 
may sincerely wish to recuperate his personal honor and 
reputation by playing a positive role in the election 
process.  For example, the decision to retire Gen. Rios Sosa, 
a wise one in our view, was made by the President at some 
cost. 
 
Paniagua:  Electoral Registry Clean 
----------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Paniagua said that the first phase of his Mission, 
to verify the electoral register, is drawing to a close 
without evidence of fraud.  The register has not grown 
significantly beyond expectations, a final scrub of the 
deceased, other ineligible voters and those who have moved, 
is proceeding smoothly.  He also thought that the various 
controls in the electoral law and system would be adequate to 
prevent fraud. 
 
Berger\'s Return 
--------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Paniagua said he had attended Oscar Berger\'s 
homecoming speech at the airport on September 7 and was 
impressed by the spontaneous turnout and breadth of Berger\'s 
support.  He was less impressed by Berger\'s claim that he 
would win in the first round. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Paniagua will play a key role should an electoral 
crisis evolve during the two-stage elections on November 9 
and December 28.  Some have expressed doubt that he is 
assertive enough to face down official fraud or violence.  We 
believe he is already making important efforts to do so, and 
will continue to be a key ally throughout the process. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10623","9/9/2003 21:46","03GUATEMALA2341","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE254587","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: STATEMENT OF INTERDICTION PRINCIPLES DELIVERED 
 
REF: STATE 254587 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Sylvia Corado, Director 
for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry, on 
September 5.  Corado expressed interest in the principles and 
said Guatemala would give serious thought to how the GOG 
could assist in their eventual implementation. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10674","9/12/2003 0:11","03GUATEMALA2371","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2331","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA DAS DAN FISK, WHA/CEN DIRECTOR TRIVELLI, 
WHA/PPC AND G/TIP 
USOAS FOR AMBASSADOR MAISTO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, KCRM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S TOUR D\'HORIZON WITH FOREIGN MINISTER 
GUTIERREZ 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2331 
 
Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Erik Hall.  Reason 1.5 (B&D) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  The Ambassador met with Foreign Minister 
Edgar Gutierrez on September 10 to discuss re-certification; 
Article 98; Belize; a draft law on the successor to the 
Presidential Guard (SAAS); the Commission to Investigate 
Parallel Groups (CICIACS); and trafficking in persons. 
Gutierrez was generally amenable to our concerns on these 
issues, with the exception of Article 98, which he ducked. 
He agreed to limit further GOG comment on re-certifcation 
until a decision is announced; blamed the GOG\'s disavowal of 
a referendum on Belize on opposition hardball tactics but 
hoped it would set the stage for a referendum early in the 
next government; and confirmed that President of Congress 
Rios Montt had agreed to his revisions of the SAAS bill.  He 
said President Portillo will discuss the CICIACS with UN 
SecGen Annan on September 22.  He agreed that CICIACS, 
counter-narcotics cooperation, and cooperation on fighting 
trafficking in persons are priority issues which should 
continue beyond the GOG\'s transition.  Gutierrez raised two 
issues of his own: a Guatemalan Embassy inquiry about a USG 
money laundering investigation of President Portillo and 
Portillo\'s plan to reach out to opposition presidential 
candidates to encourage cooperation on unresolved national 
issues.  The Ambassador said he was unaware of the inquiry 
the Guatemalan Embassy made, and could not confirm that there 
was an active investigation of Portillo for money laundering. 
 End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) The Ambassador was accompanied by the DCM and 
Acting PolCouns.  Gutierrez, recently in treatment for severe 
back pain, said he was receiving acupuncture treatment for 
vertebral osteosis, aggravated by a blow he received playing 
soccer with his son. 
 
Counter-Narcotics Certification Decision 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) The Ambassador asked Gutierrez, who has been quoted 
in local press anticipating a U.S. decision to re-certify 
Guatemala\'s counter-drug cooperation, to refrain from further 
comments until a decision is announced in Washington, 
probably early in the week of September 15.  The Ambassador 
said he would hold a press conference shortly after the 
announcement to explain the USG decision.  Gutierrez agreed 
to hold off further comment until the decision is announced. 
He said he had proposed to Portillo that the GOG 
institutionalize GOG-USG counter-narcotics cooperation and 
start to focus on corruption in the ports and the national 
tax authority (SAT).  The Ambassador agreed that it is 
important to make further progress in the time remaining to 
this government. 
 
Article 98: Plea for Time 
------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) Gutierrez said his key advisor on Article 98, Amb. 
Maritsa de Vielman, is currently running for Vice President 
but owes him a report analyzing the USG suggestion that he 
consider a non-reciprocal agreement.  Vielman\'s report will 
clarify his own confusion on the issue, Gutierrez said, and 
allow him to respond to our request. 
 
Belize 
------ 
 
5.  (C) Gutierrez said that, after earlier rejecting a 
recommendation of his Ministry\'s Belize Commission to 
publicly reject the OAS panel\'s recommendations, he was 
forced to reverse his decision when opposition Congress 
member Anabella de Leon, threatened to charge him with 
treason.  The charge would have been based on an obscure (to 
us) principle of international law that says when a proposal 
has gone unchallenged for a year, it could be considered to 
have been agreed to by the GOG.  The GOG\'s August 25 
disavowal of the panel\'s recommendations, he acknowledged, 
has put the GOG in the contradictory position of accepting 
some of the panel\'s recommendations, including expanding 
confidence building measures, while rejecting others, notably 
the referendum.  Gutierrez expressed hope that the next GOG 
would inherit political conditions more favorable to holding 
a referendum.  That referendum should ask Guatemalan citizens 
to choose between the World Court and arbitration.  Asked 
which the GOG prefers, Gutierrez said he was not confident 
the GOG would win in court. 
 
SAAS Bill 
--------- 
6.  (C) Gutierrez confirmed what the President told the 
Ambassador (Ref): that President of Congress Rios Montt had 
agreed to his proposals to strip the SAAS authorization bill 
of troublesome provisions relating to the Army.  Gutierrez 
said his own analysis of the problems with the bill coincided 
with those of the SAAS Chief; MINUGUA; and the Myrna Mack 
Foundation.  He said Rios Montt asked him to brief the FRG\'s 
interested Congress members on the subject, which he will do. 
 
 
CICIACS 
------- 
 
7.  (C) Gutierrez said President Portillo plans to discuss 
the CICIACS with UN SecGen Annan on September 22.  Gutierrez 
knows the UN has completed its report, but the GOG has not 
yet received a copy.  He said he hopes the UN will not impose 
pre-conditions that delay the formation of the CICIACS.  A 
better alternative would be to launch the CICIACS and let the 
GOG subsequently upgrade its law enforcement capabilities. 
He cited the GOG\'s recent ratification of the Palermo 
Convention Against Organized Crime and the Myrna Mack case as 
tools to help the CICIACS investigations.  MFA lawyers are 
drafting a bill to allow Congress to give CICIACS the 
additional legal tools it will need to accomplish its task, 
he said. Asked by the Ambassador what effect the recent 
Constitutional Court decision nullifying Guatemala\'s 
accession to the Hague Convention on Adoptions would have on 
other GOG treaty obligations, including the Palermo 
Convention, Gutierrez expressed frustration over the Court\'s 
decision.  The Ambassador urged the GOG to seek to limit the 
effect of the Court\'s decisions on other treaty obligations 
and accessions. 
 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
---------------------------- 
 
8.  (C)  The Ambassador discussed the shared USG and GOG 
interest in combating the scourge of trafficking in persons 
and asked Gutierrez to activate a proposed bilateral TIP 
working group.  Gutierrez agreed to do so, saying his 
security advisor, Mario Rene Cifuentes, had fully briefed him 
on the results of an initial bilateral meeting on the subject 
July 7.  The GOG recognizes it must do more to combat this 
criminal activity, but has not yet developed \"lines of 
action\" to do so.  He said the Ministry would welcome a 
meeting with the Embassy to discuss this topic further. 
 
UNGA Travel 
----------- 
 
9.  (C) Gutierrez said he would be in New York for the UNGA 
September 22-28, and then visit Brussels for a CA-EU 
political dialogue meeting.  He said he would be happy to 
participate in a bilateral between Secretary Powell and the 
SICA-7, and that such a meeting should be arranged through 
the Belize presidency.  President Portillo will arrive in New 
York for a meeting with Secretary General Annan on September 
22, will deliver his UNGA speech on September 23, meet with 
the Group of Friends of the Peace Process on September 24, 
and probably return to Guatemala on September 25.  Asked if 
Portillo planned to visit Washington, Gutierrez said he did 
not know but did not think so. 
 
Portillo Investigation 
---------------------- 
 
10.  (C) Gutierrez expressed concern that the Department had 
not responded to an Embassy of Guatemala inquiry earlier this 
summer about U.S. Customs inquiries of hotel and hospital 
staff in Baltimore, where President Portillo had taken his 
wife for treatment.  He asked if the Ambassador could confirm 
allegations in the press that the USG is investigating 
Portillo for money laundering.  The Ambassador said he could 
not confirm this, and that U.S. law enforcement agencies 
typically are not forthcoming about investigations.  The 
Ambassador did acknowledge press reports of a federal 
anti-money laundering task force in Florida are accurate. 
 
Transition Issues 
----------------- 
 
11.  (C) Gutierrez said Jose Ruben Zamora, the editor of 
crusading daily \"El Periodico,\" had suggested to President 
Portillo that he meet with opposition presidential candidates 
to discuss transition issues.  Gutierrez supports the idea, 
saying the objective will be to agree on a basic, minimal 
national agenda of issues that should be approved by the 
current Congress.  As examples he cited the need for a 
cadastre (land registry) law, CICIACS, continued 
counter-narcotics cooperation, the SAAS law, border issues, 
trafficking in persons, and the National Commissions Against 
Discrimination and for Women.  These efforts could help pave 
the way for cooperation in the next Congress, he said, where 
no party is likely to have a majority.  Gutierrez implied 
that, should such an initiative materialize, the Ambassador 
might be asked to serve as a \"Witness of Honor.\" 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
12.  (C) A good meeting, although the foot-dragging on 
Article 98 is disappointing. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10771","9/16/2003 16:55","03GUATEMALA2387","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002387 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: GT NAVY BRINGS IN 102 STRANDED ILLEGAL ALIENS 
 
1. The Guatemalan Navy launched patrol boats in response to 
information from the Embassy\'s Tactical Analysis Team 
indicating an Ecuadorian vessel, possibly transporting 
narcotics, was stalled 40 nautical miles southwest of 
Guatemala\'s Puerto Quetzal.  The vessel \"Matheus Tollet\" was 
intercepted at 0330 local time on September 11, and was found 
to be carrying 102 illegal aliens but no narcotics.  The 
vessel, which has accomodations for a crew of 12, departed 
Ecuardor 13 days earlier and had run out of food and water by 
the time it was intercepted.  The Navy towed the disabled 
vessel to Puerto Quetzal where it was met by Immigration 
Officials, a prosecutor, and Embassy DHS personnel.  The 
illegal aliens are being held at a hotel/shelter in the 
capital for interviews and processing before being 
repatriated.  Some of the aliens may be expelled via the U.S. 
as alien smugglers or material witnesses.  A similar incident 
last year resulted in convictions in Washington, DC against 
four crewmembers. 
 
2.  Comment: This is an encouraging demonstration of 
political will on the part of the Government of Guatemala to 
combat smuggling at sea.  As the implementation of our new 
Maritime counternarcotics agreement gets underway, more such 
incidents are likely and the GOG\'s handling of this one, 
which required no high-level communications to secure GOG 
cooperation, sets a positive precedent. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10772","9/16/2003 16:55","03GUATEMALA2388","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002388 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/09/2013 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, BH, GT 
SUBJECT: BELIZEAN DATT ON BORDER DISPUTE 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b). 
 
1.  (C) PolOff met with Lt. Col. Omar L. Pulido, Belizean 
Defense Attache in Guatemala, at his request, on September 9. 
 Pulido wanted our readout on whether the future of the 
confidence building measures had been affected by Guatemala\'s 
rejection of the OAS facilitator\'s proposals.  Pulido said 
President Portillo\'s message at the September 3 Summit, that 
the door to negotiations was \"still open,\" was well received 
in Belize although several political factions are looking for 
ways to impose costs on Guatemala for rejecting the 
proposals.  PolOff informed Pulido that the Embassy had 
expressed keen disappointment to GOG officials and conveyed 
to him the assurances we have received regarding Guatemalan 
interest in maintaining and even expanding the confidence 
building measures. 
 
2. (C) Pulido indicated that he and Belizean Ambassador 
Martinez had made an effort to get to know the realities of 
the border region and had met with Padre Salvador Crutzal, 
the crusading priest whose comments on alleged Belizean 
Defense Force atrocities get frequent play in Guatemalan 
media.  Pulido indicated he was surprised and relieved to 
find Crutzal a pragmatic interlocutor seeking solutions for 
the daily problems of his parish.  The Belizean Embassy is 
working with Crutzal in hopes of developing a dialogue with 
Guatemalan peasants in the Adjacency Zone.  Note: FM 
Gutierrez told the Ambassador September 10 he had also met 
with Crutzal who said he may be leaving his parish.  End Note. 
 
3. (C) On a another positive note, Pulido said that for the 
first time ever, the Embassy of Belize in Guatemala was going 
to celebrate Belizean Independence on September 19.  Pulido 
hoped the event would be a low-key success that would serve 
to demonstrate continued progress in the Belizean-Guatemalan 
relationship. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10849","9/18/2003 19:49","03GUATEMALA2412","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA2345","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 002412 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: CAMPAIGN POLITICS UPDATE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2345 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  With the registration of twelve 
presidential tickets complete, the presidential race has 
narrowed to four main contenders (only the top two in the 
first round, on November 9, will contend in the second round, 
on December 28).  Oscar Berger of the tripartite GANA 
coalition is ahead by all measures, and seems certain to make 
the second round.  Alvaro Colom (National Unity of Hope Party 
(UNE)), leads ruling Guatemalan Republican Front (FRG) 
candidate Efrain Rios Montt for second place in the polls. 
Lionel Lopez Rodas, the National Advancement Party\'s (PAN) 
standard-bearer, trails behind the three front-runners in the 
polls but has effectively emphasizing a tough anti-crime 
message, responding to voter concerns.  Judicial processes 
still cloud the picture, with continuing court review of Rios 
Montt\'s candidacy and rumors of coming challenges to Berger. 
With the campaign now in full swing, the candidates\' messages 
are flooding the media, and civil society groups are at high 
alert for fraud and political violence.  A presidential 
debate on September 16 did not attract Berger or Rios Montt, 
but gave smaller party candidates the chance to shine and 
question the integrity of published polls showing them out of 
contention.  End Summary. 
 
The Twelve 
-------------- 
 
2.  (U) The following 12 presidential candidates were 
registered with the Electoral Tribunal (TSE) before the 
September 10 deadline, and have until September 18 to 
complete all the documentary requirements for final 
confirmation: 
 
(1) \"Frente Republicano Guatemalteco\" (FRG) Guatemalan 
Republican Front 
(P) Jose Efrain Rios Montt 
(VP) Edin Raymundo Barrientos 
 
(2) \"Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca\" (URNG) 
Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union 
(P) Rodrigo Asturias Amado 
(VP) Pablo Ignacio Ceto Sanchez 
 
(3) \"Gran Alianza Nacional\" (GANA) Grand National Alliance 
(P) Oscar Berger Perdomo 
(VP) Eduardo Stein Barillas 
 
(4) \"Unidad Nacional de la Esperanza\" (UNE) National Unity of 
Hope 
(P) Alvaro Colom Caballeros 
(VP) Fernando Andrade Daz-Duran 
 
(5) \"Partido de Avanzada Nacional\" (PAN) National Advancement 
Party 
(P) Leonel Lopez Rodas 
(VP) Ruben Alfonso Ramrez 
 
(6) \"Partido Unionista\" (PU) Unionist Party 
(P) Fritz Garca Gallont 
(VP) Hctor Cifuentes 
 
(7) \"Democracia Cristiana Guatemalteca\" (DCG) Christian 
Democratic Party 
(P) Jacobo Arbenz Villanova 
(VP) Rolando Castro De Leon 
 
(8) \"Desarrollo Integral Autentico-Partido Libertador 
Progresista\" (DIA-PLP) Authentic Integrated Development Party 
- Progressive Liberation Party 
(P) Eduardo Suger 
(VP) Maritza Ruiz de Vielman 
 
(9) \"Cambio Nacional\" (CN) National Change 
(P) Manuel Conde Orellana 
(VP) Estuardo Meneses 
 
(10) \"Los Verdes\" (LV) Green Party 
(P) Rodolfo Rosales Garca-Salas 
(VP) Emilio Recinos 
 
(11) \"Union Nacional\" (UN) National Union Party 
(P) Fernando Arredondo 
(VP) Jorge Canale Nanne 
 
(12) \"Democracia Social Participativa\" (DSP) Democratic 
Social Participation 
(P) Jose Angel Lee 
(VP) Americo Cifuentes 
 
Three other parties are running candidates for Congress, and 
mayoralties, without presidential or vice presidential 
candidates: the \"Union Democratica\" (UD) Democratic Union, 
\"Alianza Nueva Nacion\" (ANN) New Nation Alliance, and 
\"Transparencia\" Transparency Party. 
 
Potential Legal Challenges 
-------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) No legal challenges have yet been filed against the 
registration of these candidates, with the exception of Rios 
Montt.  On September 11, the Supreme Court announced that it 
would not hear appeals from the UNE and the GANA\'s Otto Perez 
Molina of Rios Montt\'s registration, respecting a 
Constitutional Court order against any further constitutional 
challenges to Rios Montt\'s candidacy.  The Constitutional 
Court, for its part, has yet to rule on a similar appeal of 
Rios Montt\'s registration, but is widely expected to reject 
it.  Some FRG leaders claim the GANA is also vulnerable to a 
legal challenge to its registration, which is complicated by 
its three-party alliance.  Another GOG official recently told 
the Ambassador that legal charges may be filed against Berger 
for irregularities in a bus contract he signed years ago as 
mayor of Guatemala City, which could also potentially 
threaten his candidacy. 
 
Battle of the Polls 
------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Ref reported the results of Vox Latina\'s latest 
poll, which showed Berger ahead with 38%, Colom in second 
with 18%, and Rios Montt in third with 11%.  Lopez Rodas 
trailed at 7%, and 22% were undecided.  The Vox Latina poll 
also showed Berger handily winning in the second round 
against either Rios Montt or Colom. 
 
5.  GOG sources tell us that the FRG\'s internal polls, 
supposedly conducted to simulate secret balloting, 
unsurprisingly put Rios Montt in second, at 21%, after 
Berger, with 32% of voter preferences.  According to both 
polls, Colom is in third place with 18% and Lopez Rodas 
trails at 10%.  Lopez Rodas told the Ambassador on September 
11 that his own polling data shows him contending with Colom 
for second place, with 15%.  A GANA-commissioned private 
Noguera poll shows Berger at 45%, Colom in second with 21%, 
Rios Montt in third with 14% and Lopez Rodas following with 
6%, and claims a margin of error of 3.1%.  In the Noguera 
poll, only 9% are undecided.  A Demoscopia poll published in 
\"Siglo XXI\" on September 16 shows similar results, with 
Berger at 47%, Colom at 14%, Rios Montt at 13%, and Lopez 
Rodas at 7%.  The Demoscopia poll reflects lower rates of 
voter indecision than Vox Latina\'s poll conducted over the 
same period and claims a margin of error of 2.8%. 
 
6.  (SBU) Colom and URNG presidential candidate Asturias have 
publicly criticized the polls as inflated in favor of Berger, 
and we are hearing rumors of strife within the media over 
distortions of poll results.  The polls consistently show 
voter concern over crime and personal security, and 
unemployment as the two issues on most voters minds. 
 
Debate: 15 minutes of Fame 
-------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) The first public debate involving most registered 
presidential candidates was held on September 16, under 
sponsorship of the Business Center (not to be confused with 
CACIF), OAS and the TSE\'s Political Party Forum.  The 
Ambassador and other diplomats and dignitaries attended as 
\"witnesses of honor.\"  Berger, Rios Montt and Garcia-Gallont 
did not participate, for which they were roundly jeered by 
the crowd.  Berger and the FRG were singled out for criticism 
from those remaining, the former for inflating poll results, 
the latter for the corruption and ineffectiveness of the 
current government.  None of the candidates said they would 
raise taxes.  All said more could be done with the resources 
now available to the government (including better tax 
collection) and most hinted at austerity programs while 
prioritizing social needs, rather than new spending.  None 
responded to a question about re-certification by criticizing 
the process; instead, they competed to outdo each other on 
the importance of combating organized crime.  Lopez Rodas 
promoted his \"tough on crime\" platform effectively, promising 
to make dramatic changes to improve security from \"day one\" 
of his Administration.  Rosales, the Green Party candidate, 
bombastically criticized others, positioning himself as an 
outsider not tainted by previous government service. 
 
8.  (SBU) Colom criticized Berger for inflating the polls, 
asked rhetorically why campesinos are bearing the cost of 
buses bought by Berger when he was mayor, promised to cancel 
a business transaction tax (IEMA), opposed privatization of 
health or education services, promised to fight organized 
crime, and revive a national dialogue and fiscal pact. 
Asturias, the URNG candidate, appeared old and frail, but 
gave reasoned responses, opposing privatization, and 
promoting the URNG\'s agenda to fully implement the peace 
accords.  Eduardo Suger came off as professorial, often 
beginning his response to softball questions with \"this issue 
is very complex...\"   Manuel Conde of the National Change 
Party was more energetic, and Arbenz exhibited gravitas but 
his proposals lacked substance.  Following the debate, the 
participants (and the FRG) joined together to denounce the 
manipulation of polls, especially the Demoscopia poll, in 
favor of Berger, insisting that future polls were not 
authorized to use their names and party logos.  The 
opposition press has reacted with studied indignation to this 
charge, and we are currently witnessing a big flap (which 
shall dissipate) as a result. 
 
Campaign Issues/Strategies 
------------------------- 
 
9.  (U) Berger had returned to Guatemala and the stump on 
September 8, after prostate surgery in NY.  Since his return 
he has proposed investing in public works infrastructure 
projects (new capital airport, ring road, highways), to 
generate employment.  On September 11 Berger said he was also 
contemplating tax cuts.  His running-mate, Eduardo Stein, 
publicly proposed a governability pact among political 
parties on the same day.  GANA campaign manager Eduardo 
Gonzalez told the press GANA is not concerned about Berger\'s 
fall of seven points in the Vox Latina poll, still hopes to 
win in the first round, and there will be no change to 
campaign strategy.  The GANA is still finalizing its plan of 
government. 
 
10.  (SBU) Gen. Rios Montt has stepped down from his post as 
President of Congress to dedicate himself full-time to the 
campaign.  Despite recent rumors of Rios Montt\'s ill health, 
his running-mate, Edin Barrientos, claimed on September 9 
that the General is showing no signs of slowing down.  The 
FRG has launched a massive media campaign under the slogan 
\"Security, Well Being, Justice.\"  The FRG announced plans to 
visit three or four municipalities each week between Thursday 
and Sunday, giving special attention to areas where major 
media do not penetrate, and keeping its distance from major 
media coverage (apart from paid advertising), which it 
considers biased.  A dominant theme for FRG candidates is 
their intention to \"take from the rich and give to the poor.\" 
 For his part, President Portillo has made statements 
promising to increase the minimum wage by at least 8% (the VP 
later publicly pushed for 18%) and has been reproached by the 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal for overstepping bounds on GOG 
advertising of public works projects. 
 
11.  (U) Colom\'s team is giddy with the poll results 
uniformly showing Colom\'s steady climb in popularity, which 
they estimate even higher, at 23%, well above Rios Montt and 
Lopez Rodas.  On the stump, Colom is emphasizing citizen 
security, job creation, poverty reduction, education and 
housing.  Colom has also promised new roads to more 
marginalized municipalities he visits, and was the only 
candidate who showed up at a candidate forum convoked by the 
council of indigenous elders. 
 
12.  (SBU)  Lopez Rodas told the Ambassador on September 11 
that security and job creation are the major campaign issues, 
and he plans to attack them by \"putting the Army in the 
streets on January 14 (inauguration day),\" outlawing the 
possession of automatic weapons, criminalizing gang 
membership, taking control of the borders and forcefully 
prosecuting the war on drugs, contraband, and trafficking in 
persons.  He said he chose to focus his message on crime and 
jobs after earlier messages on health and education caused 
eyes to glaze.  (Note:  the Noguera poll shows crime at the 
top of voter concerns (58%), followed by the general economic 
situation (25%) and lack of jobs (25%).  End Note.)  When 
pressed by the Ambassador about the dangers of giving the 
Army an internal security role, Lopez Rodas said the show of 
force in the streets would be used to prevent crime until 
corrupt police could be purged and the police force built up 
to the task.  Employment will be generated by a massive 
home-building public works project, and labor peace secured 
by a general labor pact to be negotiated among government, 
business and labor leaders.  The Ambassador concurred that 
greater gun control is needed, welcomed Lopez Rodas\' emphasis 
on counter-narcotics, and pitched the shared importance of 
combating trafficking in persons. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
13.  (SBU) Berger\'s absence from the debate was not 
surprising.  Since Serrano Elias came from behind to win the 
presidency after a similar debate in 1991, front-runners have 
all declined to participate.  It is no surprise either that 
Rios Montt has also avoided public debate.  Given his lack of 
charisma, Colom would be wise to do so in future as well. 
His low-key demeanor translates as weakness in a combative 
format.  In contrast, Lopez Rodas delivery is forceful and 
polished, but strikes us as feigned. 
 
14.  (SBU) While we don\'t have much faith in any particular 
poll, the general picture they describe implies that in 
Guatemala\'s two-stage election process, the interesting 
battle is for second place.  With Berger securely leading the 
field (but probably losing support to Colom), the race for 
second place could easily affect the final outcome of the 
elections.  If Rios Montt makes it to the second round with 
Berger, Berger will benefit from a massive anti-FRG vote. 
If, however, Colom or, more improbably (but not impossibly), 
Lopez Rodas join Berger in the second round, Berger loses the 
anti-FRG windfall, and conceivably the presidency. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10850","9/18/2003 20:33","03GUATEMALA2413","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KDEM, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: ANTI-FRAUD MEASURES FOR GUATEMALAN ELECTIONS 
 
REF: BOYNTON-HAMILTON EMAIL 9/10/03 
 
1.  Summary.  This message provides information about 
procedures to prevent electoral fraud in response to 
questions raised at the September 4 Policy Coordinating 
Committee meeting on Guatemala.  We are encouraged by the 
measures that electoral authorities and institutions are 
taking to reduce possibilities for fraud, but will continue 
to monitor this subject vigilantly through the November 9 and 
December 28 elections.  End Summary. 
 
Q: With 100 mesas being added, especially in rural 
areas/outside Guatemala City, have the international 
observers taken that into account in their coverage of 
election day? 
A. Yes; the OAS election monitoring team is aware that there 
will be extra voting tables and is working closely with the 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) on coverage.  The actual 
number of additional tables remains to be determined (may be 
more or less than 100), as the number will be based on the 
final approved version of the voter registration list 
(\"padron electoral\"), which is still being verified. 
 
Q: Security of the voting card; ability to manipulate or 
reproduce them; how will voter ID\'s be validated? 
 
A. The national identity document required to register to 
vote, known as the \"cedula,\" is a multi-page booklet, one of 
whose pages is reserved for voter registration.  When the 
owner is registered, that page is stamped with a voter 
registration number that is checked against the registry 
maintained by the TSE. 
 
Numerous municipalities are authorized to issue cedulas and 
some have been credibly accused of selling cedulas to illegal 
immigrants.  The Consular section sees many of them in 
connection with visa applicants.  After careful review of the 
situation, however, we are confident that sufficient 
safeguards are in place for the following reasons: 
 
-- The use of indelible ink effectively prevents voters from 
voting more than once, as it penetrates the skin and takes 
several days to wear off.  False cedulas are therefore useful 
only to people who would otherwise not be able to vote, such 
as foreigners, members of the police and military, convicted 
felons, or underage people.  Police and military together 
constitute only 50,000 possible votes--not enough to matter 
at the national level even if every single one voted and then 
was somehow able to hide the inky finger.  Underage people 
and foreigners would be easily detected if they tried to vote 
in numbers large enough to affect the outcome. 
 
-- As part of the registration validation process, the TSE 
checks the registry against lists provided by the military, 
police, judiciary, and municipalities, removing the names of 
ineligible or deceased voters.  Although the TSE is not able 
to investigate every registration, it focuses on newly 
registered voters, especially if the voter has not recently 
come of age. 
 
-- Anyone who intends to use a false cedula to vote needed to 
have registered to vote before the August 9 deadline.  Since 
then, TSE officials have been verifying the rolls against the 
civil registries of births (which are books, with 
chronologically entered handwritten entries) maintained by 
municipalities.  In order to successfully register a 
fraudulent cedula with the TSE, the cedula must match an 
entry at least 18 years old in the civil registry of some 
municipality.  Additionally, the entry cannot belong to 
someone who has already registered to vote or the TSE 
computers will detect the match.  OAS Observer Mission Chief 
Valentin Paniagua and the TSE have independently concluded 
that the growth of the voter registry is in line with 
population growth.  In other words, there was no explosion of 
newly registered voters at the national level. 
 
-- TSE officials have detected and investigated unusual 
growth rates in voter rolls at the municipal level (such as 
in Villa Nueva, a suburb of the Capital), but so far all the 
investigations have unearthed reasonable explanations and no 
signs of serious fraud. 
 
Taken together, these safeguards significantly raise the 
effort required to register to vote fraudulently and reduce 
the likelihood that fraud can be perpetrated on a massive 
scale. 
 
Q: Validation and review of civic education efforts to assure 
voters of the secrecy of their vote on election day? 
 
A.  A large-scale campaign of TV and radio spots in 
indigenous languages as well as numerous full-page ads in all 
the major newspapers is well underway.  Additionally, the 
largest newspaper in circulation, Nuestro Diario, has 
launched its own get-out-the-vote campaign, also using full 
page announcements and ads. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"10883","9/19/2003 18:23","03GUATEMALA2426","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE268287","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: URGENT MIDDLE EAST DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: SECSTATE 268287 
 
PolOff discussed reftel point with Sylvia Corado, Director 
for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on September 
18.  Corado was aware of the Palestinian Resolution vetoed by 
the U.S. in the Security Council on September 16, but was 
unprepared to comment on our points as she was unaware of the 
emergency special session of the General Assembly.  Corado 
promised to convey our points to her Permrep in New York. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10911","9/22/2003 19:17","03GUATEMALA2441","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2221","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002441 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: BAD BLOOD BETWEEN OMBUDSMAN AND PROSECUTOR: 
HARMLESS TURF BATTLE OR A THREAT TO HUMAN RIGHTS 
INVESTIGATIONS? 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2221 
 
Classified By: Human Rights Officer Katharine Read, reason 1.5 (d) 
 
1. (U) Summary: In the wake of the break-in at the Human 
Rights Ombudsman\'s Office on August 26 (reftel), a dispute 
over the motivation for the break-in erupted between the 
Public Ministry and the Ombudsman\'s Office.  This dispute has 
divided opinion of human rights groups and threatens to 
permanently damage the working relationship and credibility 
of two key GOG institutions charged with defending human 
rights.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On August 26, the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office 
(PDH) was burglarized and two computers were stolen.  In the 
days that followed, the Ombudsman, Sergio Morales, and others 
in the domestic and international human rights community 
denounced the act as a flagrant attempt by the FRG and 
shadowy clandestine forces linked to the military to 
intimidate the PDH.  EmbOffs visited the PDH and met with 
Morales to show solidarity and concern. 
 
3. (U) In addition to asserting a political motivation behind 
the break-in, Morales criticized the Public Ministry for 
being slow to respond and claimed that the Special Prosecutor 
for Crimes Against Human Rights Workers, Telma de Lam, was 
not properly investigating the case.  He implied that De Lam 
had curtailed her investigation due to political pressure and 
cited the fact that she has personal ties to the military 
through her father.  (Note: The fact that De Lam\'s father was 
a colonel in the army has been widely known since her 
appointment, and never seemed to concern human rights 
activists. End Note.) 
 
Attorney General Defends Troops 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Defending De Lam, Attorney General Carlos de Leon 
issued public statements calling Morales \"irresponsible\" for 
levying accusations against the integrity of the Public 
Ministry.  De Lam told the press that she had been to the PDH 
the day that the burglary occurred, and that she had 
apprehended four of the suspects in what she characterized a 
common crime.  De Leon also hosted a public event showcasing 
the advances of De Lam\'s office, including the investigations 
of the PDH break-in and Chimaltenango Auxiliary Ombudsman\'s 
murder, to show his institution\'s commitment to getting 
results in human rights cases. 
 
Human Rights Groups Divided 
--------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Sensing trouble, HROff met with human rights defenders 
Helen Mack and Claudia Samayoa on September 4 to discuss the 
clash between these two key human rights activists.  Mack 
said that she respects the work that De Lam has done to build 
and professionalize her office, especially by developing a 
\"rapid response\" capacity to investigate crime scenes shortly 
after an attack.  Mack and Samayoa both agreed that, while 
Morales is well-intentioned, he is damaging the credibility 
of all human rights defenders when as now, they implied, he 
\"cries wolf,\" especially when the Public Ministry is finally 
developing a capacity to investigate threats against and 
attacks on the human rights community.  They agreed, with 
HROff\'s suggestion, to recommend that Morales keep further 
conflicts with De Lam and the Public Ministry out of the 
press.  Mack said that if Morales continued to \"bash\" De Lam, 
she would ask MINUGUA to release its independent verification 
of the PDH burglary, which she believed would support De 
Lam\'s version of the facts. 
 
6. (C) Not everyone in the human rights movement shares Mack 
and Samayoa\'s opinions.  Human rights leaders Frank LaRue 
(CALDH) and Mario Polanco (GAM) told us privately that they 
believe that Morales was wrong to make aggrandizing and 
fictitious statements to the press about the burglary, but 
they publicly support the work of the PDH and have made 
statements to the press suggesting that De Lam\'s military 
background was cause for concern. 
 
MINUGUA Staying out of the Fray 
------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) MINUGUA representative David Bahamondes told HROff 
that they will not be releasing a verification report unless 
absolutely necessary, to avoid publicly taking sides in this 
dispute.  Bahamondes said that MINUGUA privately believes 
that the break-in was not a political attack on the PDH, as 
Morales claims, but that MINUGUA would not attribute the 
attack to common crime either. 
 
Embassy Attempts to Calm the Storm 
---------------------------------- 
8. (C) The Ambassador met with Attorney General De Leon in 
the days following the break-in, and urged De Leon to support 
De Lam without further provoking the Ombudsman; the USG is 
committed to seeing both institutions cooperate and succeed. 
DCM and HROff attended the Public Ministry\'s event showcasing 
De Lam\'s work, after cautioning Public Ministry spokeswoman 
Ana Lucia Alejos and De Lam herself that we would not support 
further mudslinging.  HROff raised concerns about political 
influence and military linkages with De Lam, and said that we 
would continue to support her office politically and 
financially as long as she conducted complete, impartial 
investigations.  De Lam responded that she would quit the day 
she felt her investigative independence compromised. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C) The Ombudsman and the Special Prosecutor for Crimes 
Against Human Rights Workers are among the most critical 
state institutions for safeguarding the security of human 
rights defenders in Guatemala.  This public tiff only damages 
their credibility, and forces the historically fractured 
human rights movement to chose sides.  We will continue to 
encourage both institutions to work together and resist the 
temptation to turn their differences of opinion into national 
news. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10943","9/23/2003 21:48","03GUATEMALA2461","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE226229|03STATE254339","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NP/CBM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MNUC, KSCA, ETTC, TSPA, GT, MTCRE 
SUBJECT: ICOC - GUATEMALA UNABLE TO SUBSCRIBE BY OCTOBER 
 
REF: A. STATE 226229 
     B. STATE 254339 
 
Guatemala remains interested in subscribing to the 
International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile 
Proliferation (ICOC), but is not prepared to do so at the 
October 2-3 meeting in New York.  Sylvia Corado, Director for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry, told PolOff on 
August 7 that the MFA was encouraged by the option (ref A) to 
\"otherwise abide by\" the three treaties listed in Section 
3(a) of the ICOC because, in Guatemala, the process to ratify 
or accede to them would be quite long.  However, Corado 
cautioned that in order to abide by the treaties as a matter 
of national policy, Guatemala had to be sure it understood 
its obligations, and was at that time engaged in an 
interagency review of these obligations.  Poloff followed up 
with the Spanish talking points provided in ref B on 
September 10.  On September 18, Corado informed us that the 
GOG interagency review was making little progress and that 
Guatemala would be unable to subscribe to the ICOC by the 
October 2-3 meeting in New York.  Corado would not speculate 
on how much more time may be needed for the GOG to define its 
position in regards to the ICOC. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10984","9/25/2003 16:25","03GUATEMALA2473","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002473 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EMBASSY SAN JOSE PLEASE PASS TO CODEL KOLBE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OVIP, PREL, PGOV, ETRD, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: SCENE SETTER FOR VISIT OF CODEL KOLBE 
 
 
1. (U) Summary: Your September 27-29 visit to Guatemala comes 
in the final weeks of Guatemala\'s heated national election 
campaign, leading up to the November 9 election of the 
President, all members of the unicameral Congress and all 
local government officials.  The sometimes violent 
confrontation between the ruling party (the Frente 
Republicano Guatemalteco - FRG) and the opposition has fed 
fears of potential electoral fraud, though USG assistance to 
the impartial Supreme Electoral Tribunal and the Organization 
of American States (OAS) election monitoring mission has 
contributed significantly to ensuring that the election is 
free and fair.  Polls show one of the opposition candidates 
has a significant lead in the presidential race. 
 
2. (U) The new government, which will take office on January 
15, 2004, will inherit an initialized text or final 
negotiation of a free trade agreement between the United 
States and Central America (CAFTA).  Concluding a free trade 
agreement with Central America is one of the Administration\'s 
highest priorities.  Securing effective cooperation from 
Guatemala in the war against drugs is also a major USG 
priority, and we have seen major advances in this front in 
recent months.  In March 2003, Guatemala was \"decertified\" 
with a vital national interest waiver for failing to 
cooperate fully in stopping the flow of drugs (mainly 
Colombian cocaine) through Guatemala to the US.  Following 
this virtual \"decertification,\" the GOG (prodded by us) 
increased cooperation in practically all areas of the war on 
drugs -- increasing cocaine seizures from 4 tons in 2002 to 
over 8 tons so far in 2003; extraditing a Guatemalan national 
to face justice in the US; signing and ratifying a 
Counternarcotics Maritime Cooperation Agreement with us; 
seizing over $21 million dollars in narcotics assets; and 
much more.  On September 15, 2003, President Bush certified 
Guatemala as a cooperating partner in the war on drugs in 
response to this increased cooperation. 
 
3. (U) The protection of human rights in Guatemala continues 
to suffer from the legacy of 36 years of civil war, which 
ended in 1996 with the signing of the Peace Accords between 
Marxist guerrillas and the Guatemalan government.  The USG 
has made promoting human rights and investigating and 
prosecuting violations committed during the internal conflict 
a major priority.  There have been some advances, but threats 
against human rights workers continue to impede progress in 
healing the wounds of the civil war.  Your visit will offer 
the opportunity to underscore for your Guatemalan 
interlocutors, both in the government and civil society, the 
importance the United States places on the holding of free 
and fair elections, the negotiation of a free trade agreement 
that benefits us all, effective cooperation to stop the flow 
of drugs through Guatemala and the promotion of human rights. 
 End summary. 
 
National Elections 
------------------ 
4. (U) Elections for President, Congress and mayors will be 
held on November 9, and you will find that the heated 
election campaign will be foremost on the minds of your 
Guatemalan interlocutors.  There are numerous Presidential 
candidates, making it difficult for any one candidate to 
obtain the 50% of the vote necessary to win on the first 
round.  If no candidate wins more than 50% of the vote on 
November 9, a run-off election will be held on December 28 
between the two finalists.  Currently the polls show 
center-right business candidate for the GANA coalition Oscar 
Berger ahead with roughly 40% of the vote.  Center-left 
candidate Alvaro Colom and the populist candidate for the 
ruling FRG, former General Efrain Rios Montt, are disputing 
the second place with between 13 and 18% of the vote.  The 
candidacy of former de facto President Rios Montt (who headed 
a military junta in 1982-1983) has added a great deal of 
controversy to the election as there is a Constitution 
prohibition against it.  Rios Montt used his position as 
President of Congress during these past four years and head 
of the ruling FRG to stack the Constitutional Court with his 
supporters, thus ensuring that the high court ruled in favor 
of his candidacy by the narrowest of margins.  The decision 
unleashed a firestorm of protests by the opposition and the 
media, but ultimately the decision stood as the 
Constitutional Court is the highest court in the land and its 
decisions can not be appealed. 
 
5. (U) The participation of Rios Montt in the election and 
the high levels of political violence (twelve mayoral or city 
council candidates and party activists have been killed so 
far) have increased public concerns that the ruling party may 
engage in electoral fraud.  Guatemala has a good electoral 
law and an independent and respected Electoral Tribunal, 
greatly reducing the probability that fraud will be 
significant.  The USG has invested resources to strengthen 
the technical ability of the Electoral Tribunal to carry out 
free and fair elections, and we are providing most of the 
financing for the OAS election observation mission, which 
will blanket the country in the weeks leading up to the 
election and on election day.  The Electoral Tribunal is 
getting out the message on TV and radio, in Spanish and in 
the Mayan languages, that \"your vote is secret.\"  While it 
will be hard to overcome the popular perception that fraud 
will be committed in the elections, we believe the process 
will be transparent. 
 
Free Trade (CAFTA) 
------------------ 
6. (U) Your visit will also coincide with the final stages of 
the negotiation of a free trade agreement between the United 
States and Central America.  The Administration has made the 
conclusion of a free trade agreement with Central America one 
of the highest priorities in our relationship with the 
hemisphere.  The region currently benefits from unilateral 
trade concessions under the General System of Preferences 
(GSP) and the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), but a free 
trade agreement would give us similar access to Central 
American markets in exchange for making their access to the 
US market permanent.  It will also strengthen and clarify the 
rules for trading, investing and resolving business disputes 
in the region, eliminating some of the arbitrary practices 
that have impeded investment and growth.  We believe a free 
trade agreement between the US and Central America will spur 
economic growth in the region, giving them a greater capacity 
to buy our products and diminishing the incentive for 
immigration.  There are currently an estimated 1.5 million 
Guatemalans living in the United States, most without legal 
status.  Remittances by Guatemalans living in the US to their 
relatives in Guatemala will reach almost $2 billion in 2003, 
generating more foreign currency for Guatemala than exports 
of coffee, sugar and tourism combined. 
 
Counter-Narcotics Cooperation 
----------------------------- 
7. (U) Guatemala is a major transit country for drugs (mainly 
Colombian cocaine) heading to US markets.  Over a 100 tons of 
cocaine are estimated to transit through Guatemalan land, 
waters or airspace every year.  During the first years of the 
administration of President Alfonso Portillo, the GOG did not 
make cooperation in the war on drugs a high priority, and 
containing the transit of drugs through Guatemala suffered 
markedly.  In March 2003, President Bush certified to 
Congress that Guatemala was not fully cooperating in the war 
on drugs, but extended a vital national interest waiver to 
Guatemala in order for us to continue critical USG assistance 
programs in the area of child nutrition, protection of the 
environment and human rights.  This virtual \"decertification\" 
led the GOG to improve its cooperation with us in the war 
against drugs, and in the ensuing six months the GOG doubled 
cocaine seizures; extradited a Guatemalan national to the US 
to face felony murder charges; signed and ratified a 
Counternarcotics Maritime Cooperation Agreement with us; 
passed asset forfeiture legislation; seized over $21 million 
in narcotics assets; totally reorganized the special 
counternarcotics police; and much more.  As a result of the 
GOG\'s enhanced cooperation, on September 15 President Bush 
certified to Congress that Guatemala is once again a 
cooperating partner on the war on drugs.  We are continuing 
to engage with the GOG to ensure that counternarcotics 
cooperation levels are sustained in the remaining months of 
the Portillo Administration, and have made this a major 
element in our dialogue with the presidential candidates in 
the upcoming elections. 
 
Human Rights 
------------ 
8. (U) The end of the 36-year armed internal conflict in 1996 
put an end to the most egregious human rights violations in 
Guatemala, but left a legacy of violence and impunity that 
persists today.  Human rights organizations that are trying 
to prosecute human rights violators from the conflict period 
have been threatened and several have been killed during the 
past two years.  The USG has made protection of human rights 
workers and promotion of the rule of law a major USG 
objective in our relationship with Guatemala.  The Ambassador 
has personally attended the major human rights trials and 
made numerous public statements in support of the beleaguered 
human rights community, as well as using every private 
meeting with government and military leaders to raise our 
concerns about the continuing threats.  We have supported the 
creation of an international commission (made up of the UN, 
OAS and Guatemalans) to investigate the operation of 
clandestine groups in the country, for the purpose of 
prosecuting those who are threatening human rights workers. 
 
Comment 
------- 
9. (U) Your visit offers an important opportunity to convey 
to Guatemalans, both in the government and in civil society, 
the priority the United States places on working with 
Guatemalans to strengthen their emerging democracy.  At this 
juncture in Guatemala\'s history, the key to success will 
depend to a great extent on the holding of free and fair 
elections, the negotiation of a free trade agreement with us, 
clamping down on the transit of narcotics through the isthmus 
and the effective promotion of human rights.  We welcome your 
visit and look forward to the chance to brief you more fully 
on these issues on your arrival. 
HAMILTON 
"
"10989","9/25/2003 22:42","03GUATEMALA2486","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002486 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: INVITATION TO THE SECRETARY TO GUATEMALAN 
PRESIDENTIAL INAUGURATION 
 
1.  A letter addressed to the Secretary from Foreign Minister 
Edgar Gutierrez, dated September 18, was delivered to the 
Embassy on September 24.  The original letter will be pouched 
to WHA/CEN.  Text of the letter follows. 
 
2.  Begin Text: 
 
Excellency, Mister Secretary of State: 
 
It is my honor to address you, Excellency, and it is my 
pleasure to extend an invitation to you to attend the 
transference of presidential power in Guatemala, which will 
take place in this capital city on January 14 of 2004. 
Furthermore, I would like to request that you inform this 
Chancery of how the Honorable Delegation of your country to 
this event will be composed. 
 
I take this opportunity to reiterate, Excellency, the renewed 
assurances of my highest consideration and esteem. 
 
Edgar Gutierrez 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 
End Text. 
 
3.  Comment: Assuming a free and fair election, we do hope 
that we will have a U.S. presidential delegation attending 
the January 14 inauguration. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11057","9/29/2003 17:42","03GUATEMALA2500","Embassy Guatemala","SECRET","03GUATEMALA1465|03GUATEMALA2255","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002500 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR CHRIS KUSHLIS AND BILL BLOCK; PANAMA FOR BICE- 
ELBERT CRUZ; DHS FOR MIAMI FIELD OFFICE - NEAL RAU 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2013 
TAGS: KCOR, EFIN, PGOV, MOPS, PINR, GT, PM 
SUBJECT: MILITARY PENSION FUND: MILITARY FOCUS ON 
RECOVERING FUNDS, AVOIDING OUTSIDE INVESTIGATION 
 
REFS: A. GUATEMALA 02255 B. GUATEMALA 01465 
 
C. GUATEMALA 01687 D. GUATEMALA 01909 
E. USDAO IIR # 6 838 0042 02 DTG 042124Z 
F. GUATEMALA 02331 
 
Classified By: Econ Thomas A. Palaia for reason 1.5(d). 
 
1.  (S) Summary: EmbOffs met with General Alfredo Gonzalez 
to discuss recent developments in the theft and 
mismanagement of the Military Pension Fund.  Gonzalez, who 
has been involved in the military\'s internal investigation 
of the matter, alleged payoffs were made to current and 
former top military officials involved with IPM\'s governing 
board.  The fund may have lost up to $23 million in this 
particular scandal and its financial health remains 
uncertain.  No charges have been brought against any high- 
ranking military official involved despite alleged evidence 
implicating many.  The scandal may have been a factor in 
the forced resignation of Military Chief of Staff Rios 
Sosa, son of former de facto president and current 
presidential candidate Rios Montt, though Gonzalez claims 
Rios Sosa was not aware of the scandal until after the 
funds had been lost.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The Military Pension Fund (IPM) is a quasi- 
governmental organization responsible for managing the 
contribution-based pension plans of some 12,000 current and 
former military personnel.  IPM, along with its subsidiary 
INVERMA, reportedly transferred approximately USD 37 
million to the Miami-based Pension Fund of America (PFA). 
The money was transferred in several smaller transactions 
to PFA from August through November 2001 with the stated 
intention of investment in stocks and bonds traded in New 
York.  Reportedly, only USD 14 million has been recovered. 
 
3.  (S) EconOff, DATT and PolOff met with General Alfredo 
Gonzalez to discuss IPM, including the recent scandal and 
its possible role in the resignation of former military 
Chief of Staff, Rios Sosa (Refs A and F).  Gonzalez was on 
the governing board of the IPM until about three weeks ago 
and has been involved in investigating the scandal and 
pursuing a lawsuit in Florida on behalf of IPM and the MOD. 
He was not a board member at the time of the theft but, 
according to DAO sources, may have his own corrupt 
interests unrelated to IPM. 
 
Yes There was Corruption 
------------------------- 
 
4.  (S) In this conversation, Gonzalez immediately backed 
off claims he had made that IPM was simply the victim of 
bad financial decisions and a group of swindlers in Miami. 
He admitted that the previous governing board of IPM 
received kickbacks from PFA for agreeing to transfer the 
funds through PFA accounts.  He claimed that various 
members (unidentified) of that governing board received 
checks for USD 50,000.  Former MOD Arevalo Lacs confronted 
board members with photocopies of these checks well before 
the scandal broke and asked for the return of the money. 
Gonzalez said that not only was the money never returned, 
IPM continued to use PFA to manage their investments. 
Note: No crusader for integrity, Arevalo Lacs became a 
millionaire during his stint as MOD. 
 
5.  (S) Gonzalez said board members considered the 
kickbacks commissions and insisted that they did not know 
the fund would be robbed.  He could not explain, however 
why anyone believed that PFA would be willing to pay such 
high \"commissions\" for the privilege of managing the fund. 
He also could not answer how IPM justified the use of what 
they now allege to be an unlicensed middleman (IPM alleges 
in a suit filed in Florida that PFA is not licensed to 
manage investments or give investment advice) to open 
accounts and deposit funds whose ultimate destinations were 
supposedly major investment firms in New York.  When asked 
why the money wasn\'t invested directly with a major 
investment house, he conceded board members were simply 
looking out for their \"commissions\" and reluctantly 
admitted that some may have suspected a larger theft was 
taking place.  Gonzalez continued to deny any connection 
between the IPM scandal and the theft of at least USD 45 
million from the Guatemalan Social Security Fund (IGSS) 
(Refs B and C).  Gonzalez insisted the two groups\' dealings 
with PFA were completely unrelated. 
 
6.  (S) Gonzalez speculated that a lower-level technocrat 
might have masterminded the theft.  The military wanted in- 
house, Guatemalan actuarial capabilities to save on 
expensive consulting fees paid to Spanish accounting firms 
who advised them on IPM\'s insurance structure.  Lt. Col. 
Archila Grazales (phonetic), at the time a Captain, was 
sent to Mexico for five years of training in actuarial 
science.  He returned a Major and was asked to assist IPM 
in managing its finances.  Gonzalez claims it was Grazales 
who first brought PFA to the attention of the board and got 
the board interested in U.S. investment opportunities. 
Gracales reportedly arranged for PFA to make a presentation 
to the board where they misrepresented their credentials 
and were successful in convincing the board to invest 
through them. 
 
7.  (S) The scandal did not end after IPM\'s board changed 
and a new board began its investigation and sought legal 
action in Florida in late 2001.  Gonzalez claims that IPM 
opened an account in Miami and deposited an additional USD 
1 million, intended to cover anticipated legal costs 
involved in recovering the USD 37 million invested. 
According to Gonzalez, the legal fund was mistakenly 
invested in insurance and was not available when they first 
attempted to initiate legal proceedings.  This delay gave 
PFA ample time to move the money beyond the reach of 
Florida authorities. 
 
8.  (S) EmbOffs asked Gonzalez what legal actions were 
being taken in Guatemala.  Gonzalez insisted that all 
internal investigation efforts were focused on recovering 
the lost investments and that they would worry about 
placing blame after the money was found.  The Public 
Ministry was not being brought in because the MOD wanted to 
keep this an internal investigation. 
 
Rios Sosa\'s Involvement 
------------------------ 
 
9.  (S) EmbOffs asked about former Chief of Staff Rios 
Sosa\'s involvement in IPM and the role it might have played 
in his recently forced resignation.  Rios Sosa was a member 
of the governing board for a short period in late 2001. 
Gonzalez claimed that Rios Sosa\'s recent resignation had 
more to do with avoiding a perceived conflict of interest 
with his father, Rios Montt\'s Presidential campaign.  He 
insisted that Rios Sosa\'s involvement in IPM was very 
limited and occurred after most of the money was already 
transferred to PFA.  He alleged that Rios Sosa saw the 
financial state of IPM and, recognizing the potential for 
scandal, immediately resigned from his position on the 
governing board.  Gonzalez went on to assert that, without 
the target of Rios Sosa, the scandal of IPM would disappear 
from the headlines. 
 
IPM\'s Financial Health - or Lack Thereof 
---------------------------------------- 
 
10.  (S) Gonzalez assured EmbOffs that IPM is well-funded 
and in no danger of bankruptcy.  He asserted that IPM is 
taking in substantially more each month than it is paying 
out in benefits.  The fund owns significant income 
generating investments in properties and companies that 
supplement the payroll contributions of military personnel. 
He explained that the fund owns approximately 60% of a 
variety of companies (the other 40% being owned by high- 
level current and former military officials). 
Additionally, IPM has periodically been the recipient of 
generous transfers from the GOG.  However, when pressed on 
IPM\'s continued solvency, he admitted that without 
substantial reform the Fund would likely face serious 
financial problems within 10 years, as the number of 
retirees drawing from the fund increases and the number 
contributing decreases due to military reductions. 
 
11.  (S) Gonzalez did not address the history of corruption 
within the IPM and related institutions, such as the 
Military Bank, which cast doubt on the fund\'s financial 
health (Ref E).  The fund has been known to make loans on 
favorable terms to board members and high-ranking military 
and MOD officials with no intention of ever collecting. 
The fund has also been involved in sketchy real estate 
deals where property of little value was purchased from 
friends of the fund for inflated sums.  It is likely that 
Gonzalez\' positive assessment of the medium-term health IPM 
is based in part on overvalued assets and misplaced faith 
in current and future fund management. 
 
12.  (S) One potential up-side for the fund\'s financial 
outlook is the 40% ownership of many of its investments by 
influential military and ex-military, who likely have the 
wherewithal to ensure their investments\' profitability. 
Companies with ties to current and former military have 
been known to use illicit means to support their businesses 
such as maintaining monopolies through intimidation and 
manipulation of the legal system as well as access to 
political favors and government-financed sweetheart deals. 
However, these investments are subject to the same risks of 
fraud and theft that depleted IPM\'s U.S. investments. 
 
It Could Happen Again 
--------------------- 
 
13.  (S) No substantive oversight has been developed to 
monitor the decisions of the governing board of the fund. 
There is no reason to believe current and future IPM 
management will not look for their own opportunities to get 
their hands in the cookie jar.  According to Gonzalez, the 
IPM\'s management answers to no one except the MOD, and the 
government has no authority over this quasi-governmental 
pension plan.  Congressional calls for Central Bank 
auditing and increased transparency appear to have been 
largely ignored.  The IPM is very secretive about its by- 
laws.  Gonzalez claims he was fired from the governing 
board for supporting reforms that would limit the sitting 
MOD\'s discretionary nominations and control over the board. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
14.  (S) There is undoubtedly more to the story than 
Gonzalez presented.  Possible ties to the IGSS scandal and 
who was involved outside of the IPM board remain unclear. 
Gonzalez\' assertions of Rios Sosa\'s innocence were not well 
supported.  His insistence that a low-level technocrat was 
the only real connection to PFA was convenient but 
unlikely.  The Public Ministry would be expected to 
investigate given the amount of publicly available evidence 
and allegations, regardless of the lack of an invitation 
from the MOD.  There is also the potential that more 
extensive money laundering was involved given the secrecy 
of IPM\'s financial dealings and the military\'s known links 
to organized crime.  The scope of the fraud and the PFA 
link to the IGSS scandal ought logically to bring the 
Public Ministry running.  The lack of an investigation may 
result from a reluctance at the Public Ministry to take on 
the military.  It may also be the result of higher-level 
political interference. 
 
15.  (S) Comment continued: The theft and subsequent lack 
of resolve to prosecute those involved reflect a lack of 
transparency and oversight of the Guatemalan military\'s 
business and financial dealings.  Many high-ranking 
officials are reluctant to go after their peers for fear of 
exposing their own corrupt interests.  This scandal further 
taints the image of the military and indirectly, Rios Montt 
through his son\'s possible involvement.  The potential 
financial trouble for IPM poses a threat to the morale of 
lower and mid-level officers who are already tired of the 
corruption of many of their superiors.  This may eventually 
have serious budget implications for the GOG when they are 
called on again to bail out the institution. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11128","10/1/2003 15:38","03GUATEMALA2527","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE272470","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NP AND T. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PREL, PHSA, EAIR, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA DOES NOT HAVE A POSITION YET ON 
PROLIFERATION INITIATIVE 
 
REF: A. STATE 272470 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2341 
 
Per ref A instructions, we followed up on our earlier 
demarche (ref B) with Sylvia Corado, Director for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on September 29. 
 Corado indicated that the MFA had reviewed the statement of 
interdiction principles and was consulting internally and 
with other affected ministries on how Guatemala could 
contribute to the Proliferation Security Initiative.  She 
said the MFA would inform us once the GOG has decided its 
position on this matter. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11157","10/2/2003 20:34","03GUATEMALA2550","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002550 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/01/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, PHUM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: ELECTION UPDATE: OAS CRITICIZES ELECTORAL 
VIOLENCE; BERGER MAINTAINS LEAD IN POLLS 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The OAS Electoral Observation Mission (EOM) 
issued its second report, criticizing the GOG\'s failure to 
investigate and prosecute electoral violence, especially the 
murders of political activists and the violent FRG protests 
of July.  On October 1, the OAS EOM opened offices in seven 
provinces.  Ten parties joined together to criticize recently 
published polls which show them trailing the GANA coalition, 
and in some cases the FRG.  The ex-PAC continue to protest 
against Rios Montt holding rallies in their communities. 
Every party has its own poll, though all the polls, including 
the FRG\'s, put Oscar Berger ahead.  FRG candidate for Mayor 
of Guatemala City Rabbe was disqualified by the Registry of 
Citizens, setting off another legal battle which could force 
the FRG out of the race for Mayor of the capital. Berger\'s 
chief of staff told us that there is a chance Berger will win 
on the first round, but a greater chance that he will face 
off against Rios Montt or Colom in a second round.  GANA does 
not believe electoral fraud will be significant.  The 
Ambassador received assurances from the FRG that they will 
respect the outcome of the election, even if unfavorable. 
end summary. 
 
OAS calls on GOG to investigate electoral violence 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
2. (C) Former President Valentin Paniagua, head of the OAS 
Electoral Observation Mission, gave reporters a copy of the 
second OAS EOM report on September 29, in which the OAS 
criticizes the lack of investigation and prosecution of cases 
of possible electoral violence.  The report notes that 20 
political party activists have been murdered since the 
convocation of elections in May, and that none of the cases 
has been successfully investigated, much less prosecuted, by 
the GOG.  It goes on to say that no legal action has been 
taken against any of the participants in the violent protests 
organized by the FRG on July 24-25 in which one reporter 
died, several people were injured and property was destroyed. 
 In a closed conversation with the Ambassadors of the Donor 
Dialogue Group, made up of representatives of donor nations 
and international organizations, the OAS EOM representative 
said that their preliminary investigations suggest that most 
of the 20 murders were not politically related -- half of 
them are of ANN party members from Chiquimula who are 
believed to have been killed in a fight between rival 
organized crime gangs; two of the murders are of PAN 
candidates that even the PAN have told us were not 
politically motivated; and at least two of the murders of UNE 
activists are clearly attributed to common crime.  MINUGUA 
confirmed that their analysis of the 20 murders coincides 
with that of the OAS.  There is little doubt that some of the 
murders were politically motivated, however, and the lack of 
investigation and prosecution of any of the cases creates the 
perception that the GOG is tolerating political violence. 
 
3. (U) The OAS EOM has brought the first contingent of 
foreign observers into the country and has announced that it 
will open offices in the Departments of Coban, Zacapa, Peten, 
Quezaltenango, Solola, Huehuetenango and Quiche by October 1. 
 They announced that they would have 100 observers blanketing 
the country on election day.  The Embassy meets several times 
a week with the OAS EOM, and will be providing a security 
briefing for its members on October 2, at the OAS\'s request. 
 
4. (C) The OAS and MINUGUA have both issued statements 
calling for greater political tolerance, after mobs of former 
civil patrol members, who argue the FRG did not comply with 
its commitment to compensate all of them for the service 
during the internal conflict, have created disturbances at 
some of Rios Montt\'s campaign rallies in the countryside. 
Groups of angry ex-PACs threatened a Rios Montt rally in 
Nebaj (Quiche), kept the General from campaigning in two 
towns in San Marcos, and have threatened to disrupt his 
rallies in other areas, including the town of Chicacao, where 
the former PAC\'s burned the municipal building in June.  The 
GOG\'s decision in late September to assign 70 million 
Quetzales (roughly $9 million) to Peten ex-PAC leader Rosenda 
Perez (for economic development programs in the Peten) 
infuriated other PAC leaders, and has led to renewed threats 
to disrupt his campaign rallies.  MINUGUA Chief Tom Koenigs 
told the Donor Dialogue Group that, despite his personal 
antipathy for Rios Montt, he believes that it is important 
that MINUGUA oppose all political intolerance, noting that if 
the FRG were keeping other candidates from holding campaign 
rallies as has happened to them, the whole international 
community would be outraged. 
 
Every party has its own poll 
---------------------------- 
5. (U)  Ten presidential candidates representing the smaller 
parties competing in the election (all but the FRG and GANA) 
held a news conference in late September to complain that the 
polls that are appearing in the press intentionally 
underestimate their support, and argued that this is a 
strategy to favor the GANA and FRG candidates who have more 
influence with segments of the media.  In response, one daily 
(Siglo XXI) printed the \"polls\" of the PAN, UNE and Unionista 
parties on October 1.  Their results did not differ greatly 
from the professional polls on the percentage of the vote 
that Berger, Rios Montt and Colom would get, but each placed 
their own candidate significantly higher than other polls, 
giving them a big portion of the undecided vote.  Following 
are the results: 
 
-                 UNE poll        PAN poll      Unionista poll 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
Berger - GANA       37%             27%             35% 
Colom - UNE         22              20              14 
Rios Montt - FRG    12              13              10 
Lopez - PAN          7              18               7 
Garcia - Unionista   6               8              13 
 
6. (U) The San Carlos University (public) and Rafael Landivar 
University (Jesuit) polled their students in September 
regarding their presidential preferences.  Radio Sonora also 
polled its public in September.  These are \"user\" polls, and 
are not intended to be scientific samples.  We list the 
latest Prensa Libre poll (which purports to be from a 
scientific sample) for comparison.  Following are the results 
of these polls: 
 
-                 Prensa Libre  Radio Sonora   USAC     URL 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Berger - GANA         38%           67%         35%     67% 
Colom - UNE           18            16          22      15 
Rios Montt - FRG      11             8           4       2 
Lopez - PAN            5             7           7       2 
Garcia - Unionista     3             1           8       5 
 
7. (C) President Portillo told Ambassador Hamilton in early 
September that the FRG\'s polls showed Berger ahead with 32%, 
but followed closely by Rios Montt with 23%.  The FRG is 
tight lipped with us about their polling numbers, saying 
(disingenuously, in our view) only that they are confident 
they will win overwhelmingly in the first round. 
 
Will the FRG accept defeat? 
--------------------------- 
8. (C) The violent FRG-led protests of July 24-25 generated 
concerns that the FRG is prepared to use violence if they are 
not pleased with the electoral outcome.  With all polls, 
including the FRG\'s, showing Rios Montt significantly behind 
Berger with only five weeks left in the election, there is a 
possibility that the FRG will not make it into the second 
round, and a very serious possibility that they will 
ultimately lose the election to Berger even if they do make 
it into the second round.  The Ambassador raised concerns 
about potential FRG refusal to accept the election results 
with Ambassador Antonio Arenales (FRG insider and 
congressional candidate) and Acting First Vice President of 
Congress Zury Rios on September 27.  Both assured him that 
the FRG will be respectful of the electoral outcome. 
Congresswoman Rios is seeking meetings in the Department on 
October 14 to discuss the FRG\'s vision of the electoral 
process, among other things. 
 
FRG Mayoral candidate disqualified to run 
----------------------------------------- 
9. (SBU) In late September the Registry of Citizens 
determined that the candidacy of Luis Rabbe for Mayor of 
Guatemala City, representing the FRG, was not valid, as he 
was selected by the FRG\'s National Convention, and not by the 
FRG\'s Municipal Convention, as required by the electoral law. 
 The FRG quickly filed an appeal, arguing that in the 1999 
election Rabbe had similarly been selected by the National 
Convention, and the Registry of Citizens had not objected. 
The Registry of Citizens responded that two wrongs don\'t make 
a right.  The appeal is being considered by the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal, and could ultimately be appealed to the 
Constitutional Court.  With time fast running out, it is 
possible the FRG will not be on the mayoral ballot for 
Guatemala City.  FRG leaders have not responded publicly in 
defense of Rabbe, leading many of our contacts to conclude 
that the FRG may not be upset over Rabbe\'s troubles.  August 
polls placed him in fourth place for the mayoralty with 7% of 
the vote, behind Alvaro Arzu with 40%. 
 
GANA rules out significant fraud 
-------------------------------- 
10. (C) The Ambassador met with Eduardo Gonzalez, Campaign 
Chairman for GANA candidate Oscar Berger, on October 1. 
Gonzalez said that they just received a new poll which shows 
GANA candidate Berger sustaining his high levels of support 
in the final stretch of the campaign.  Gonzalez said there is 
a small chance that Berger could win in the first round, but 
said there is a much greater likelihood that Berger will have 
to face Rios Montt or Colom in a second round.  The poll 
results for Colom and Rios Montt are too close to speculate 
on which has a better chance, he commented, adding that GANA 
leaders do not believe fraud on election day will be 
significant.  He also opined that the intense international 
scrutiny being given to this campaign would make it difficult 
for the FRG to dispute the election results in the event they 
are defeated.  Gonzalez will be in Washington on October 
9-10, and is requesting a meeting with WHA DAS Fisk to 
discuss the elections and bilateral relations in the event 
Berger wins. 
 
11. (C) The Ambassador asked Gonzalez if GANA had the kind of 
communication with the FRG it needed to avoid violence and 
unproductive confrontations, offering the neutral ground of 
the Ambassador\'s Residence and our good offices for meetings 
between the two sides, if they could be useful to defuse 
tensions.  Gonzalez expressed appreciation for the offer, and 
said he would definitely keep it in mind.  He stated that 
there is not a lot of contact between the two sides, but at 
this time, the GANA prefers to keep it low key as anyone who 
meets with the FRG would automatically become suspect in the 
public\'s eyes.  He commented, however, that tensions could 
rise at any time (as they did in July), and that having the 
option of a neutral ground to meet with the FRG was 
important.  The Ambassador had earlier made a similar offer 
to Zury Rios, who responded similarly that it was an 
important offer to be able to draw on if the situation in the 
future should warrant it. 
 
Comment 
------- 
12. (C) Local concerns about electoral fraud have diminished 
significantly in recent weeks, after an aggressive Embassy 
campaign to publicize the secrecy of the vote and the 
guarantees in place.  The OAS EOM has also been effective in 
showing that it is prepared to take on the government (and 
the FRG) on issues of electoral violence.  The permanent 
presence of the OAS in the countryside, beginning October 1, 
will also have a calming effect at the provincial level.  The 
\"concern of the day\" among our Guatemalan contacts has become 
the fear that the FRG will not respect the outcome of the 
election.  We have received assurances from the FRG that they 
will respect the outcome, and will continue to raise this 
matter in all meetings with the FRG. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11186","10/3/2003 17:10","03GUATEMALA2563","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002563 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PINR, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS UPDATE: COURT UPHOLDS GERARDI 
SENTENCE; NEW MURDER IN CHICHICASTENANGO 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  The following is an update of significant 
recent developments in human rights in Guatemala.  Topics 
include: 
 
-- Constitutional Court Rejects Defense Request to Annul 
Gerardi Sentence 
 
-- Murder of Community Organizer in Chichicastenango 
 
-- Ovalle Shooters Sentenced to Life 
 
-- Pres. Portillo\'s Sister Under Investigation for Threats 
 
End Summary. 
 
Court Upholds Gerardi Sentence 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) On October 1 the Constitutional Court denied a 
request from defendants in the Gerardi murder case to annul 
the verdict against them, and ordered the Fourth Court of 
Appeals to resolve the appeals pending in that case.  This 
decision upholds an earlier decision on February 12, 2003, by 
the Supreme Court, and reaffirmed the 30-year sentences for 
ex-military officers Byron Disrael Lima Estrada and Byron 
Miguel Lima Oliva for extrajudicial execution (a third, 
Obdulio Villanueva was murdered in a prison riot in 
February), and the 20-year sentence of Catholic priest Mario 
Orantes Najera for complicity in the murder of Bishop Juan 
Gerardi Conedera in April 1998.  The appeals court may now 
consider pending appeals from Orantes and the Bishop\'s Office 
of Human Rights.  MINUGUA issued a statement on October 2 
praising the Court\'s decision and calling on judicial 
authorities to resolve the appeals \"in strict accordance with 
the law\" and called on the international community to 
continue to monitor the case and push for complete 
clarification of the crime. 
 
Murder of Community Organizer in Chichicastenango 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
3.  (U) On September 27, Eusebio Macario, a community 
organizer, was murdered in Chichicastenango municipality, 
Quiche province.  Amilcar Mendez, founder of the indigenous 
rights NGO, Council of Ethnic Communities Runujel Junam (\"We 
are all Equal\") (CERJ) informed the Embassy of the crime on 
September 29.  He claims that Macario was a founding member 
of CERJ.  According to Angelica Macario, daughter of the 
deceased, Macario had publicly criticized the FRG candidate 
for mayor of Chichicastenango, Jose Tiriquiz Tiniguar, for 
FRG corruption.  According to Amnesty International, Macario 
died from 8 shots in the village of Chulumal, 4 km. from the 
town of Chichicastenango, apparently from a 9mm pistol. 
Amnesty fears the murder may be in reprisal for CERJ\'s work 
on behalf of victims of Guatemala\'s internal conflict.  CERJ 
is organizing communities of victims to obtain reparations 
from the Government.  Members of the International Peace 
Brigade are accompanying CERJ leaders Mendez, Tomas Guarcas 
and Ms. Macario, who is a candidate for city councilor for 
the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union party (URNG). 
Eusebio Macario was helping his daughter to organize victims 
of the internal conflict for the National Victims 
Compensation Commission, and on September 21 participated in 
a meeting to inform victims of their right to compensation 
from the Government.  Five days later, three unidentified men 
reportedly asked local residents about the meeting and who 
organized it, according to Amnesty International\'s Urgent 
Action report on the case issued October 2. 
 
4.  (SBU) Public Ministry Special Prosecutor for Crimes 
Against Human Rights Workers, Thelma de Lam, took up the case 
on September 29, after we brought it to her attention.  She 
promised to share the results when they are available.  On 
October 1 de Lam told PolOff that Tiriquiz had threatened the 
life of Macario in person three days before the crime took 
place, in the presence of witnesses.  The body may be exhumed 
on October 2, if the autopsy proves incomplete.  De Lam said 
that, contrary to the claims of Mendez and the victim\'s 
daughter, the victim\'s wife had told investigators that 
Macario was never a member of CERJ or any other human rights 
group, but instead was a member of the URNG political party. 
She also disputed claims reported to us by Mendez that public 
ministry investigators had not questioned the family of the 
victim as of September 30.  De Lam insists that her 
investigators were on the scene on September 29.  Mendez met 
with de Lam and Attorney General de Leon to discuss the case 
on October 1.  The Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Human Rights 
Center sent letters expressing concern about the case to 
President Portillo and de Leon on the same day. 
 
5.  (SBU) Comment:  We will closely monitor the results of 
the investigation.  End Comment. 
 
Ovalle Murderers Sentence to Life 
--------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) On September 13, the First Penal Court found Ever 
Lopez Gomez and Billy Rene Barrios guilty of the April 29, 
2002 murder of Guillermo Ovalle, the accountant of the 
Rigoberta Menchu Tum Foundation.  The two were accused of 
killing Ovalle during an assault in a Guatemala City 
restaurant.  One was apprehended carrying a weapon linked to 
the attack. 
President\'s Sister Under Investigation for Threats 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7.  (U) Press reported on September 23 that Edna Portillo, 
President Portillo\'s sister, has been called for questioning 
by the Public Ministry about the use of a government vehicle 
assigned for her protection.  The vehicle in question belongs 
to the Presidential Guard (EMP), and was sighted on August 1 
parked for five hours in front of the Forensic Anthropologist 
Institute (FAFG).  The vehicle also followed FAFG members 
when they left their office.  The FAFG has been the subject 
of threats and intimidation for the past two years.  The 
Presidential Spokesman would not comment on the case, which 
he called \"a personal matter.\" 
 
8.  (SBU) Comment:  Government sources claim Edna\'s son was 
romantically involved with the sister of the FAFG director 
and was upset when she broke off the relationship.  We doubt 
this fully accounts for the two years of mounting threats and 
intimidation of the FAFG.  End Comment. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11253","10/7/2003 17:15","03GUATEMALA2586","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC (C. ROE) AND DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LABOR/TIP UPDATE #6-2003 
 
 
1.  Summary:  Following is an update of significant recent 
developments in the labor sector and trafficking in persons. 
Topics include: 
 
-- GOG to Attend GSP Hearing 
 
-- Progress in Monzon Lima Murder Investigation? 
 
-- MOL Willing to Combat \"Blacklisting\" 
 
-- Ambassador to Speak at Labor Justice Forum 
 
-- Pending Legislative Reforms Status Update 
 
-- MOL Proposes Maquila Pact: Rejected 
 
-- TIP - DCM Preparatory Bilateral 
 
-- TIP - Nine Stolen Babies Returned from Costa Rica 
 
-- TIP - GOG Brothel Raids Find no TIP Victims 
 
End Summary. 
 
GOG to Attend GSP Hearing 
------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) On September 25 LabAtt attended a meeting of GOG\'s 
\"Inter-institutional Labor Working Group,\" comprised of 
representatives of the Labor, Economy, and Foreign Affairs 
ministries; the Attorney General\'s Office and the judiciary 
to encourage the GOG to participate in the upcoming GSP 
hearings and to provide a substantive official response to 
the pending GSP petitions.  Minster of Labor Victor Moreira 
said Guatemalan Ambassador to Washington Antonio Arenales 
will attend the Oct. 7 GSP Public Hearing at USTR.  The GOG 
is considering responding to the petitions at three levels, 
he said:  1) to report and correct issues of fact, 2) to 
report new developments (he cited the Choi Shin case as an 
example) and, 3) where structural problems are acknowledged, 
to propose goals and indicators to be achieved and monitored 
by the Embassy. 
 
3.  (SBU) LabAtt told the group that while we have noted some 
advances, the USG continues to be concerned about unresolved 
cases of violence against trade unionists, which 
distinguishes Guatemala from its neighbors and contributed to 
USTR\'s decision to review the petitions.  The Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes Against Trade Unionists reported that 
he is offering protection to a key witness in the Monzon Lima 
murder case and hopes to use that witness to charge the main 
suspect in the case (see below).  LabAtt suggested that the 
GOG provide details on this case in its report to USTR and 
requested that the GOG include information about results of 
the Guzman Lanuza murder case (where the transfer of the case 
to another Special Prosecutor resulted in an arrest of the 
main suspect).  Cortez said he would consult with his 
colleagues and do so. 
 
4.  (SBU) LabAtt also expressed concern about delays in the 
labor justice system, and the need to reinstate workers 
illegally fired for unionization activities.  Supreme Court 
Magistrate Otto Marroquin described efforts by the judiciary 
to resolve labor cases but noted limitations on making labor 
court reinstallation decisions effective. 
 
Progress in Monzon Lima Murder Investigation? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) On October 1, Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Trade Unionists, Marco Antonio Cortez Sis, told LabAtt that a 
key witness implicating the intellectual author of the June 
22, 2000 murder of Oswaldo Monzon Lima, General Secretary of 
the Gas Distributors Transportation Union, had accepted the 
Public Ministry\'s offer of witness protection.  Cortez said 
an arrest of the prime suspect in the case, Mario Roberto 
Ortiz Barranco, could take place within the month.  (Comment: 
 the arrest of Ortiz would be a major milestone for the 
Special Prosecutor, who has been largely ineffective to date. 
 End Comment.) 
 
MOL Willing to Combat \"Blacklisting\" 
------------------------------------ 
 
6.  (SBU) On September 30, LabAtt accompanied two ex-DYMEL 
workers to meet with Labor Vice Minister Antonio Monzon. 
Miguel Angel Rivera and Wilson Pineda, both qualified 
welders, described their own efforts and those of other union 
members in the DYMEL dispute to find jobs in the construction 
industry.  Those efforts have been largely thwarted by the 
existence of an internet-based blacklist of the 71 unionized 
ex-DYMEL workers.  (Note:  some ex-DYMEL workers have found 
jobs, but members of the union\'s executive board, including 
Rivera and Willy Hernandez, have had a tougher time finding 
work, and when they are contracted, they have been fired 
without explanation after a day or two.  LabAtt expressed 
concern that this form of discrimination, if proven, violates 
fundamental labor rights.  Monzon accepted the workers\' 
complaint, and called together his staff to investigate. 
(Comment:  One of the firms implicated in the blacklisting is 
PCCS, a subcontractor to Duke Energy.  LabAtt had alerted 
Duke to these allegations and provided the names of workers 
contracted and dismissed; Duke\'s representative promised to 
look into the case.  End Comment.) 
 
Ambassador to Speak at Labor Justice Forum 
------------------------------------------ 
7.  (U) The Ambassador has accepted an invitation from the 
National Sub-Commission to Strengthen the Labor Justice 
System to speak at a public event on October 8 marking 
publication of the sub-commission\'s proceedings.  Composed of 
representatives of the GOG, the judiciary, unions, academics, 
and the private sector, the sub-commission is a rare example 
of consensus building in a highly polarized society.  We hope 
it will provide a forum intent on making consensus-based 
reforms to the administration of the labor justice system, 
which is clogged and slow.  In the absence of consensus 
within this group on the Executive\'s proposed procedural code 
reform, which is pending in Congress, the emphasis has 
shifted to making non-legislative changes to improve the 
labor justice system. 
 
Pending Legislative Reforms Status Update 
----------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Labor Vice Minister Antonio Monzon claimed on 
September 30 that the FRG leadership in Congress will act on 
pending labor reforms when it can achieve a quorum, which is 
difficult during this election campaign period.  The reforms, 
submitted in May as four separate bills, have been combined 
into one, which includes articles which: 
 
-- prohibit child labor for children under the age of 14 and 
fine (not less than $2500) employers who violate this 
prohibition, 
 
-- define and prohibit the worst forms of child labor, and 
define the conditions of legal labor by minors under age 18, 
 
-- define and require an administrative fine for sexual 
harassment, 
 
-- mandate the formation of a joint management-worker 
committee to investigate allegations of sexual harassment in 
the workplace, to determine measures to immediately stop the 
harassment, 
 
-- require employers who fire workers without cause to give 
the fired worker the option of reinstallation or a severance 
payment, 
 
-- require employers to pay a worker who quits an amount 
equivalent to what that worker would received if fired 
without cause, 
 
-- close the exemption on rights and benefits of domestic 
workers, 
 
-- allow complainants to request that a labor court judge 
embargo employer assets at the outset of hearings, 
 
- mandate an oral hearing on cases within two months of a 
complaint, 
 
-- require employers of foreign workers to pay a monetary 
contribution for training Guatemalans. 
 
9.  (SBU) Guido Ricci, a labor lawyer for the main employers 
association (CACIF), told LabAtt on October 1 that the 
private sector originally decided not to oppose the pending 
labor reforms, but now objects to giving workers fired 
without cause the right to reinstallation in lieu of 
severance benefits.  This provision (inserted by the 
government to mollify union critics who worried universal 
severance would make it easier for employers to lay off 
workers) would restrict employers\' rights to control the size 
of their labor force.  With the prospect of a CAFTA which 
might prohibit any changes to labor legislation that limit 
labor rights, employers cannot risk having Congress approve 
this provision, he said.  Nevertheless, CACIF has not decided 
how to react publicly should the Congress take up the new 
draft bill.  (Note:  Ricci implied that CACIF did not want to 
be lured into public rejection of a bill, which the FRG would 
argue promotes labor rights, during the election campaign 
period.  End Note.) 
MOL Proposes Maquila Labor Pact 
------------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) Minister of Labor Moreira told LabAtt that 
Guatemalan labor law permits industry-wide collective 
bargaining agreements to be negotiated with unions 
representing 2/3 of all unionized workers in that sector. 
(Note:  the requirement to organize an industrial union is 
different: 50% plus one of all workers in the sector.  End 
Note.)  Moreira said he intended to propose that VESTEX, the 
maquila employer association, which represents over 2/3 of 
the companies in that sector, enter into voluntary 
negotiations with the Choi Shin/Cimatextiles unions to 
achieve such a pact, which are the only unions which 
currently exist in the sector.  Vice Labor Minister Monzon 
subsequently told LabAtt that the Minister had made the 
proposal to VESTEX, and it was rejected.  Comment:  This was 
vintage Moreira--audacious and seemingly intended to provoke 
the rejection of the private sector.  End Comment. 
 
TIP - DCM Preparatory Bilateral 
------------------------------ 
 
11.  (SBU)  On October 1, the DCM and LabAtt attended a 
meeting with MFA bilateral affairs officers and Mario Rene 
Cifuentes, the Foreign Minister\'s advisor on security issues, 
to request a meeting of the bilateral working group on 
trafficking in persons proposed in July by the GOG. 
Cifuentes offered to produce a draft \"matrix\" of benchmark 
goals that both governments share.  The DCM provided text of 
President Bush\'s UNGA speech and urged the GOG to make 
progress developing cases against traffickers.  The MFA 
officers requested a tri-lateral meeting of immigration 
officials from the US, Mexico and Guatemala to share ideas 
about border controls, with a possible emphasis on 
trafficking in persons.  They also requested a USG 
participant to give a briefing on TIP at an upcoming 
(unscheduled) series of seminars it will offer its own staff 
on the broad theme of migration.  The DCM said we would look 
forward to reviewing the matrix next week. 
 
TIP - Nine Stolen Babies Returned to Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
12.  (U) Press reported the repatriation of nine babies 
allegedly destined for illegal adoption in Costa Rica for up 
to $80,000 each.  A Guatemalan woman and Carlos Hernan 
Robles, a Costa Rican banker, were allegedly detained by 
Costa Rican authorities in the scheme. 
 
TIP - GOG Brothel Raids Find no TIP Victims 
------------------------------------------- 
 
13.  (SBU) DHS officer met in September with the Oscar 
Contreras, the Director General of Immigration, to request 
cooperation to investigate cases of TIP.  Contreras agreed to 
do so, and coordinated a raid on brothels with the national 
police and Public Ministry on September 10.  The 25 women, 
mostly Salvadoran and Honduran, denied to DHS interviewers 
that they were victims of TIP (i.e. forced or tricked into 
prostitution).  DCM will meet with Contreras on October 7 to 
request further efforts to combat TIP. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11254","10/7/2003 17:15","03GUATEMALA2587","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002587 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KCRM, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: GERARDI WITNESS MURDERED 
 
 
1.  Press reported the murder on October 5 of Erick Urizar, a 
defense witness in the murder case of Bishop Juan Gerardi. 
Urizar was shot while exiting his gun shop in the capital 
with his brother.  He had provided an alibi for ex-Capitan 
Byron Lima Oliva, convicted to 30 years imprisonment (since 
appealed) as the intellectual author of the Gerardi murder, 
which occurred April 26, 1998.  Ivan Urizar, Erick\'s brother, 
was wounded in the attack and is in serious condition in 
hospital.  There are no indications at this time that 
Urizar\'s murder was politically motivated. 
 
2.  Comment:  Several prosecution witnesses and one of the 
three military agents convicted of the Gerardi murder have 
been murdered since the start of the Gerardi investigation. 
The murder of Urizar does not appear to be 
politically-motivated, and may be attributable to spiraling 
violent crime in the capital. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11256","10/7/2003 22:47","03GUATEMALA2594","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002594 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/07/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, EFIN, PINR, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS GROUPS APPLAUD NEW SAAS LAW 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) On September 24 the Guatemalan Congress passed the 
organic law of the Secretariat for Administrative and 
Security Matters (SAAS) of the Presidency, which will replace 
the notorious Presidential Guard (EMP) set to be disbanded on 
November 1.  The SAAS was created by presidential decree on 
January 14, 2000, and has been gradually taking over duties 
from the EMP during the long transition.  The new SAAS law 
assures that the terms of the presidential decree are 
permanent, and was viewed by civil society as a sign that the 
Portillo government and the FRG majority in Congress remain 
committed to demobilizing the EMP on November 1.  MINUGUA 
issued a press statement congratulating the government for 
passage of the SAAS law, and senior human rights leaders were 
quoted in the press supporting the legislation. 
 
2. (C) During the long Congressional debate of the law, 
numerous articles were added which appeared to give the 
military continued influence over the President\'s security. 
The Ambassador raised our concerns about these modifications 
with President Portillo, noting that the international 
community viewed these as perpetuating the EMP under another 
name.  Portillo promised the Ambassador that if the law was 
passed by Congress with the unhelpful modifications, he would 
veto it.  PolOffs met with opposition legislators, who had 
been distracted from their Congressional duties by their own 
electoral campaigns, to urge them to weigh-in against the 
modifications.  Nineth Montenegro, of the left-of-center ANN 
party, agreed to take the lead, and opposed the modifications 
on the floor of Congress.  Other opposition parties joined 
her, and the modifications were eventually withdrawn.  The 
law as passed received some criticism for the financial 
implications it assumed in offering security to all former 
Presidents and Vice Presidents, but was applauded for 
effectively eliminating military influence over the 
Presidential household -- a key commitment from the Peace 
Accords. 
 
3. (C) Comment: The long-awaited demobilization of the EMP, 
scheduled for November 1, is on track.  We have received 
assurances from Portillo on down that there will not be a 
delay.  On October 6, Congress assigned the EMP a budget 
supplemental of Q16.4 million (roughly $2 million), 
generating renewed criticisms of the Portillo 
Administrations\' use of the EMP\'s non-transparent budget. 
But others saw it as a final payment to consign the EMP to 
history, once and for all. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11323","10/9/2003 18:11","03GUATEMALA2613","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE283733","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, SENV, ETRD, GT 
SUBJECT: CAFTA LABOR/ENVIRONMENT INFORMATION REQUEST 
 
REF: STATE 283733 
 
1.  In response to reftel request for information on legal 
remedies or actions the GOG can take to address violations of 
or non-compliance with labor and/or environmental laws, we 
submit the following: 
 
2.  Labor 
--------- 
 
-- Violations of labor law are generally brought to the 
attention of authorities (the Labor Ministry and Labor 
Courts) by complaints from workers and through labor 
inspections. 
 
-- The Labor Ministry and Labor Courts may each attempt to 
facilitate the amicable resolution of conflict.  If no 
voluntary \"acta\" (compliance agreement) is agreed to between 
the employer and worker, aggreived parties may seek justice 
in the Labor Courts.  Labor Court decisions may be appealed 
to the Supreme Court, and, if a consitutional principle is 
involved, to the Consitutional Court. 
 
-- Labor Code reforms passed in May 2001 also permit the 
Labor Ministry to cite and fine employers for infractions of 
standards relating to working conditions, minimum wage rates, 
maximum hours, permit requirements, safety and health 
standards, working age, and the rights to organize and 
bargain collectively. 
 
-- Employers have the right to appeal fines over 5000 
quetzals (approx. $625) to the labor courts. 
 
-- Between the enactment of new labor reforms in May, 2001 
and September 17, 2003, the Labor Ministry reported imposing 
1,326,622 quetzals ($165,827) in fines on employers for labor 
violations. 
 
-- The GOG (Ministry of Economy, in consultation with the 
Labor Ministry) also requires respect for labor rights as a 
condition on employers granted tax exemption privileges to 
for-export clothing manufacturers (\"maquilas\"). 
 
-- The GOG has cited 54 companies in the maquila sector for 
labor violations, and threatened to withdraw tax exemption 
privileges if these companies do not address outstanding 
labor violations by a GOG-imposed deadline.  Two such cases 
resulted in negotiation of collective bargaining agreements. 
 
-- The Executive submitted a package of reforms to the Labor 
Code in May, 2003, which, if passed by Congress, would allow 
plaintiffs to request that the labor court judge embargo the 
assets of the employer or representatives of the named 
company at the outset of a labor court proceeding.  Critics 
argue that the measure is too sweeping and could force firms 
to shut down before a case has been tried. 
 
3.  Environment 
--------------- 
 
GOG has provisions in its environmental law (1986) for 
stopping an activity which would pollute, for seizing objects 
that would pollute or assist in polluting, for modifying or 
demolishing structures that violate resolutions governing the 
environment, for levying fines that correlate to the offense, 
and for whatever else would be necessary to prevent or 
correct damage to the environment. 
 
The Ministry of Environment investigates complaints.  It has 
the authority to levy fines on site of from 5 to 100,000 
quetzals ($0.60-12,500).  However, usually it investigates 
the complaint and then calls in the implicated company. 
Together they write up a resolution (\"acta\") which is 
equivalent to a compliance agreement in the U.S.  If the 
\"acta\" is not fulfilled, the Ministry can try for legal 
redress through the Ministerio Publico (MP) via the following 
articles of the Penal Code: 
 
Article 346- Illegal exploitation of natural resources. A 
person who would exploit mineral resources, construction 
materials, rocks and natural resources contained within 
territorial oceans, underwater areas, rivers and lakes 
without having a license or authorization from appropriate 
environmental authorities (or who exceed approved license 
limits) will be sanctioned with a 2-5 year sentence. If this 
crime were committed by employees or legal representatives of 
a company or a legal entity, the company will be sanctioned 
with a fine of 5,000-25,000 quetzals ($625-4,125).  If a 
company is a second offender, it will be permanently shut 
down. 
 
Article 347 A- Pollution: 1-2 year sentences and fines of 
300-5,000 quetzals ($48-625) for air, ground, or water 
pollution through toxic emanations, excessive noise or waste 
disposal that could harm people, animals, forest and 
plantations. 
 
Article 347 B- Industrial pollution:  2-10 year sentences and 
fines of 3,000-10,000 quetzals ($475-1,250) to directors, 
managers, principals or beneficiaries of an industrial 
facility or commercial activity that would allow or approve 
air, ground, water pollution through toxic emanations, 
excessive noises. 
No standards or parameters exist for what constitutes, e.g., 
toxic emanations, excessive noise or waste disposal that 
could harm people, animals, forests and plantations.  The 
Ministry of Environment tells us it has neither the equipment 
nor the training nor the staff to set standards and evaluate 
information which would determine the magnitude of damage to 
the environment. 
 
The GOG also has other laws which cover environment, 
specifically, forestry (1996) and fishing (2003). 
 
According to Ministry of Environment statistics, it dealt 
with, verified and/or resolved 672 complaints in 2002 and 795 
in 2003. 
 
4.  Amparo (Injunction) 
----------------------- 
 
Guatemalan law (specifically the \"ley de amparo\") protects 
persons against the threat of violation of rights or restores 
rights if violated.  There is no area of law in which the 
\"amparo\" (injunction) does not apply (i.e. including labor 
and environmental regulation).  Amparos can be temporary or 
permanent, and have the force of law.  Amparos can be 
requested against court decisions, or can be filed against 
government or private entities (e.g requested by a union or 
environmental organization against a private company). 
HAMILTON 
"
"11324","10/9/2003 19:47","03GUATEMALA2615","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE283733","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002615 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, SENV, ETRD, GT 
SUBJECT: CAFTA LABOR/ENVIRONMENT INFORMATION REQUEST 
 
REF: STATE 283733 
 
1.  This message is in response to RefTel request for 
information on legal remedies or actions the GOG can take to 
address violations of or non-compliance with labor and/or 
environmental laws. 
 
2.  Labor 
--------- 
 
-- Violations of labor law are generally brought to the 
attention of authorities (the Labor Ministry and Labor 
Courts) by complaints from workers and through labor 
inspections. 
 
-- The Labor Ministry and Labor Courts may each attempt to 
facilitate the amicable resolution of conflict.  If no 
voluntary \"acta\" (compliance agreement) is agreed to between 
the employer and worker, aggrieved parties may seek justice 
in the Labor Courts.  Labor Court decisions may be appealed 
to the Supreme Court, and, if a constitutional principle is 
involved, to the Constitutional Court. 
 
-- Labor Code reforms passed in May 2001 also permit the 
Labor Ministry to cite and fine employers for infractions of 
standards relating to working conditions, minimum wage rates, 
maximum hours, permit requirements, safety and health 
standards, working age, and the rights to organize and 
bargain collectively. 
 
-- Employers have the right to appeal fines over 5000 
quetzals (approx. $625) to the labor courts. 
 
-- Between the enactment of new labor reforms in May, 2001 
and September 17, 2003, the Labor Ministry reported imposing 
1,326,622 quetzals ($165,827) in fines on employers for labor 
violations. 
 
-- The GOG (Ministry of Economy, in consultation with the 
Labor Ministry) also requires respect for labor rights as a 
condition on employers granted tax exemption privileges to 
for-export clothing manufacturers (\"maquilas\"). 
 
-- The GOG has cited 54 companies in the maquila sector for 
labor violations, and threatened to withdraw tax exemption 
privileges if these companies do not address outstanding 
labor violations by a GOG-imposed deadline.  Two such cases 
resulted in negotiation of collective bargaining agreements. 
 
-- The Executive submitted a package of reforms to the Labor 
Code in May, 2003, which, if passed by Congress, would allow 
plaintiffs to request that the labor court judge embargo the 
assets of the employer or representatives of the named 
company at the outset of a labor court proceeding.  Critics 
argue that the measure is too sweeping and could force firms 
to shut down before a case has been tried. 
 
3.  Environment 
--------------- 
 
The GOG has provisions in its environmental law (1986) for 
stopping an activity which would pollute, for seizing objects 
that would pollute or assist in polluting, for modifying or 
demolishing structures that violate resolutions governing the 
environment, for levying fines that correlate to the offense, 
and for whatever else would be necessary to prevent or 
correct damage to the environment. 
 
The Ministry of Environment investigates complaints.  It has 
the authority to levy fines on site of from 5 to 100,000 
quetzals ($0.60-12,500).  However, usually it investigates 
the complaint and then calls in the implicated company. 
Together they write up a resolution (\"acta\") which is 
equivalent to a compliance agreement in the U.S.  If the 
\"acta\" is not fulfilled, the Ministry can try for legal 
redress through the Public Ministry (MP) via the following 
articles of the Penal Code: 
 
Article 346- Illegal exploitation of natural resources. A 
person who would exploit mineral resources, construction 
materials, rocks and natural resources contained within 
territorial oceans, underwater areas, rivers and lakes 
without having a license or authorization from appropriate 
environmental authorities (or who exceed approved license 
limits) will be sanctioned with a 2-5 year sentence. If this 
crime were committed by employees or legal representatives of 
a company or a legal entity, the company will be sanctioned 
with a fine of 5,000-25,000 quetzals ($625-4,125).  If a 
company is a second offender, it will be permanently shut 
down. 
 
Article 347 A- Pollution: 1-2 year sentences and fines of 
300-5,000 quetzals ($48-625) for air, ground, or water 
pollution through toxic emanations, excessive noise or waste 
disposal that could harm people, animals, forest and 
plantations. 
 
Article 347 B- Industrial pollution:  2-10 year sentences and 
fines of 3,000-10,000 quetzals ($475-1,250) to directors, 
managers, principals or beneficiaries of an industrial 
facility or commercial activity that would allow or approve 
air, ground, water pollution through toxic emanations, 
excessive noises. 
No standards or parameters exist for what constitutes, e.g., 
toxic emanations, excessive noise or waste disposal that 
could harm people, animals, forests and plantations.  The 
Ministry of Environment tells us it has neither the equipment 
nor the training nor the staff to set standards and evaluate 
information which would determine the magnitude of damage to 
the environment. 
 
The GOG also has other laws which cover environment, 
specifically, forestry (1996) and fishing (2003). 
 
According to the Ministry of Environment, it dealt with, 
verified and/or resolved 672 complaints in 2002 and 795 in 
2003. 
 
4.  Amparo (Injunction) 
----------------------- 
 
Guatemalan law (specifically the \"ley de amparo\") protects 
persons against the threat of violation of rights or restores 
rights if violated.  There is no area of law in which 
\"amparo\" (injunction) protection does not apply (i.e. 
including labor and environmental regulation).  Amparos can 
be temporary or permanent, and have the force of law. 
Amparos can be requested against court decisions, or can be 
filed against government or private entities (e.g. requested 
by a union or environmental organization against a private 
company). 
HAMILTON 
"
"11325","10/9/2003 22:24","03GUATEMALA2623","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE214398","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002623 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: SUPPORT FOR LEVITSKY NOMINATION TO THE 
INCB 
 
REF: STATE 214398 
 
The MFA informed us on October 9 via Diplomatic Note (faxed 
to WHA/CEN) that the GOG will support the candidacy of 
Ambassador Melyvn Levitsky in the International Control Board 
special election in late October. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11357","10/10/2003 17:51","03GUATEMALA2630","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002630 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI, TBIO, EAID, GT, UNDP, UNESCO 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SEEKS SUPPORT FOR AIDS PROGRAM 
 
1. Summary: On October 9, the Ambassador attended a GOG 
presentation to elicit support for its latest attempt to 
secure funding from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis, and Malaria.  The Guatemalan AIDS proposal, 
slightly modified since its last presentation in Geneva in 
March, will be voted on during the week of October 13-17 at 
the Global Fund\'s third round of proposal approvals in Chiang 
Mai, Thailand.  Belize and Guatemala are the only CentAm 
countries to have had their proposals rejected in the first 
and second rounds.  End Summary. 
 
2. Due to widespread concerns in-country of government 
financial accountability, the Guatemalan proposal puts UNDP 
in a fiduciary agent role - a strategy used effectively in 
other sectors and with multilateral projects to ensure 
effective and timely program execution.  Guatemala\'s proposal 
seeks just under $41 million, $7 million less than its last 
proposal, for a 5 year period that would strengthen the 
existing country coordination mechanism, as well expand 
education, prevention, and treatment programs.  The proposal 
is a revision of earlier proposals.  The latest proposal has 
an administrative overhead of 5 percent, and its goals 
include: 
 
--Targeting preventative measures at the most vulnerable 
populations, 
 
--Involving NGO\'s and civil society, primarily in awareness 
and preventative programs, 
 
--Reducing the mother-child transmission rate from 30 percent 
to 5 percent over 5 years, and 
 
--Reducing opportunistic infections by 50 percent and the 
mortality of those infected by 30 percent over the same 5 
years. 
 
3.  Comment: An AIDS epidemic can still be avoided in 
Guatemala.  However, Guatemala\'s youthful population is the 
largest in Central America and, without outside AIDS funding, 
is increasingly at risk.  Guatemala currently has about the 
same number of AIDS cases as Honduras, Central America\'s most 
afflicted country in terms of percentage of population. 
Honduras secured a $45 million program in the first round, 
whereas Guatemala\'s higher per capita income pushed it to the 
least competitive category for proposals (2A).  Income 
distribution in Guatemala is highly skewed and the true size 
of Guatemala\'s vulnerable population is likely 
underestimated.  As the GOG presentation pointed out, it will 
be a true tragedy and far more expensive if Guatemala must 
wait for external AIDS funding until the epidemic is 
exploding. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11359","10/10/2003 18:55","03GUATEMALA2634","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002634 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, PINR, GT, UN 
SUBJECT: JUST ANOTHER LATIN AMERICAN ELECTION, FOR NOW 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The election campaign, which got off to a 
violent start, marred by allegations of expected fraud, has 
settled in recent weeks into what the UN mission aptly 
described as \"just another Latin American election.\"  The 
continuing heated confrontation between the ruling FRG and 
the opposition, however, lead many to believe that further 
violence is possible.  Polls continue to show Berger with a 
conformable lead, but the gap between the three front 
runners, including General Rios Montt, is narrowing.  UNE 
candidate Colom told us that if the FRG makes it into the 
second round of the elections, all the opposition parties 
have agreed to oppose the FRG.  The Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal decided unanimously to allow FRG candidate for mayor 
of Guatemala City Rabbe to run, overturning an earlier 
decision by the Registry of Persons that he had not met the 
conditions to be a candidate.  The OAS Election Observation 
Mission filed complaints against President Portillo and 
Guatemala City Mayor (and candidate for President) Garcia 
Gallont for using public resources to promote partisan 
campaigns.  The EU election observation mission is on the 
ground, and will have a large scale presence around the 
country on election day.  End summary. 
 
The Calm Before the Storm? 
-------------------------- 
2. (C) Since the beginning of August, the national election 
campaign in Guatemala has been characterized by fiery stump 
speeches by all candidates in the most remote corners of the 
country and uninspiring public debates (with only the smaller 
parties participating) in the capital.  The violent 
confrontation that characterized the early part of the 
campaign and the daily allegations that the FRG was going to 
commit massive fraud throughout the campaign and on election 
day have virtually disappeared, at least for now.  An 
internal MINUGUA document (please protect) of early October, 
notes that of the twenty cases of murders of \"political 
activists,\" only two were clearly politically motivated, and 
most of the others were clearly not politically motivated. 
It further concludes that the election campaign has become 
\"just another Latin American election.\"  With levels of 
confrontation still high, and with the UNE and FRG hotly 
contesting second place (in order to make it into the second 
round of elections), we can not rule out the possibility of 
future violence.  But for now, we agree that the election 
campaign has settled into a more normal rhythm. 
 
Polls Show Gap Narrowing 
------------------------ 
3. (U) An unpublished Noguera poll, taken between September 
26 and October 5, shows that GANA candidate Berger\'s lead 
over UNE\'s Colom and the FRG\'s Rios Montt has narrowed 
somewhat, though it still gives Berger a 20 point lead. 
While we caution that polls in Guatemala are widely viewed as 
subject to partisan manipulation, the Noguera poll has been 
the most consistent with anecdotal evidence and our own 
soundings of voter preferences outside the capital. 
Following are Noguera\'s conclusions: 
 
-      voter preference as a percentage of total respondents 
-                July    August    September    October 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Berger - GANA    30.5     39.6        40.7        36.2 
Colom - UNE      12.6     12.5        16.7        15.9 
Rios Montt - FRG 10.3     11.5        12.2        15.5 
Lopez R. - PAN    3.4      4.2         4.9         6.3 
Undecided        23.5     17.7        13.7        13.0 
 
4. (U) The poll notes that respondents view Berger as best 
positioned to create more jobs, but give him only a slight 
lead over Rios Montt in reducing crime.  The poll also 
concludes that 57.7% of respondents said they would never 
vote for Rios Montt, compared to 5.9% who said they would 
never vote for Berger. 
 
5. (C) UNE candidate Alvaro Colom told the Ambassador on 
October 8 that the ten smaller parties (all but the FRG and 
GANA) have agreed to join forces and support whichever of the 
ten parties makes it into the second round of elections.  He 
said that if none of them make it, and the runoff is between 
GANA and the FRG, they will all support GANA.  He 
acknowledged that none of the ten party leaders could command 
the second round vote of their followers, but said it was 
inconceivable that the FRG would pick up support from 
opposition voters. 
 
Green Light to Rabbe\'s Mayoral Candidacy 
---------------------------------------- 
6. (U) On October 8 the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) 
ruled unanimously that FRG candidate for Mayor of Guatemala 
City, Luis Rabbe, was eligible to run, overturning an earlier 
decision by the Registry of Persons which found him 
ineligible.  The TSE members concluded that the FRG did not 
in fact have a functioning Municipal Assembly, and therefore, 
the FRG\'s National Assembly had correctly chosen the mayoral 
candidate.  While some in the opposition groused at the 
decision, the TSE is widely viewed as impartial, and their 
unanimous decision put an end to the controversy.  The 
Noguera poll gives Rabbe 10.2% of voter preferences, compared 
with 47.0% for Unionista candidate (and former President) 
Alvaro Arzu and 20.2% for GANA\'s candidate Jorge Briz. 
 
OAS Questions Partisan Actions of Portillo and Garcia Gallont 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
7. (U) The OAS EOM filed complaints with the Public Ministry 
on October 9 alleging that President Portillo and Mayor of 
Guatemala City Fritz Garcia improperly used their public 
positions to promote partisan candidacies.  The complaint 
alleges that Portillo participated in FRG campaign rallies 
after the May convocation of national elections, violating 
the electoral law which forbids public officials from 
participating in partisan events.  Mayor Garcia Gallont, who 
is running as the presidential candidate for the Unionista 
Party, was accused of printing campaign propaganda on all 
municipal receipts.  The complaints have been filed with the 
Public Ministry for investigation and possible prosecution. 
Neither Portillo nor Garcia Gallont have responded to the 
charges publicly so far. 
 
EU Observation Mission on the Ground 
------------------------------------ 
8. (SBU) The Ambassador met with the head of the EU electoral 
observation mission, Jannis Sakellariou, and his deputy, 
Rafael Lopez Pintor, on October 8.  They noted that the EU 
mission will soon be opening offices in different regions of 
Guatemala, and will have a large presence on election day. 
The EU mission is coordinating with the OAS EOM to avoid 
duplication of efforts, but told us that efforts to 
coordinate with the OAS in other recent elections had had 
\"mixed success.\"  The OAS EOM similarly told us that there is 
good communication between the missions, but that the mandate 
of the missions was different enough that coordination was 
only effective on very specific issues. 
 
Lots of Illiterate Voters 
------------------------- 
9. (U) The TSE completed its update of the electoral register 
(\"padron\"), and announced that a total of 5,073,310 
Guatemalans had registered to vote.  The total represents an 
increase over the registry from 1999 roughly equal to 
population growth. Some illustrative figures from the 
registry:  29% of registered voters (1,477,814) identified 
themselves as illiterate; 26% of registered voters live in 
Guatemala City and its suburbs; the indigenous provinces of 
Quiche, Huehuetenango and San Marcos (that historically vote 
heavily for the FRG) make up 18% of registered voters. 
 
Comment 
------- 
10. (C) Expressions of concern that FRG fraud or manipulation 
could still influence the election continue to surface, but 
in recent weeks the election campaign has taken on the 
appearance of \"just another Latin American election.\"  This 
week\'s \"fear du jour\" is that the FRG has already contracted 
all public transportation for election day, depriving the 
other parties of means to transport their voters to the 
polls.  While it is possible that the FRG has begun 
contracting busses, some of our opposition contacts have 
expressed doubt that the FRG could corner the market 
nationally.  We are not prepared to speculate that the final 
four weeks of this heated campaign will be as \"normal\" as the 
past ten weeks, especially if the FRG and UNE view themselves 
as neck and neck for a space in the second round.  However, 
the growing presence of international observers, especially 
in the countryside, and the public stand by the OAS against 
electoral violence and abuses to the electoral law, create 
disincentives for a last minute increase in bad behavior by 
the FRG or other political actors.  The Embassy will be 
sending out teams of reporting officers to the countryside in 
coming weeks to provide snapshots of voter preferences and 
election issues dominating the minds of rural voters. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11360","10/10/2003 18:56","03GUATEMALA2635","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, PINS, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: RIGOBERTA MENCHU HARASSED BY FRG SUPPORTERS 
 
 
1.  Summary:  Nobel Peace Prize winner and indigenous rights 
activist Rigoberta Menchu Tum was harassed by supporters of 
FRG presidential candidate Efrain Rios Montt inside the 
Constitutional Court building on October 9.  Although she was 
not harmed, Menchu still sounded shaken by the incident early 
on October 10, when Ambassador called to express his concern 
and sympathy.  Menchu thanked the Ambassador for his call and 
said she would shortly hold a press conference and file a 
legal complaint with authorities.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Menchu and the FRG supporters, who reportedly included 
some FRG Congressional deputies and officers from the 
Ministry of Finance, were at the Constitutional Court to 
observe proceedings in the appeal by 34 members of the Bar 
Association against the Court\'s order prohibiting 
consideration of any legal appeal of its decision to permit 
Rios Montt to contest the presidency. 
 
3.  According to press reports, confirmed as accurate by the 
Rigoberta Menchu Foundation, Menchu arrived around noon in 
the hearing room, in time to hear a representative of the 
Attorney General\'s Office make a statement in favor of Rios 
Montt\'s inscription as a candidate.  Approximately 200 
supporters of Rios Montt erupted in jubilation at the 
statement, and began to shout insults and threats at Menchu, 
a prominent opponent of the FRG who filed a genocide case 
against Rios Montt in Spain.  The FRG supporters blocked the 
single exit to the building for 30 minutes to an hour. 
Menchu was reportedly jostled, pushed and spat on by some of 
the FRG supporters, but suffered no physical injury.  Police 
were notably absent from the building during this time. 
Menchu was able to leave the building after OAS observers and 
the Human Rights Ombudsman arrived to escort her. 
 
4.  The Ambassador called Menchu in the morning of October 10 
to express his concern for her safety and his sympathy for 
her following the abusive treatment she received.  Still 
sounding shaken, Menchu thanked the Ambassador and described 
the incident as \"ugly\" and her attempts to calm the 
situation.  She said she would hold a press conference at the 
Ombudsman\'s office and would file a complaint with the Public 
Ministry later that morning. 
 
5. Comment:  Menchu normally lives in self-imposed exile from 
Guatemala in Mexico, for security reasons, although her 
foundation has an office here.  Since Rios Montt\'s candidacy 
was ruled valid in July, Menchu has been at the forefront of 
efforts by civil society to protest his candidacy.  In doing 
so, Menchu is at high risk of threats to her safety.  The 
Ambassador\'s call was intended to prevent further incidents 
by showing USG concern and interest in Menchu\'s safety. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11424","10/15/2003 23:35","03GUATEMALA2649","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE287167","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, GT, UNHCR-1 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE TO THE GOG ON CANDIDATE FOR UN COMMITTEE 
AGAINST TORTURE 
 
REF: STATE 287167 
 
1. DCM and Polcouns met with Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Gabriel Aguilera and MFA Director of Multilateral Affairs 
Carla Rodriguez on October 15 to request GOG support for the 
candidacy of Ms. Felice Gaer for re-election to the UN 
Committee Against Torture.  The DCM provided the MFA with a 
diplomatic note officially requesting GOG support, as well as 
a copy of Ms. Gaer\'s CV.  Vice Minister Aguilera noted that 
Ms. Gaer is imminently qualified, said that the GOG would 
give full consideration to Ms. Gaer\'s candidacy and promised 
to inform us once the GOG reached a decision on which 
candidacies it would support. 
 
2. Senior MFA officer Rodriguez noted that Guatemala had 
voted for Ms. Gaer when she was first elected, and said that 
the GOG has always had a good working relationship with Ms. 
Gaer. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11425","10/15/2003 23:49","03GUATEMALA2650","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE291466","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002650 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/T (JANE COWLEY), AND USUN/L (CAROLYN 
WILLSON). 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO, GT, UNGA, KSCI 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA DOES NOT HAVE A POSITION YET ON CLONING 
BAN 
 
REF: STATE 291466 
 
Sylvia Corado, Director for Multilateral Affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry, told us on October 15 that Guatemala 
continues to consult internally and has not yet decided 
whether it will co-sponsor the Costa Rican Resolution. 
Corado was familiar with the substance of the resolution and 
promised to inform the Embassy as soon as the GOG reaches its 
decision on cosponsorship.  Corado was unwilling to speculate 
at this point on whether Guatemala would vote for the 
resolution even if it decides not to cosponsor. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11426","10/15/2003 23:50","03GUATEMALA2651","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE283533","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002651 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC(BATJER), WHA/USOAS (FERRAO), PM (SNIDLE), 
AND PM (SUGARMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ASEC, MARR, PARM, XM, XL, XS, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S DELEGATION TO OAS SPECIAL CONFERENCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 283533 
 
1. Poloff delivered reftel points to Carla Rodriguez, 
Director General for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign 
Ministry on October 7.  In a follow-up meeting on October 9, 
Rodriguez said that the Guatemalan delegation would be led by 
Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez.  Other delegates include 
Minister of Defense, General Robin Moran, Vice Minister for 
Foreign Affairs, Gabriel Aguilera and Guatemalan Ambassador 
to Mexico, Jorge Escoto.  On October 14, Rodriguez informed 
us that Guatemala will not seek a bilateral meeting with us 
on the margins of the conference. 
 
2. On October 14, Poloff informed Rodriguez of U/S Grossman\'s 
interest in meeting with all delegation heads from Central 
America, and noted that Belize, as SICA Chair, would be 
coordinating.  Rodriguez promised to inform Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11452","10/16/2003 17:26","03GUATEMALA2659","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161726Z Oct 03

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002659 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, OVIP, GT 
SUBJECT: INAUGURAL INVITATION FOR PRESIDENT BUSH 
 
 
1. On October 15, the Embassy received Diplomatic Note number 
9-1452 from the Directorate of Protocol at the Foreign 
Ministry.  The note, unofficially translated in paragraph 2, 
is a cover letter for an invitation to President Bush from 
President Portillo to attend the January 14 inauguration in 
Guatemala City.  Copies of the note and invitation have been 
faxed to WHA/CEN and originals will follow by pouch.  The 
note is dated October 8, and the invitation is dated 
September 31, 2003.  Our unofficial translation of the 
invitation is in paragraph 3. 
 
2. Begin text of Diplomatic Note 9-1452: 
 
Ministry of Foreign Relations, Guatemala City, Central America 
 
Note Number MA.9-1452--Protocol 
 
The General Directorate of Protocol and Diplomatic Ceremony 
of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of Guatemala, presents 
its compliments to the Honorable Embassy of the United States 
of America and has the honor to attach an invitation from Mr. 
Alfonso Portillo Cabrera, President of the Republic of 
Guatemala, to his Excellency Mr. George W. Bush, President of 
the United States, to attend the Guatemalan Presidential 
Inauguration on January 14, 2004. 
 
The General Directorate of Protocol and Diplomatic Ceremony 
of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of Guatemala takes this 
opportunity to renew its highest and most distinguished 
considerations to the Honorable Embassy of the United States. 
 
Guatemala, October 8, 2003 
 
Honorable Embassy of the Unites States, Guatemala City 
 
End text of Diplomatic Note. 
 
3. Begin text of invitation: 
 
The President of the Republic of Guatemala, Central America 
 
Guatemala, September 30, 2003 
 
Great and Good Friend, 
 
I have the honor to greet your Excellency and extend a 
cordial invitation to your illustrious government to attend 
the Guatemalan Presidential Inauguration that will take place 
in this capital city on January 14, 2004. 
 
I take this occasion to renew to your Excellency assurances 
of my highest and most distinguished considerations. 
 
Signature and Seal of President Portillo 
 
Excellency Mr. George W. Bush 
President of the United States of America, 
Washington DC, USA 
 
End text. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11455","10/16/2003 18:26","03GUATEMALA2660","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE286648|03STATE287999","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002660 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, EAID, IZ, GT 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE MADE TO GOG ON IRAQ DONORS CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. STATE 287999 
     B. STATE 286648 
 
Classified By: DCM Bruce Wharton for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) DCM and PolCouns met with Deputy Foreign Minister 
Gabriel Aguilera and MFA Director of Multilateral Affairs 
Carla Rodriguez on October 15 to urge the GOG to attend the 
Madrid Donors Conference and to pledge financial support for 
the reconstruction of Iraq.  DCM noted that the whole 
international community shares an interest in the prompt 
reconstruction of Iraq, and that Guatemala\'s participation in 
the Madrid conference and a financial contribution by the GOG 
to the reconstruction effort would gain for Guatemala 
recognition among the international community. 
 
2. (C) Aguilera acknowledged that the GOG had received an 
invitation from the Government of Spain to participate in the 
conference, but said that no determination had been taken yet 
by the GOG on its possible participation or on a financial 
contribution to Iraq\'s reconstruction.  He commented that the 
MFA is seeking input from other ministries, and would inform 
us once a decision had been made. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11490","10/17/2003 18:06","03GUATEMALA2664","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002664 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, PINS, GT 
SUBJECT: ELECTION ROUND UP WITH THREE WEEKS TO GO 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Polls continue to show GANA candidate 
Berger significantly ahead in voter preferences, followed by 
UNE\'s Colom and the FRG\'s Rios Montt in a dead heat for 
second place.  Some electoral experts believe the FRG will 
not make it into the second round, though poll results 
suggest that the FRG\'s core support base may be stronger than 
most give them credit for at around 20%.  Reports of Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal concerns over the potential for election 
day disturbances were exaggerated by the press.  Nonetheless, 
the TSE has asked for additional police protection for 
polling places that are historically hot spots.  Of 22 
alleged electoral related murders, only two are believed by 
international observers to be politically motivated.  OAS and 
EU election observers are blanketing the country, and expect 
to be up to 300 observers by election day.  In a meeting with 
the Ambassador, OAS EOM Chief Paniagua said he is meeting 
with the MOD to seek access to military bases to verify if 
payments to ex-PAC\'s are being made by FRG candidates.  End 
summary. 
 
 
WHO\'S AHEAD 
----------- 
2. (U) An October CID-Gallup poll gives GANA candidate Oscar 
Berger a commanding lead in the first round election with 34% 
of the vote, compared to 18% for UNE\'s Alvaro Colom, 10% for 
FRG leader Efrain Rios Montt and 7% for PAN candidate Leonel 
Lopez Rodas.  The CID-Gallup poll does not list other months 
for comparison purposes, but is consistent with polls taken 
by other firms for the same period.  The October poll shows 
that in a second round between Berger and Colom, 47% of 
respondents would vote for Berger, and 30% for Colom.  In a 
second round between Berger and Rios Montt, 65% of 
respondents said they would vote for Berger, followed by 13% 
for Rios Montt. 
 
3. (SBU) At a recent meeting with the Ambassador, three 
electoral experts (not affiliated with any political party) 
concluded that the unbroken tendency of Guatemalan voters to 
throw out the party in power would be difficult for the 
ruling FRG to overcome in this election.  A sagging economy, 
serious corruption allegations, a deteriorating security 
situation and the continued absence of the state from many 
rural areas would all work against Rios Montt\'s candidacy. 
Two of them opined that the final round of the election would 
pit Berger against PAN\'s Leonal Lopez Rodas, and one that 
Berger would face off with UNE\'s Alvaro Colom (Embassy 
comment:  While Lopez Rodas has risen in the polls in recent 
months, he still remains far behind Colom and Rios Montt in 
all the polls. End comment).  Other observers have noted that 
Berger\'s health problems (he was operated on recently for 
prostate cancer) have had a negative impact on his candidacy. 
 
4. (SBU) Conventional wisdom in Guatemala is that the FRG and 
UNE are competing virtually equally for second place.  Most 
polls show the FRG gaining ground, though still in third 
place.  A recent VoxLatina poll of Guatemala City voters 
showed that 15.5% would vote for FRG candidate for Mayor of 
Guatemala City Luis Rabbe.  While that still puts him in a 
distant third place for mayor, it shows that support for the 
FRG in Guatemala City, widely viewed as hostile to the FRG, 
could exceed 15%.  If the FRG has 15% in Guatemala City, it 
is not inconceivable that its core support nationwide is 
closer to 20%. 
 
CONCERNS ABOUT ELECTION DAY DISTURBANCES 
---------------------------------------- 
5. (U) Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) President Oscar 
Bolanos told reporters on October 15 that the TSE fears 
confrontations in 205 municipalities where current mayors are 
running for re-election.  In an October 16 round-table 
discussion with the private sector, Bolanos clarified that 
the TSE does not have any reason to believe that the current 
election will be more violent than previous ones, and said 
that they expect public disturbances will occur in very few 
municipalities.  He noted that two of the blue-collar suburbs 
of Guatemala City (Chinautla and Palencia) historically had 
election day violence (after the poll results were known), 
and that in the 1999 the election had to be repeated in 
Chinautla because angry mobs burned the ballot boxes after 
their candidate for mayor lost.  He said that he had already 
spoken with the Minister of Government to request additional 
security on election day for the areas where violence is 
traditional, and OAS Election Observation Mission head 
Valentin Paniagua noted that the OAS will dedicate more 
observers to the municipalities where violence is 
traditionally common. 
 
6. (SBU) The murder on October 8 of two GANA members (a 
husband and wife) in Puerto San Jose again raised the specter 
of pre-election violence, but MINUGUA and the OAS have not 
determined that the murders were politically motivated.  Of 
the 22 allegations of election-related murders since the 
convocation of elections in May, MINUGUA and the OAS believe 
two were clearly politically motivated (though in both cases 
they were the acts of impassioned local party members, not 
part of a national strategy by the parties involved).  Most 
of the cases were clearly not politically motivated.  The OAS 
and MINUGUA continue to investigate the remaining cases. 
 
MOST OBSERVED ELECTION EVER 
--------------------------- 
7. (U) The OAS and EU election monitoring missions have 
opened their regional offices and are making their presence 
felt throughout the country.  Both missions expect to field 
150 international observers each on election day, in what 
will be Guatemala\'s most observed election since the 
restoration of democracy. 
 
OAS TO VERIFY PAYMENTS TO EX-CIVIL PATROL MEMBERS 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
8. (SBU) The GOG\'s recent decision to expand the number of 
former PAC\'s that would receive compensation for their 
war-time service was widely viewed as a ploy to seek their 
support for the FRG in the elections.  Large numbers of 
ex-PAC\'s that failed to receive compensation in the first 
tranche have been blocking FRG campaign rallies in different 
parts of the country and protesting against FRG candidate 
Rios Montt.  The controversial GOG decision to pay the former 
civil patrol members on military bases, where the public is 
not allowed, created fears that the FRG would use this to 
hide their political proselytism with the ex-PAC. 
Accusations have surfaced that FRG candidates are handing out 
the compensation payments.  In an October 17 meeting with the 
Ambassador, OAS Election Observation Chief Valentin Paniagua 
said that he would be meeting later that day with MOD General 
Robin Moran to request access to military bases on the days 
the payments are made to the PAC to observe if partisan 
political activities are taking place in violation of the 
electoral law. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
9. (SBU) Last week\'s fear \"du jour,\" that the FRG had rented 
all the buses in the country on election day, has subsided. 
Several individuals associated with the opposition have 
assured voters that public transportation will be available 
on election day.  This week\'s fear is that the FRG will put 
mobs on the streets on election day to discourage voters. 
The OAS and TSE have engaged with the Minister of Government 
on this issue and received assurances that the police will 
maintain order on election day.  The OAS believes that the 
large number of international observers will also discourage 
violence.  With 23 days left before the election, voter 
preferences have not changed, and tensions have diminished 
significantly from their high in late July.  Current 
expectations are for a normal electoral process. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11616","10/23/2003 22:24","03GUATEMALA2705","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002705 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, PREL, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: WITH TWO WEEKS TO GO, VOTER PREFERENCES REMAIN 
CONSTANT 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The polls continue to show GANA candidate 
Oscar Berger in a clear lead in the run up to the November 9 
national elections, followed by Colom and Rios Montt vying 
for second place.  Fears of potential electoral fraud are 
much diminished, and pre-election violence and electorally 
motivated public spending do not appear to exceed the levels 
of previous elections.  OAS and EU observer missions are 
blanketing the country, and the OAS is observing payments to 
the ex-PACs to ensure that the payments are not used for 
partisan campaigning.  The Ambassador has begun a round of 
meetings with the four leading presidential candidates and 
their teams to reinforce our expectation that the elections 
will be free, fair and violence-free, and to establish a 
dialogue on bilateral issues with the next government.  End 
summary. 
 
What the polls say 
------------------- 
2. (U) A poll taken by VoxLatina between October 5-11, and 
reprinted in the major dailies on October 20, continues to 
list GANA candidate Oscar Berger ahead with 37.2% of the 
vote, followed by UNE candidate Alvaro Colom with 21.3% and 
FRG candidate Rios Montt with 11.5%.  The VoxLatina poll is 
consistent with other polls in the lead it gives Berger, but 
most polls put the difference between Colom and Rios Montt at 
well within the margin of error.  The extremely low rating 
for Rios Montt is inconsistent with other polling information 
and anecdotal evidence of a larger core support base for the 
former General.  Following are the VoxLatina rankings: 
 
-            voter preferences as a percentage of respondents 
-                 July     August     September     October 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
Berger - GANA     36.9      44.4         37.8         37.2 
Colom - UNE       13.1      17.1         18.2         21.3 
Rios Montt - FRG   7.9       3.3         11.4         11.5 
Lopez Rodas - PAN   --       4.1          4.6          6.3 
 
Ambassador meets with Berger 
---------------------------- 
3. (C) The Ambassador, DCM and PolCouns met with GANA 
candidate Oscar Berger, his Vice Presidential runningmate 
Eduardo Stein and campaign chairman Eduardo Gonzalez on 
October 21 in the first of a series of breakfasts scheduled 
with the four leading contenders for the Presidency.  Berger 
downplayed public concerns over his health (he was recently 
operated on for prostate cancer) and said that his campaign 
had not missed a beat.  Berger does not believe Rios Montt 
will make it into the second round of the election campaign, 
and said he discounts the possibility of significant fraud on 
election day.  He also said that it is increasingly unlikely 
that he will win in the first round.  Vice Presidential 
candidate Stein opined that all the last minute government 
spending, payments to the former PACs and other manipulation 
by the FRG would not alter the election results by more than 
4 or 5 percent.  The GANA leaders expect that there will be 
some local post-electoral violence in communities where the 
mayorships are being hotly contested, but do not believe 
violence will affect the national election.  The Ambassador 
noted that the Embassy wants to brief the two winners of the 
November 9 election on a wide range of bilateral issues, as 
the transition period after the second round election will be 
very brief.  The GANA leaders welcomed increased engagement 
after the first round. 
 
OAS observes PAC payments 
------------------------- 
4. (C) Following allegations by the PAN that they had filmed 
FRG candidates handing out government compensation payments 
to former civil patrol members, the OAS began monitoring the 
payment of ex-PACs (which are taking place on military 
bases).  The MOD gave the OAS mission a list of sites and 
dates for the ex-PAC payments, and granted access for the OAS 
observers to military bases.  The OAS observers began 
monitoring these payments in mid-October and have told us 
that they have not observed any FRG candidates or electoral 
propaganda at the payment sites as alleged by the PAN.  The 
OAS also told us that the PAN has not given the OAS a copy of 
the video purportedly showing FRG candidates handing out the 
payments to the ex-PAC. 
 
5. (SBU) The Government has confirmed press reports that the 
number of former civil patrol members who are to receive 
compensation has risen from 250,000 to 500,000.  Vice 
President Reyes claimed to the diplomatic corps in a 
closed-door meeting on October 23 that the number of 
claimants had risen gradually, but steadily, over the last 
several months as beneficiaries documented their claims to 
compensation.  The (opposition) press is portraying it as an 
electoral calculation by the FRG, after ex-PACs around the 
country have protested against the FRG for failing to deliver 
on their compensation promises.  While payments to the former 
PACs have increased, the pace of actual payments remains 
slow, and associations of ex-PACs continue to protest against 
the government and the FRG.  Large numbers of former PACs 
continue to occupy the city square in Mazatenango, 
threatening to keep out any FRG campaigners, and ex-PACs have 
also threatened to disrupt FRG campaigning in parts of Alta 
Verapaz. 
 
Public spending will have little impact on election 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
6. (U) Under a contract from USAID, local NGO CIEN has 
conducted a study of how the Portillo government is spending 
resources in the months leading up to the elections in ways 
that could influence voters.  The three studies presented so 
far have concentrated on state spending for the compensation 
program for the former PAC, the school breakfast program and 
the distribution of fertilizers.  The CIEN studies have found 
that party affiliation has not been a factor in determining 
who benefits from the programs, that beneficiaries do not 
feel obligated to vote for the FRG as a result of receiving 
the benefits and that the election year spending has not been 
out of line with the spending of previous governments. 
 
7. (SBU) CIEN Director Maria del Carmen Acena told us that 
actual spending on public works projects was less than in 
previous election years, though the budget for public works 
projects is at record levels.  Acena commented that the 
biggest difference between the election year spending of the 
Portillo government and its predecessors is that previous 
governments used budget reserves to cover the spending, while 
the FRG has indebted the next government to pay for the 
election year largesse.  She also said that while previous 
governments had built public works that benefited the whole 
community, the Portillo government has resorted to \"more 
populist\" cash payments (in the case of the ex-PACs and the 
school breakfast program). 
 
8. (SBU) At the meeting (see para 5) with Vice President (and 
FRG founding member) Reyes Lopez on October 23, the 
Ambassador asked whether the FRG would accept a 
TSE-determined result that it did not make it to the second 
 
SIPDIS 
round.  The Vice President\'s answer was a categorical \"yes,\" 
but he then listed a half-dozen reasons why he expects the 
FRG to \"surprise and disappoint a lot of people\" on election 
night.  These included the familiar: under-reported strength 
in the interior, the General himself being a candidate, the 
strength of mayoral and Congressional candidates and superior 
organization.  Some of the diplomats took the latter part of 
his reply as a de facto negation of the first part.  The 
Ambassador did not think he went that far. 
 
Plenty of busses 
---------------- 
9. (SBU) The concern of many opposition leaders that the FRG 
had contracted all the buses in the country for election day 
appears to have passed.  News reports (and our inquiries in 
rural areas) suggest that bus owners are still looking for 
business on election day, and that Electoral Tribunal members 
in many of the rural areas we have visited do not believe 
there will be a transportation shortage on election day. 
 
Ambassador tries out electoral ink 
---------------------------------- 
10. (U) Challenging public skepticism that the ink used to 
mark voters\' fingers on election day could be removed to 
permit voters to vote more than once, the Ambassador and the 
ambassadors of a number of other countries participated in a 
public demonstration of the ink by the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal on October 22.  The ambassadors emerged with their 
fingers blackened, and the press carried the story, complete 
with pictures, that the ink is reliable.  Much scrubbing and 
24 hours later, the ink remains. 
 
Friction between Berger and other opposition candidates 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
11. (SBU) Competing presidential debates held on the nights 
of October 21 and 22 exposed the growing tension between GANA 
candidate Oscar Berger and the candidates for the other ten 
parties opposed to the FRG.  Berger and Rios Montt did not 
show up at the October 21 debate, sponsored by an 
organization widely viewed as sympathetic to the ten smaller 
parties.  When the organizers of the October 22 debate only 
invited the three largest of the ten small parties, the ten 
agreed that no one would participate if they all were not 
invited.  Berger was the only candidate to show up for the 
October 22 debate at the packed out National Theater, once 
again drawing attention to the growing feud between the 
parties opposed to the FRG.  Berger\'s disinterest in seeking 
a more collegial relationship with the other opposition 
leaders comes across to voters as arrogance, and may limit 
his ability to get out the vote of supporters of the other 
opposition parties in the second round. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
12.  (C) With little more than two weeks left before the 
first round of balloting, there is scant evidence of the 
highly charged political atmosphere that characterized the 
first months of the campaign.  While polls continue to show 
that a large number of Guatemalans believe there will be 
fraud in the elections, all of the contenders agree that the 
election process itself is virtually tamper-proof.  The 
presence of large numbers of international observers already 
in the countryside has diminished the likelihood of violence 
before the voting tables close, though disputed municipal 
races historically lead to violent confrontations in some 
towns on election night.  Teams of Embassy officers are 
taking informal soundings on electoral issues in the four 
corners of the country, and we will provide snapshot reports 
on regional views of the elections over the next two weeks. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11633","10/24/2003 12:36","03GUATEMALA2707","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002707 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: ELECTIONS SNAPSHOT 1: ALL QUIET ON THE EASTERN 
FRONT 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary: EmbOffs visited the eastern provinces of 
Zacapa and Chiquimula to conduct man-on-the-street interviews 
and to discuss the ongoing election campaign with resident 
international election observers.  Widespread disillusionment 
with the Portillo Administration was reflected in our 
unscientific polls and confirmed by the MINUGUA and OAS reps. 
 Colom and Berger tied in the voter-preference poll, with 
Rios Montt a distant third.  Concerns about fraud and 
violence on election day were widespread but ill-defined, and 
centered on mayoral-level races.  International observers are 
well-coordinated and have targeted their resources at areas 
where tensions are highest.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Zacapa and Chiquimula are typical of Guatemala\'s 
rural, largely ladino eastern provinces.  Together the two 
provinces constitute just under 5 percent of Guatemala\'s 
population, and both departments voted overwhelmingly for the 
FRG in the 1995 and 1999 elections.  During our visit, 
EmbOffs conducted random interviews with a broad range of 
voters.  About one third of the interviews were conducted 
outside Zacapa\'s hospital and included voters from several 
outlying communities.  The rest were conducted in 
Chiquimula\'s central plaza. 
 
3. (SBU) Zacapa is President Portillo\'s hometown and has been 
the beneficiary of several large-scale public works projects, 
such as the renovation of the central square and the sports 
stadium.  Residents were not impressed, however, and most 
expressed bitter disappointment with the Portillo 
Administration.  Alberto Brunori, MINUGUA representative, who 
has resided in Zacapa since 2000, believes this 
disillusionment will translate into low voter turnout on 
election day.  Rosario Ramos of the OAS observation mission 
reported long lines all over the region as people updated 
their voter registration.  Our interviews reconciled this 
apparent contradiction by reflecting widespread apathy and 
cynicism toward politics and politicians at the national 
level, but residents became animated and opinionated when our 
questions touched on local-level politics. 
 
4. (U) Chiquimula is widely referred to as the personal 
fiefdom of four-time FRG congressman Baudillo Hichos, whose 
repeat victory in the upcoming elections appears guaranteed. 
Both Brunori of MINUGUA and Gerber Mendez, resident 
representative for the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s office (PDH) 
in Chiquimula, point to an atmosphere of tension in 
Chiquimula, but neither expects acts of violence or fraud on 
election day if only because Hichos and his people seem to 
have the situation completely under control.  All bets are 
off, however, if early results indicate that the Mayor\'s 
office or the new Congressional seat is not going to the FRG. 
 Gerber said that the number and types of formal complaints 
his office receives have not been affected by the run-up to 
the election.  Our interviews in Chiquimula did not pick up 
an atmosphere of intimidation, although we got more responses 
in favor of Rios Montt than in Zacapa. 
 
5. (SBU) Rios Montt performed poorly in our unofficial poll, 
placing a distant third with less than 8 percent.  We suspect 
some of our subjects who claimed to be undecided or insisted 
that their vote was secret are in reality going to vote for 
Rios Montt.  These cases still amounted to less than 20 
percent of responses.  Surprisingly, Alvarado Colom scored as 
high as Oscar Berger in our poll, each with 40 percent 
support.  Colom was considered by respondents to be the least 
corrupt and most likely to help the poor, whereas Berger was 
considered more likely to improve the economy and impose 
security.  Respondents were evenly split on whether economic 
or security issues should be the priority of the next 
government, with most people seeing these issues as 
inextricably linked at the local level.  Respondents focused 
almost entirely on local issues, and did not seem concerned 
about national political issues. Nearly all respondents 
(except for those voting for Rios Montt) believed there would 
be fraud at the polls.  Several respondents said that a Rios 
Montt victory would constitute proof of fraud, but no one 
explained how electoral safeguards could be defeated and no 
one thought the results of the elections would ultimately be 
discredited by fraud. 
 
6. (SBU) The OAS and EU observation missions said they have 
closely coordinated their election day observation plans, and 
the EU observers told us they have received excellent 
cooperation from the local political parties to date.  We 
also noted a high degree of communication and coordination 
among MINUGUA, Mirador Electoral, and the PDH.  Seventy-four 
of the 261 voting precincts in Chiquimula province will be in 
the city of Chiquimula itself.  Given the FRG\'s strength and 
stakes in the city, the Mirador will concentrate 17 of it 58 
observers there, backed up by 31 from the PDH.  In 
Esquipulas, where violence has historically been more of a 
problem than fraud, the Mirador will send 6 observers, and 
the PDH is committing 25 so that there will be complete 
coverage of the 30 voting tables in Esquipulas.  A similar 
pattern applies to Zacapa where 47 domestic observers (12 
from the Mirador and 35 from PDH) will provide nearly 
complete coverage to the 51 voting tables in the city.  The 
rest of the precincts in these two provinces (261 total for 
Chiquimula, and 183 total for Zacapa) will have approximately 
50 percent coverage. 
 
7. (SBU) Comment:  Man-on-the-street interviews and reports 
from international observers suggest that the FRG is 
significantly behind in its own stronghold, in large part 
because of disillusionment with the current government. 
Localized disturbances are expected in the eastern provinces 
on election night, where historically the supporters of 
losing mayoral candidates often seek redress with bravado, 
sometimes leading to violence.  In fact, when MINUGUA 
recently suggested that the GANA candidate for Mayor in the 
town of Gualan file a legal complaint in the wake of an 
attempt on his life, he retorted \"that\'s not the way we do 
things here.\"  International observers have established a 
high profile and are working well together.  Potential 
flashpoints appear to have been identified and are few enough 
in number to be well monitored. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11644","10/24/2003 18:27","03GUATEMALA2727","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE300129","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/AND (C. BARCLAY) AND WHA/USOAS (J. 
FERRAO) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, CO, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON COLOMBIAN\'S SIDE DECLARATION AT OAS 
SPECIAL CONFERENCE ON SECURITY 
 
REF: STATE 300129 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Sylvia Corado, Director 
for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry.  Corado 
said Guatemala has not formed a position on the Colombian 
declaration.  The GOG delegation, headed by Foreign Minister 
Edgar Gutierrez, departs for Mexico tomorrow.  Corado 
promised she would provide our points and a copy of the 
Colombian declaration to the delegation before its departure. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11645","10/24/2003 18:44","03GUATEMALA2728","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002728 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: ELECTION SNAPSHOT #2: SOUTH COAST HOT SPOTS 
 
 
1.  Summary:  Election officials in Suchitepequez and 
Esquintla provinces generally anticipate a transparent 
process, with minimal vote fraud.  Election officials, OAS 
observers, and men and women encountered in the street all 
anticipate high voter turnout.  Based on a tiny, unscientific 
sample, Berger, Colom and Rios Montt, in that order, are the 
front-runners at the presidential level; mayoral preferences 
vary more widely by municipality.  Election officials and 
international observers are concerned about the potential for 
isolated electoral conflict or violence in the municipalities 
of Santa Lucia and Chicacao, two areas that have recently 
experienced politically-motivated violence.  Other areas of 
concern to OAS observers are towns with incumbent FRG mayors 
seeking re-election and rumors that the FRG has infiltrated 
vote-counting centers (which TSE officials doubted).  Another 
unpredictable factor in the electoral brew is the strong 
protest movement among disgruntled former paramilitaries 
(ex-PAC) who await compensation from the government.  End 
Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  On October 22 PolOff and ConOff visited the hot, densely 
populated towns of Mazatenango (30,000 voters in 1999, 51% 
participation) and San Antonio (16,000 voters in \'99), 
Suchitepequez province; and Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa (37,000 
voters, 33% participation) and Siquinala (7,300 voters, 65% 
participation), Esquintla province.  EmbOffs met with 
election officials in Mazatenango and Santa Lucia, and OAS 
election observation mission officials in San Antonio.  All 
these towns are located on the steamy southwestern coastal 
plain dominated by sugar cane and rubber plantations, and 
sugar mills.  Although the FRG won in all these towns in 
1999, Suchitepequez is a hotbed for anti-government protest 
by former civil self-defense patrollers; and Santa Lucia 
experienced anti-FRG electoral violence in 1999 when several 
polling stations were attacked and the tabulated poll results 
were burned.  We also discussed electoral preferences with 
random citizens encountered in the town centers of 
Mazatenango and Siquinala. 
 
Electoral Officials Prepared 
---------------------------- 
 
3.  TSE officials in Mazatenango and Santa Lucia reported few 
concerns about electoral preparations.  They enjoy close 
coordination with local political organizers and parties, 
police authorities and international observers to help insure 
a smooth and fair electoral process.  They reported no major 
complaints received (some minor complaints about tearing down 
rival campaign posters) and are confident the citizenry will 
turn out in larger numbers.  TSE officials in Santa Lucia 
have concentrated all voting booths along one city block, 
cordoned off by a reinforced police contingent, to prevent 
attacks on dispersed voting centers from recurring.  This 
will permit better observation in the voting area, which will 
be sealed at the close of the polls.  Nevertheless, TSE 
officials there are alert for possible attacks after the 
polls close. 
 
4.  On another issue of recent concern at the national level, 
TSE officials in Mazatenango discounted concerns in the 
 
SIPDIS 
capital about the availability of transportation to all 
parties on election day.  They report wide availability of 
public and private bus lines as well as private van and truck 
operators to transport voters on election day. 
 
OAS Observers Concerned about the Vote Count 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  TSE and OAS observers generally express confidence that 
the election will proceed smoothly on election day.  However, 
OAS observers in the region expressed concern about the 
potential for electoral impropriety in towns in which FRG 
mayors are seeking re-election (17 of 20 municipalities in 
Suchitepequez).  They also shared rumors that FRG has 
infiltrated TSE election tabulation sites with its 
supporters.  TSE officials discounted this possibility, 
citing redundant systems for vote tabulation at the 
municipal, national and regional level.  The TSE officials we 
met were more concerned with monitoring and sanctioning cash 
payments or other voter incentives offered on voting day. 
All the people we met on the street planned to vote; few 
expressed concern about electoral fraud. 
 
Potential for Violence:  Ex-PACS and Tight Races 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
6.  TSE and OAS officials were most concerned about the 
potential for electoral conflict and violence in the isolated 
municipalities of Santa Lucia and Chicacao, which have both 
experienced political violence.  According to the local TSE 
representative, Santa Lucia is number three on the Ministry 
of Government\'s national list of potential problem areas on 
election day.  The TSE expects a larger police presence as a 
result, but have not yet been informed of actual police 
numbers.  He blamed recent political violence, including the 
burning of local National Civil Police headquarters, on the 
volatile mix of residents in Santa Lucia, which has 
experienced high in-migration of poor Guatemalans in search 
of jobs. 
 
7.  In nearby Chicacao municipality, 2,000 disgruntled ex-PAC 
burned down the municipal building on May 5 to protest 
non-payment of expected compensation.  In other nearby towns 
on the same and the following day, ex-PAC sequestered a mayor 
for 16 hours and the governor for 6 hours, for the same 
reason.  During their visit to Mazatenango, EmbOffs observed 
a seething crowd of angry, sun-bitten campesinos which filled 
the claustrophobic central square.  The crowd of 150-200 
ex-PAC was being harangued by a speaker accusing the 
government of \"trickery\" and demanding payment for their 
\"national service\" as paramilitaries during the internal 
conflict.  The protesters, a few armed with machetes, later 
seized control of a local radio station for several hours. 
Press reports accused a local government official of making 
death threats to journalists for \"anti-FRG\" coverage.  TSE 
and OAS contacts discounted the notion that compensated 
ex-PACs will vote solidly for any one party, saying the 
motivation for their protests are pure self-interest.  Other 
parties have promised to respect the current government\'s 
commitment to pay the ex-PAC in two further tranches.  Our 
TSE and OAS contacts claimed that members of the Democratic 
 
SIPDIS 
Social Participation Party of presidential candidate Miguel 
Angel Lee are encouraging further protest by local ex-PAC in 
Chicacao and Mazatenango. 
 
Voter Preferences Vary Locally:  Man in the Street 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
8.  Electoral official and observer predictions and our 
discussions with people in and around the central squares of 
Mazatenango, San Antonio and Siquinala revealed great 
variation between municipalities.  In Mazatenango and San 
Antonio, none of the people we met on the street said they 
would vote for the FRG.  In Mazatenango, some cited as their 
reason the corruption of the current FRG mayor, who was 
suspended for five months while under investigation.  In 
Siquinala, however, several people we met support the FRG at 
the local level.  Two women in indigenous clothing (rare in 
this region, but Siquinala is home to a community of returned 
Guatemalan refugees from Mexico) said they would vote for the 
current FRG mayor and for Oscar Berger for President.  Two 
men told us they supported the FRG, and said the Unionista 
and PAN candidates for mayor were also contenders.  In Santa 
Lucia, TSE officials told us the mayoral race is between the 
FRG and URNG. 
 
9.  At the presidential level, Berger (6) and Alvaro Colom 
(5) of the UNE were the most popular presidential candidates 
in both towns, followed by Rios Montt (2).  One man refused 
to divulge his preferences, and another turned out to be a 
Salvadoran attempting to migrate illegally to the U.S.  The 
TSE official in Mazatenango put the UNE in front, followed by 
 
SIPDIS 
the FRG and GANA.  In Santa Lucia, the TSE predicted a Berger 
win, with Rios Montt in second place over Colom.  At the 
national level, no one we met expressed a preference for the 
PAN candidate, despite presidential candidate Lopez Rodas\' 
demagogic emphasis on citizen security.  All the major 
candidates had recently visited the region and most had 
turned out good crowds of curiosity-seekers.  OAS observers 
predicted the region would favor, in descending order, the 
GANA, UNE and FRG. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  This visit reinforces the notion of a divide between 
local and national politics.  Electoral officials here seem 
confident about pre-electoral preparations, convinced that 
election violence is likely to be isolated at the municipal 
level.  Our interviews with men and women on the street also 
revealed a separation in voter intentions, with some voters 
planning to vote for one party for mayor and a different one 
for president.  This situation is linked to the performance 
of local FRG mayors.  Interestingly, even in towns with 
popular FRG mayors, Rios Montt may not benefit from a 
party-line vote.  Also notable was the fact that, apart from 
some voters\' concerns with municipal corruption (in 
Mazatenango) and differing opinions about public works, very 
few of the voters we spoke with cited any national issues 
motivating their presidential candidate preferences.  All 
agreed that jobs and security are important national issues, 
but few cited these issues as reasons for their presidential 
preferences. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11709","10/28/2003 18:25","03GUATEMALA2744","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002744 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PINR, PINS, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: FORMER CIVIL PATROL MEMBERS TAKE JOURNALISTS 
HOSTAGE 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: A group of approximately 500 ex-PACs blocked 
the inter-American highway in La Libertad, Huehuetenango on 
October 26 and took four journalists hostage, in an attempt 
to get the government to compensate them for wartime service. 
 The former civil patrol members had originally taken the 
highway to block a campaign rally for FRG candidate Rios 
Montt, but took the journalists hostage when the FRG 
suspended the rally.  The Minister of Government told the 
Ambassador that the GOG does not want to use force which 
could put the hostages\' lives in jeopardy, and said that the 
GOG negotiators are offering to register the ex-PACs and 
process their compensation on an expedited basis.  Opponents 
of the government in civil society and the media blame the 
GOG for the general lawlessness in the country and for 
creating expectations of compensation among the ex-PACs that 
the GOG is not able to meet.  Former civil patrol members in 
other areas of the country who have not been compensated are 
doubtless watching the tense negotiation in Huehuetenango 
closely, and the resolution could lead to new protest 
actions.  The daily images in the press of armed peasants 
blocking roads and forcing the FRG to cancel campaign rallies 
in areas where the ex-PACs have strength will not have a 
positive impact on the FRG\'s election campaign.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) On October 26, approximately 500 former civil patrol 
members (ex-PACs) blocked the inter-American highway at La 
Libertad in the Department of Huehuetenango to keep the FRG 
from bussing in participants to an election campaign rally 
for presidential candidate Rios Montt scheduled for later 
that day.  The ex-PACs were protesting their lack of 
compensation by the GOG for their wartime service (Note: As 
of October 21, the GOG had compensated 454,098 former civil 
patrol members, including 60,313 in Huehuetenango.  Tens of 
thousands of others who believe they have a right to 
compensation, however, have not received payments, leading to 
protests by ex-PACs in different areas of the country.  End 
note).  The ex-PACs detained four journalists from 
(anti-government) daily \"Prensa Libre\" at the road block, and 
continued to hold them as hostages after Rios Montt canceled 
his campaign rally.  Vice President Reyes Lopez, in an 
address to the nation on October 27, claimed that four other 
hostages were also being held by the ex-PACs.  The civil 
patrol members, who are poor peasants from that rural 
highland province much affected by the war, are using the 
hostages to pressure the GOG to compensate them. 
 
3. (U) Prensa Libre editor Gonzalo Marroquin, Human Rights 
Ombudsman Sergio Morales and NGO rep Frank Larue traveled to 
La Libertad on October 27 to seek the release of the 
hostages.  Huehuetenango Governor Carlos Morales (an FRG 
appointee) also traveled to La Libertad, but kept a prudent 
distance from the ex-PACs, as he had been held hostage by a 
different group of disgruntled former civil patrol members 
earlier this year.  The ex-PACs claimed that they had filed 
for GOG compensation through the association of retired 
military personnel (AVEMILGUA), and rejected the GOG\'s 
contention that their names did not appear on any GOG lists 
(Note: AVEMILGUA is a private association of former military 
personnel.  It is not a part of the GOG, but is viewed as 
having ties to or at a minimum sympathies with the ruling 
FRG. End note). 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador has been in contact with Minister of 
Government Reyes Calderon since the hostage taking began, to 
urge the GOG to find a peaceful solution to the standoff. 
The Ambassador has also been in frequent contact with 
Marroquin, Larue and others in civil society and the GOG who 
are involved in seeking a solution. The Embassy issued a 
public statement on October 27 condemning the hostage taking. 
 Reyes Calderon told the Ambassador that police had been sent 
to cordon off the site, and added that the GOG did not want 
to put the hostages\' lives in jeopardy by escalating the 
confrontation or attempting a rescue.  A high level 
negotiating team made up of GOG Peace Commissioner Soberanis, 
MINUGUA Chief Koenigs, GOG Human Rights rep (COPREDEH) 
Fuentes Soria, Huehuetenango Governor Morales, and 
representatives of the military and the Public Ministry are 
meeting with the ex-PAC leaders at the Military base in 
Huehuetenango on October 28.  Minister of Government Reyes 
Calderon told the Ambassador that the GOG will offer to 
review expeditiously all the documentation the La Libertad 
ex-PACs can provide to substantiate their claims to 
compensation for wartime service, and will also expedite 
payment to those who qualify.  The GOG hopes the offer will 
result in a prompt release of the hostages, though they told 
us that many of the ex-PACs at the road block are drunk, 
undermining the possibility of reasonable discourse. 
 
5. (C) Frank Larue and other civil society leaders denounced 
the government for abdicating its role of providing public 
security, telling reporters that the La Libertad hostage 
taking was only the most recent in a long series of violent 
crimes that illustrate that the Portillo government is not in 
charge (Note: a string of homicides only five days earlier -- 
including two shoot-outs on public buses which left seven 
dead -- have shocked Guatemalans, normally inured to crime 
reports. End note).  Larue told the Ambassador that the 
ex-PACs in La Libertad had not been compensated because they 
were not FRG supporters, and that the GOG was only 
compensating ex-PACs that were likely to vote for them in the 
upcoming elections (Note: The fact that the La Libertad 
ex-PACs were associated with AVEMILGUA would seem to indicate 
that their electoral preferences, had they been compensated, 
would have been with the FRG.  The OAS mission and the NGO 
CIEN, which have been monitoring payments to the ex-PACs, 
have not uncovered evidence that the GOG is discriminating by 
making payments only to ex-PAC members affiliated with the 
FRG as suggested by Larue. End note). 
 
6. (C) Comment: The standoff in Huehuetenango may well be 
resolved in the coming hours, but the unfulfilled 
expectations created by the Portillo government by offering 
to compensate the former civil patrol members has frustrated 
tens of thousands of poor peasants who may draw inspiration 
from the action of the La Libertad ex-PACs.  Former civil 
patrol members in Mazatenango and San Cristobal (Alta 
Verapaz) are at this time protesting peacefully (so far) 
against their lack of payment and have publicly threatened 
the FRG if it comes campaigning in those localities.  With 
ex-PACs spread out all over the country, the possibility of 
protests emerging in other areas remains latent.  The 
opposition to the FRG, including the press and the NGO\'s, are 
using the Huehuetenango hostage taking to illustrate for 
voters the danger of keeping the FRG in power for four more 
years.  The message, carried by newspaper photos and radio 
news bulletins, that FRG candidate Rios Montt is not welcome 
in many rural communities where the ex-PAC feel deceived by 
the GOG can not be helping his campaign.  It also will add to 
the concern of many Guatemalans that violent acts continue to 
be a part of of elections in Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11710","10/28/2003 22:14","03GUATEMALA2753","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, DRL/IL AND G/TIP 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
USDOL FOR ILAB (R. WHOLEY AND J. PEREZ-LOPEZ) AND OFR (G. 
RUSSELL) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, SMIG, KCRM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LABOR/TIP UPDATE #7-2003 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Following is an update of significant 
recent developments in the labor sector and trafficking in 
persons.  Topics include: 
 
-- Political Parties Respect Labor Rights (para #2) 
 
-- Fired Maquila Workers Reinstated (3) 
 
-- GOG GSP Submission Incomplete (4) 
 
-- Changes Likely to Labor Reforms in Congress (5) 
 
-- CA Labor Ministers Support CAFTA; GOG Rejects OSH 
Foundation (6-7) 
 
-- MOL Initiatives:  Indigenous and Women Workers (8) 
 
-- Minimum Wage Hike Likely (9) 
 
-- Miscellaneous Labor Conflicts (10) 
 
-- TIP - Migration Dir. Pledges Increased TIP Enforcement (11) 
 
-- TIP - UNICEF PR Campaign Against Unaccompanied Minors (12) 
 
End Summary. 
 
Political Parties Pledge Respect for Labor Rights 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2.  (U) On October 13, twenty-one political parties, 
including the ruling FRG and all the main opposition parties, 
agreed upon and signed a \"Shared National Agenda\" to promote 
national development, subsequently published in the press. 
The agenda includes the following points under the theme of 
employment: 
 
-- participate in the creation of a labor policy with the 
objective of generating new labor relations and addressing 
the deficit in the quality and quantity of employment 
opportunities, violation of labor rights, inadequate social 
protections and social dialogue; 
 
-- enact and enforce national labor legislation and ILO 
commitments ratified by the GOG; and, 
 
-- progressively eliminate child labor, preventing children 
from dangerous situations or slavery, perpetuating a vicious 
circle of poverty. 
 
Fired Maquila Workers Reinstated 
-------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) The Korean-owned textile maquila NB (Nobland) Inc. 
agreed on October 27 to reinstate three workers fired on 
October 16 for attempting to form a union.  The company 
agreed to do so at the request of labor inspectors and U.S. 
customers (the GAP, JC Penney).  Management lawyers also 
invited beverage and maquila federation lawyers to begin a 
dialogue about the labor conflict.  The nascent union is 
likely to be registered by the Labor Ministry shortly, 
according to the Labor Minister, which would raise to three 
the number of factory-based unions in the 200-firm maquila 
sector.  The Solidarity Center claims the workers have the 
25% support to compel collective bargaining. 
 
GOG GSP Submission 
------------------ 
 
4. (SBU) The MFA sent the Embassy what appears to be an 
advance copy of the GOG\'s 40-page GSP hearing submission due 
to USTR by October 31.  The report contains useful 
information about various fines, MOL budget increases, and 
the status of labor conflicts raised in the GSP petitions, 
including a report of substantive progress in the Finca Maria 
Lourdes plantation.  An annexed report from the Public 
Ministry about the progress of investigations of cases of 
criminal violence against union members is missing from our 
copy. 
 
Changes Likely to Labor Reforms in Congress 
------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Minister of Labor Victor Moreira told LabAtt on 
October 23 that he believes Congress will modify pending 
labor code reforms to eliminate the option of reinstatement 
for unjustifiably fired workers.  Employers would still owe 
an amount equivalent to severance pay (one month per year 
worked) to these workers.  Moreira said that many of the FRG 
Congressional deputies are themselves employers, and agree 
with objections from CACIF that allowing workers to decide 
whether to accept severance or keep their jobs would impinge 
on employer rights to fire unneeded workers.  Support in 
Congress for universal severance is boosted by the 
expectation of some Congressional deputies that they 
themselves will soon be out of office and would benefit from 
the severance pay, he said.  (Note:  unions have also 
objected to the reforms, claiming that they were not 
consulted and on the grounds that universal severance would 
undermine the permanence of employment and give employers an 
incentive to hire temporary workers, to reduce severance 
accrual.  End Note.)  On October 27 Moreira predicted that 
the modified reforms would be voted on by Congress on October 
28.  He said he had recommended to President of Congress Rios 
Montt that gender discrimination be more explicitly addressed 
in the Labor Code, to bring it in line with the Constitution. 
 (Note:  based on the ILO analysis of legal labor protections 
in Central America, we had encouraged the MOL and the 
employer association (CACIF) to consider such a change. 
CACIF made the same recommendation to Congress.  End Note.) 
 
Council of Labor Ministers:  CAFTA, OSH Foundation 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6.  (U) The Council of Ministers of Labor of Central America 
and the Dominican Republic issued a Declaration, signed by 
the ministers in Guatemala City on October 17, which includes 
a preambular clause stating: 
 
\"Considering: that the inclusion of a labor clause is 
fundamental to integrate labor issues into the process, but 
should not become an obstacle in any way to international 
commerce; every country must guarantee the enforcement of its 
own laws and respect for fundamental labor rights;\" 
 
And concludes: 
 
\"We Agree: To request the USG, in its negotiation with 
Central American nations, to allow a treaty which plainly 
benefits both sides, based on free, fair and just trade, and 
the construction of a future hemispheric market.  In this 
sense we express our total support for the negotiation of a 
CAFTA.\" 
 
7.  (SBU) Moreira told LabAtt on October 23 that he had 
informed the Central American Labor Ministers\' Conference and 
USDOL/OFR that the GOG disputes the approval of a 
newly-established regional occupational health and safety 
foundation (FUNDAPROSO) at the previous ministers\' meeting in 
Managua.  Furthermore, the Guatemalan Constitution prohibits 
any GOG financial support for private entities;  FUNDAPROSO, 
if constituted as a private entity in El Salvador, as 
proposed, would be ineligible for GOG support under 
Guatemalan law. 
 
Recent MOL Initiatives 
---------------------- 
 
8.  (U) The Labor Ministry has launched initiatives to 
promote and defend the rights of women and indigenous 
workers.  On August 20 the Labor Ministry issued a 
ministerial accord (#364-2003) creating a Department of 
Indigenous Peoples to investigate cases of discrimination and 
promote implementation of ILO Convention 169 on the rights of 
indigenous workers.  The initiative includes the designation 
of ministry representatives located in heavily-indigenous 
provinces, investigation of discriminatory hiring practices 
and coordination with the labor inspectorate and Human Rights 
Ombudsman\'s office to protect indigenous worker rights.  In a 
letter to the Embassy dated September 9, Minister of Labor 
Moreira described his Ministry\'s efforts to promote the 
rights of women workers through a series of workshops 
involving workers (515), managers (339), inspectors (281), 
and local collaborators (45) which took place from March to 
September, 2003.  The minister also cited and sent us copies 
of 10 video spots to be broadcast on television, informing 
Guatemalans of their labor rights.  Finally, the Minister 
cited his ministry\'s efforts to address pending labor 
complaints in the maquila sector, in concert with the Economy 
Ministry and other interested institutions and NGOs. 
 
Minimum Wage Hike Likely, Unemployment Rising 
--------------------------------------------- 
9.  (U) A government-labor-management panel failed to agree 
on a minimum wage hike.  Union leaders demanded 25-40%; 
employers offered 0%.  Worker representatives demanded a 
25-40% raise, saying that the current monthly minimum wages 
for agricultural workers (approx. $150) and non-agricultural 
workers ($159) is well below the government\'s estimate of 
basic monthly living expenses ($299).  Employers offered 0%, 
citing the downturn in the coffee and other sectors.  As a 
result of the deadlock, President Portillo will likely again 
exercise his authority to approve a wage hike of 7-10% 
sometime before the end of the year.  (Comment:  This will 
probably be announced before the November 9 national 
election.  End Comment.)  According to press reports, the 
National Statistical Institute counted 170,000 unemployed 
between January-March 2003, double the number the previous 
year.  It classified another 812,460 Guatemalans as 
under-employed. 
 
Miscellaneous Labor Disputes 
---------------------------- 
 
10.  (U) Norwegian labor unions, in support of appeals from 
UNSITRAGUA, an independent labor federation which represents 
banana workers in Izabal province, have protested to Chiquita 
Brands the firing of 600 workers on four plantations.  The 
unions allege that the firings are part of an anti-union 
policy on the part of Chiquita to shift production to 
non-unionized plantations on the Pacific Coast.  UNSITRAGUA 
has also protested the lack of labor court action on a 
petition to reinstall 18 workers of 64 allegedly fired 
illegally at Goodyear Tire\'s local affiliate, GINSA, which 
has been pending in the labor courts for eight months. 
Finally, a Mexican gas distributor (Tomza Inc.) is gaining 
notoriety for alleged threats against workers organizing a 
union, unlawful firings, and flouting labor court rulings. 
After a labor court judge ruled that 27 illegally-fired 
workers be reinstated, the company refused to do so.  The 
judge imposed a fine on the company of $3125 per worker. 
After a second refusal, the judge imposed an additional fine 
of $3750 per worker, but the workers remain outside. 
 
TIP - Migration Director Pledges Increased TIP Enforcement 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) On October 7 DCM, DHSOff and PolOff met with Oscar 
Contreras, Director of Immigration to thank him for recent 
efforts to discover TIP victims in Guatemala City brothels 
and urge further anti-TIP enforcement efforts.  Contreras 
said he was recently returned from a migration conference in 
Geneva where TIP was a principal topic.  The DCM emphasized 
the need to develop cases against traffickers while 
protecting the rights of victims.  Contreras claimed that an 
ongoing prosecution of a corrupt Migration official (and 
union leader) in the Peten involves allegations of complicity 
in trafficking rings.  PolOff and DHSOff urged further 
efforts to find victims who can testify against trafficking 
ringleaders.  Contreras pledged to do so beginning later in 
the month.  (Comment:  Contreras, who entered office after 
Embassy complaints about corruption under his predecessor, 
was eager to curry favor with the Embassy;  his position will 
be put at risk by the change of government in January, 2004. 
End Comment.) 
 
TIP - UNICEF Regional Anti-TIP PR Launched in Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
12.  (U) Press reported October 23 that UNICEF has launched a 
public relations campaign entitled \"The Route North\" to 
convince Central American parents about the danger faced by 
unaccompanied minors attempting to migrate illegally to the 
U.S., especially the risk of becoming a victim of sexual 
exploitation.  This effort will be supported by 633 radio 
stations throughout the region.  According to the report, 
UNICEF cited 1,200 child rescued from traffickers trying to 
enter the U.S. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11751","10/29/2003 18:14","03GUATEMALA2759","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE301451","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CCA, IO/UNP, AND USUN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, CU, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON CUBAN EMBARGO RESOLUTION AT UN 
 
REF: STATE 301451 
 
 (SBU/NF) PolCouns and PolOff discussed reftel points with 
Carla Rodriguez, Director General for Multilateral Affairs at 
the Foreign Ministry on October 28, and urged the GOG, in 
light of the recent arrests of human rights workers in Cuba, 
to reconsider its traditional vote in favor of the Cuban UN 
resolution against the embargo.  Rodriguez said that 
Guatemala\'s vote on this issue will not change from previous 
years, however, she agreed that it was important that the 
Castro regime not be given a \"blank check\" as a result of the 
vote.  Rodriguez agreed to propose to Foreign Minister 
Gutierrez that the GOG present a written explanation of vote 
addressing the deteriorated situation of human rights in Cuba. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11753","10/29/2003 20:37","03GUATEMALA2764","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2728","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002764 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KDEM, PINR, EAID, GT, UN 
SUBJECT: ELECTION SNAPSHOT #3: LEGACY OF NEGLECT LIVES ON 
IN QUICHE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2728 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Katharine Read for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Voters in Quiche, historically a bastion of 
the FRG, told us that their votes this time would be for any 
candidate other than the former General.  Berger and Colom 
led the pack of presidential preferences. While there is 
little concern among the international observers or the local 
TSE over the potential for election day fraud, several 
 
SIPDIS 
expressed concern over the possibility of manipulation of 
voters by the FRG and violence after the poll results are 
known. End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On October 23 and 24, PolOff and EconOff traveled to 
Santa Cruz del Quiche and Nebaj to gauge voter preferences 
and determine what issues are most important to voters in 
that highly rural province.  Voters in the highly rural, 
desperately poor and predominantly indigenous province of El 
Quiche in 1995 and 1999 voted overwhelmingly for the FRG, and 
recent FRG internal documents claim that El Quiche has the 
highest percentage of FRG voters of any of Guatemala\'s 
departments.  Emboffs met with European Union observation 
mission officials, the TSE delegate in Nebaj, the local 
coordinator for the UN verification mission (MINUGUA), and 
the director of the Catholic social relief office. 
Man-on-the-street interviews were conducted in both locales. 
 
EU Mission Paints a Picture of Voter Manipulation 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
3. (C) The two-person team from the EU observation mission, 
who have been living in the Quiche for the last month, 
expressed concern about potential manipulation by the FRG of 
the election, and the possibility of fraud.  They saw the 
ex-PAC payments as a \"vote-buying\" tactic and said they 
observed individuals in line to receive payments that were 
too young to have actually participated in the ex-PAC 
activities.  They also viewed the distribution of discounted 
fertilizer and machetes as an attempt by the FRG government 
to influence voters (Comment: A prestigious NGO, under a 
grant from USAID, has had mild criticism of the ex-PAC 
payments, but found no political favoritism in the fertilizer 
program. End comment). 
 
4. (C) The EU team opined that low literacy rates in the 
Quiche make for a different type of election than in more 
developed, educated parts of Guatemala.  For example, in 
Nebaj, of its 53,617 residents, only 36 percent are 
registered to vote.  However, only 32 percent of those 
registered to vote are literate.  This lack of formal 
education, as well as the overwhelming poverty which afflicts 
the Quiche, accounts for the voters\' disinterest in national 
issues and their focus on local politics.  The EU mission 
also believe that Quiche voters are more prone to believe 
rumors of supposed violations of privacy on election day 
(i.e. cameras in the voting booths), to be intimidated by 
threats and violence, and to accept bribes from local 
leaders, than voters in other parts of Guatemala might be. 
 
Local TSE Delegate Discusses Election 
------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) In Nebaj, the TSE delegate Mynor Beteta Giron, told us 
that national politicians lack the vision to improve 
conditions in this remote town.  He does not believe there 
will be actual fraud on election day, but expressed concern 
about the potential for violence, and particularly violence 
against his person, if the local FRG mayoral candidate does 
not win.  He said that the candidate himself threatened 
Giron.  The local \"caudillo\" is the leader of the \"Comite 
Civico Todos Nebajenses\" (COTON), Pedro Raymundo Cobo, who is 
running for his third re-election as mayor. He won 
overwhelmingly in the 1999 election.  Mynor Beteta told us 
that the primary concerns of the local voters, who are among 
the most impoverished in Guatemala, are health and jobs. 
 
MINUGUA Official Relates Atmosphere of Fear 
------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) In Nebaj, MINUGUA official Beatriz Lafuente told us 
the level of political tension had risen, driven particularly 
by local elections. Inflamed rhetoric has been coming from 
different political parties in the weeks leading up to the 
election, and is not coming only from the FRG. Once again, 
the common thread was concern that GOG payments to the ex-PAC 
were being manipulated by the FRG. She does not anticipate 
fraud on election day, but said voters fear their votes will 
not be secret. There is concern that the losing party will 
dispute local elections, and there is a palpable fear of 
violence in the community. 
 
7. (C) Lafuente attributed support for Rios Montt in the Ixil 
triangle to the perception that he \"saved\" the area from the 
brutality of the Lucas Garcia regime in the early 1980s. 
While \"the General\" used scorched-earth tactics in parts of 
the northern Quiche, he instituted the \"beans for bullets\" 
and model village programs in the Ixil triangle during his 
dictatorship. 
 
Taking the Pulse of Nebaj 
------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) In response to Emboffs\' man-on-the-street interviews 
in Nebaj, it was clear that voters were polarized around Rios 
Montt.  Only 22 percent of respondents said they would vote 
for the General.  They cited the FRG\'s track record in 
providing security and rural development as reasons to vote 
for Rios Montt.  The 78 percent who opposed Rios Montt were 
less enthusiastic about their chosen candidate and appeared 
to largely be voting against the FRG.  Berger had a slight 
lead among those interviewed, with 33 percent supporting him, 
compared to 28 percent for Colom. 
 
9. (SBU) Nebaj voter preferences: 72 percent of respondents 
thought the electoral process would be transparent, 17 
percent thought it would have much fraud, and 11 percent were 
not sure. Unemployment and security were tied with 28 percent 
of respondents citing these as the dominant concerns for the 
new administration.  Only 17 percent of those interviewed 
thought the FRG had done a good job over the past 4 years, 28 
percent said it had done a bad job, and 56 percent were not 
sure or said it was neither good nor bad, a statistic 
reflecting the lack of importance Nebaj voters attach to 
national political issues. 
 
Colom Commands the Streets of Santa Cruz del Quiche 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
10. (SBU) While located less than 30 miles from Nebaj 
geographically, the views of voters in Santa Cruz are worlds 
apart.  Not one of the 18 people interviewed in Santa Cruz 
del Quiche expressed support for Rios Montt. The clear 
favorite in the survey was Colom, with 50 percent of the 
people saying he is the best choice for president. In 
explaining their choice for Colom, respondents pointed to his 
honesty and origins outside of the political oligarchy as his 
biggest assets. Trailing not far behind was Berger, picking 
up 39% of the support of respondents. 
 
11. (SBU) Another glaring difference in the voting dynamic 
between Santa Cruz and Nebaj was the number of people who 
thought there would be fraud during the electoral process: 72 
percent of voters in Santa Cruz think there will be fraud in 
the election process, while 72 percent of people in Nebaj 
think the elections will be transparent. Votes in both cities 
place similar emphasis on unemployment (39 percent) and 
insecurity (33 percent) as major concerns the new 
administration faces. Eighty-eight percent of Santa Cruz 
voters responded that the current administration had done a 
bad job, while all 18 of those surveyed said they would not 
reelect the FRG. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
12. (C) It is clear that local issues dominate towns in the 
Quiche and disinterest in national politics is pervasive. 
Fraud is not a major worry of international observers in the 
Quiche, but the possibility of FRG manipulation is a concern 
spread largely by rumors shared among this largely illiterate 
populace.  National politicians pay little attention to this 
highly indigenous, remote region and most of our contacts in 
the Quiche believe that neglect is unlikely to change with 
any new administration. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11754","10/29/2003 23:26","03GUATEMALA2769","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, KDEM, MOPS, PREL, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES ELECTIONS WITH RIOS MONTT 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  In an October 29 breakfast with the 
Ambassador, FRG presidential candidate Rios Montt said he 
would respect the outcome of the election, whatever it is. 
He expressed concern about technical problems with the voter 
registration list (\"padron\") and locally organized acts of 
violence in the countryside against his campaign, but thought 
the election would be free and fair.  Vice Presidential 
candidate Barrientos said that FRG optimism over their 
\"expected electoral victory\" is not based on polls (which 
have long shown the FRG in a distant third place), but rather 
on their contact with the masses.  The Ambassador said that, 
should the FRG win the election, they would have an uphill 
battle proving to the international community that they 
represented change, and they would need to make an early 
priority of showing that they will promote human rights, 
fight corruption and transnational crime and engage on free 
trade.  End summary. 
 
2. (C) On October 29, the Ambassador, DCM and Political 
Counselor met over breakfast at the Residence with FRG 
candidate and former General Efrain Rios Montt, Vice 
Presidential Candidate Edin Barrientos and First Vice 
President of Congress (and daughter of Rios Montt) Zury Rios 
as part of a series of breakfasts with the leading 
presidential hopefuls.  The General, who had not been in the 
Residence in a long time, was at ease, and the meeting was 
candid. 
 
3. (C)  Rios Montt said that the election campaign was going 
well and that he thought it would be free and fair.  He 
expressed concern, however, that some opposition parties, at 
least at the local level, had promoted a climate of 
intolerance against his campaign and had stirred up crowds to 
keep him from holding rallies.  He mentioned the incident in 
Rabinal in June and this week\'s incident in La Independencia, 
Huehuetenango (Note: The ex-PAC hostage incident began as an 
effort to prevent the FRG from holding a rally. End note) as 
examples.  He added that he had concerns about the 
reliability of the voter registration list (\"padron 
electoral\"), noting that \"serious problems\" with the list of 
voters in San Miguel Petapa (a working class suburb of 
Guatemala City) which just came to light this week, revealed 
that some voters were shown as eligible to vote in numerous 
locations.  While Rios Montt said he agreed with the 
Ambassador that the indelible ink and other safeguards are 
sufficient to see to it that this technical error by the 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) does not lead to double 
voting, he feared that the same error could lead to the 
exclusion of many eligible voters. (Comment: This later 
concern is real.  A study just completed of the new \"padron\" 
by FLACSO, a highly reputed NGO, found that the list has 
flaws that might/might lead to the exclusion of some voters 
on election day.  While voters will believe this is a 
political manipulation to keep them from voting, it appears 
to be simply a technical problem arising from the TSE\'s 
overhaul of the \"padron.\" The problem should affect voters 
from every party equally.) 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador commented that post-electoral violence, 
particularly at the municipal level, is a historical reality 
in Guatemala, and said the national leaders of the parties, 
therefore, have a responsibility to respect the outcome and 
ensure that their supporters do not engage in violence.  Rios 
Montt said that the FRG respected the outcome in 1995 even 
when they were deprived of victory by a premeditated cut in 
the electrical power to the vote-counting center, which 
allowed the powers in control to alter the results (Comment: 
The electricity did/did go off -- for three hours.  But 
international observers at that election doubted fraud 
occurred. End comment).  He said they would respect the 
outcome this time, whatever it is.  Rios Montt said that he 
and his party represent a vision for a new Guatemala, and not 
personal interests.  If the people of Guatemala share that 
vision, they will elect him, he said.  If not, he would 
accept that and move on.  He argued that the election has 
nothing to do with his immunity from prosecution, saying that 
the Supreme Court (which is not controlled by Rios Montt), 
could lift his immunity at any time. 
 
5. (C) Barrientos expressed confidence that the Guatemalan 
people would vote overwhelmingly for the FRG, and that they 
would win on the first round.  When the Ambassador asked 
Barrientos what their polls were telling them, Barrientos 
dodged the question saying that the FRG\'s calculation of 
victory comes from their contact with the masses (Note: 
President Portillo told the Ambassador that the FRG\'s polls 
show the FRG will have an uphill struggle to get into the 
second round.  End note).  Barrientos argued that the FRG had 
reached 700,000 people with their message during the 
campaign, and that that represented over two million votes. 
He further argued that during the past four years, the FRG 
government had benefited over 800,000 farmers with subsidized 
fertilizers.  He extrapolated from that data that the FRG 
would have more than the 50% of valid votes necessary to win 
on the first round.  Neither Rios Montt nor Zury Rios 
commented on the possible outcome of the election (Comment: 
Barrientos studiously avoided addressing the FRG\'s 
third-place ranking in all the polls.  His suggestion that 
reaching 700,000 individuals with the FRG\'s message would 
translate into over two million votes for the FRG is too 
exaggerated to be self-delusion, and appears to be putting 
the best public face on a campaign that has encountered 
significant voter antipathy. End comment). 
 
6. (C) The Ambassador told Rios Montt that we will respect 
the outcome of elections that are \"clearly free and fair.\" 
Should Rios Montt win, he would have a difficult relationship 
with the international community, us included, and it was in 
his interest to move quickly to demonstrate his commitment to 
human rights, to control corruption and transnational crime 
and to engage on free trade.  The Ambassador added that 
concerns about fraud and manipulation in this election made 
it imperative that the FRG not engage in behavior on election 
day that could cast doubts on whether the election was free 
and fair.  Rios Montt acknowledged the point, said that he 
understood the importance of addressing the concerns of the 
international community, \"especially the United States,\" but 
then lapsed into a defense of his \"war on communism,\" arguing 
that international opposition to him was generated solely 
from the fact that he \"defeated the communists.\"  Rios Montt 
and Zury Rios criticized the corruption of senior advisors to 
the current government, implicitly distancing themselves from 
Portillo.  Their impassioned indictment of government 
corruption and their claim that if elected they would put an 
end to corruption by prosecuting those who have abused of the 
resources of the state blithely ignored the fact that their 
party has been in charge of the government for the past four 
years and that the corrupt officials they are referring to 
were brought to power by their electoral victory in 1999. 
 
7. (C) Comment: Rios Montt did not come across as a candidate 
who is fighting the defining battle of his political career. 
Even his complaints about violence against his rallies and 
the problems of the voter registration list were clearly not 
major concerns that he expected us to resolve.  He does not 
appear to understand how controversial his \"vision for 
Guatemala\" is with many voters, but was up front is saying 
that if the voters don\'t buy it, he won\'t insist.  With the 
exception of Barrientos\' unconvincing account of how getting 
the FRG\'s message to voters would result in a first round 
victory (and damn the polls), there was no triumphalism in 
their expression.  It was clear that, should they win, the 
FRG wants the assurance that there will be some level of 
engagement with the USG in areas of mutual interest.  It was 
also clear that they still don\'t understand that the FRG can 
only repair its image with us and other members of the 
international community by facing honestly and openly the 
human rights violations of the war and the corruption of the 
current FRG government. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11787","10/30/2003 21:21","03GUATEMALA2783","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03GUATEMALA2649|03STATE303519","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002783 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/SHA - SAHSA MEHRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, GT, UNHCR-1 
SUBJECT: FOLLOW UP DEMARCHE ON CANDIDATE FOR UN COMMITTEE 
AGAINST TORTURE 
 
REF: A. STATE 303519 
     B. GUATEMALA 2649 
 
Per instructions ref A, PolCouns and PolOff called on Carla 
Rodriguez, Director General for Multilateral Affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry, on October 28 to follow up on our previous 
demarche (ref B) and diplomatic note in support of the 
candidacy of Ms. Felice Gaer for re-election to the UN 
Committee Against Torture.  Rodriguez informed us that our 
dipnote had been forwarded to the Guatemalan Mission in 
Geneva for that post\'s comments and promised to inform us 
once the GOG reaches a decision on the candidacy. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11808","10/31/2003 15:27","03GUATEMALA2787","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2764","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: ELECTION SNAPSHOT #4: CONCERNS IN THE INDIGENOUS 
HIGHLANDS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2764 
 
Classified By: Economic Officer Thomas Palaia for reasons 1.5(d) 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  EmbOffs visited the indigenous highland 
areas of Quetzaltenango and San Jose Poaquil to continue to 
meet with local and international election monitoring 
organizations and test the pulse of the electorate outside 
the capital.  Our unscientific polling suggests widespread 
frustration with the current government and the belief that 
government resources are being used to manipulate voters. 
Generally, people expressed faith in the safeguards and 
procedures of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE). 
Observers expressed concern with voter manipulation and 
intimidation away from the polls.  There was also a general 
sense of insecurity and doubt regarding the ability and 
willingness of the National Police (PNC) to control potential 
election related violence.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Quetzaltenango is Guatemala,s second largest city 
with about 150,000 mostly indigenous inhabitants, and the 
capital of the Western highland province of the same name. 
It is also the only larger Guatemalan city with an indigenous 
mayor, Rigoberto Queme, who withdrew from the presidential 
race in August.  San Jose Poaquil, also largely indigenous, 
is a much smaller, poor rural town in the nearby province of 
Chimaltenango.  It suffered badly during the war and remains 
stunted with bleak economic prospects.  EmbOffs met in 
Quetzaltenango with local TSE leadership, observers from the 
Organization of American States (OAS) and the European Union 
(EU) as well as the UN verification mission in Guatemala 
MINUGUA, which has had a long-term presence in 
Quetzaltenango.  Although headquartered in Quetzaltenango 
these groups are handling much of western Guatemala.  \"Man on 
the street\" interviews were conducted in both Quetzaltenango 
and San Jose Poaquil. 
 
TSE and International Observers 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) TSE officials were generally positive about 
preparations for coming elections.  The head career official 
for Quetzaltenango foresaw no problems with election-day 
events.  However, the local president of the municipal 
electoral commission claimed the commission\'s efforts 
suffered from a lack of resources.  He had yet to receive any 
funds to pay workers and could not make necessary repairs to 
prepare voting centers, most of which lack electricity which 
might leave them in the dark for the nighttime ballot count. 
They both expressed doubts whether the National Civil Police 
(PNC) will devote sufficient resources and worried about the 
possibility of election-day and post-election violence, 
particularly in the more rural areas.  Nevertheless, they 
expressed general confidence that they would find a way 
around these problems and the elections would be free and 
fair. 
 
4.  (C) International observers and MINUGUA shared confidence 
in TSE procedures and safeguards and did not anticipate 
significant problems at the voting centers.  However, they 
were unanimous in their assertions that voter intimidation 
and manipulation was already happening and even common in 
many areas.  They claimed to have witnessed intimidation and 
efforts by the FRG to influence individual voters through 
food, fertilizer and other \"gifts\".  They were most worried 
about rural, under-policed areas, specifically mentioning 
traditional FRG strongholds in nearby Totonicapan and San 
Marcos provinces. 
 
5.  (C) International groups also mentioned the looming 
threat of organized crime elements supporting individual 
candidates, particularly in the border areas of Huehuetenango 
where narcotics, guns and human trafficking are prevalent. 
However, they lacked evidence or intimate knowledge of the 
interest of such groups in the elections.  They also 
expressed concern over recent threats to violently stop 
elections, made by still unpaid former civil self-defense 
patrollers (ex-PAC) who they estimated number almost 200,000 
in the area.  While some speculated that the PNC was 
responding to FRG pressure to stay out of their pre-election 
antics and others believed the PNC simply lacked adequate 
resources, none expressed confidence in their ability to 
safeguard the elections and mediate ongoing intimidation of 
voters. 
 
\"Man (and woman) on the Street\" 
------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The ruling FRG commanded almost no support in our 
informal survey in Quetzaltenango even though they won a 
substantial majority in the 1999 second round presidential 
vote.  Voters we spoke with were primarily divided between 
Alvaro Colom (UNE) and Oscar Berger (GANA).  Among 44 
potential voters, Colom captured 39% and Berger 29%.  The 
remaining voters either did not plan to vote, were undecided, 
or planned on voting for one of four other candidates.  Colom 
supporters generally cited his honesty as the reason they 
would vote for him.  There was almost unanimous 
disappointment expressed in the current government, 
particularly in its failure to address security and crime 
issues, which interviewees cited as most important to them. 
The majority anticipated fraud in the coming elections, 
particularly in the surrounding rural areas. 
 
7.  (SBU) The FRG commanded significantly more support in 
rural San Jose Poaquil than it did in Quetzaltenango, but 
again Colom was strongest in our informal poll.  Of 22 
individuals interviewed, 36% said that they would support 
Colom while 31% preferred Rios Montt.  However, even those 
who supported Rios Montt were generally not happy with the 
current government, although Portillo and the FRG did very 
well in the 1999 elections in San Jose Poaquil.  Only one 
person identified herself as a Berger supporter.  Remaining 
interviewees claimed to support several other parties, 
including the Christian Democrat party (DCG) which does not 
have a presidential candidate, although the current mayor is 
a member.  Supporters of the FRG told us that recent 
government projects such as a road motivated their support. 
Colom supporters again expressed an appreciation for his 
honesty and lack of corruption. 
 
8.  (C) Comment:  Surveys and discussions revealed high 
levels of confidence in election-day procedures and TSE 
safeguards.  However, the lack of faith in the PNC\'s ability 
to provide adequate security, whether real or perceived, 
could impact voting behavior.  While we focused our 
questioning on the presidential race, it is local elections 
that are of greatest concern to voters.  There is little 
faith and marginal interest in the national government in 
this area.  The utter lack of credibility of the current 
government and the widely held perception that the vote is 
being manipulated by government distribution programs and FRG 
intimidation threaten the credibility of results in an area 
of the country that already feels disenfranchised with its 
national government. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11817","10/31/2003 18:31","03GUATEMALA2793","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA2563","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

311831Z Oct 03
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002793 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, AORC, GT 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS UPDATE: JOURNALISTS RELEASED, EMP 
DISBANDED, CICIACS REACTION 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2563 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Protesting ex-PACs have released four 
journalists in Huehuetenango, President Portillo presided 
over a ceremony marking the dissolution of the Presidential 
Guard (EMP), and the GOG formed a working group to analyze 
the UN\'s revised proposal for a Commission to Investigate 
Clandestine Groups (CICIACS).  Our previous report (Ref) on 
the Ovalle killing was mistaken; his killers have not yet 
been tried.  End Summary. 
 
Ex-PACs Release Hostages 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) On October 28 protesting former civil self defense 
patrollers (ex-PAC) in Huehuetenango province released four 
journalists after a tense stand-off that lasted 51 hours. 
The release came after a GOG negotiating team led by Peace 
Secretary Catalina Soberanis agreed to process and pay 
 
SIPDIS 
(within six days) qualified ex-PAC applicants for their 
national service during the internal conflict, according to 
MINUGUA Chief Tom Koenigs and press reporting.  (Comment:  By 
insisting that only qualified ex-PAC will be paid, the GOG 
hopes the incident will not be repeated by unqualified 
agitators who aspire to GOG compensation.  The international 
community and electoral observers are alert to the 
possibility of further incidents which could endanger 
observers.  End Comment.) 
 
EMP Dissolved 
------------- 
 
3.  (U) On October 29 President Portillo marked the 
dissolution of the Presidential Military Guard (EMP) and its 
replacement with a civilian Secretariat for Administrative 
Support (SAAS) with a major public address.  In his address, 
Portillo praised the EMP for maintaining a clean record 
during his tenure, lambasted the economic elite who had 
manipulated previous governments and the Army in their own 
private interests, and took a jab at the international 
community for pressuring the GOG to \"run when it is learning 
to crawl.\"  Speaking without a prepared text, he accused 
Guatemala\'s critics in the international community of 
starting more wars and killing far more people than the 
Guatemalan Army had.  The Ambassador atttended this event, 
but could not bring himself to applaud the President\'s 
remarks and left after the President spoke.  Human rights 
leaders and MINUGUA chief Koenigs publicly praised the EMP 
dissolution, and pledged to monitor the exit (expected 
January 13) from the SAAS of a team of 30 military security 
agents guarding Portillo.  (Comment:  Despite Portillo\'s 
disappointing, unpresidential venting, the GOG deserves 
credit for finally completing a key Peace Accords commitment. 
 While some administrative staff from the EMP remain in the 
SAAS, and Portillo will retain his inner security team until 
he leaves office, the bulk of the EMP staff have been 
replaced by civilians.  End Comment.) 
 
Reaction to UN CICIACS Proposal 
------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Representatives of the MFA, the Human Rights 
Ombudsman\'s office, and some human rights leaders met on 
October 29 to create a working group to discuss the UN\'s 
revised CICIACS proposal.  While local press emphasized 
constitutional hurdles to the muscular UN proposal, Helen 
Mack and Frank La Rue both told the Ambassador and PolOff 
that they believe the UN proposal is \"legally viable,\" with 
some clarification, but NGOs will resist any GOG attempt at 
\"half-measures.\"  According to Mario Rene Cifuentes, the 
MFA\'s security advisor, FM Gutierrez favors an alternative 
proposal of creating a national commission as a precursor to 
an internationally-run CICIACS.  The first meeting of the 
working group will be on November 3, and the MFA will invite 
the UN to send a representative to that meeting, according to 
Cifuentes. 
 
Correction: Ovalle Case Update 
------------------------------ 
 
5.  (U) RefTel reported that Ever Lopez Gomez and Billy Rene 
Barrios were found guilty for the April 29, 2003 murder of 
Guillermo Ovalle, accountant of the Rigoberta Menchu 
Foundation, and sentenced to life imprisonment by the first 
instance court for the crime.  That information was 
incorrect, and derived from an unconfirmed report from a U.S. 
NGO.  The office of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Human Rights Workers told us on October 14 that in fact the 
court had ruled in September only that the two suspects be 
tried for homicide.  No date has been announced for the trial 
while judges rule on a request from the Menchu Foundation to 
become a joint complainant in the case. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11818","10/31/2003 18:39","03GUATEMALA2794","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2769","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

311839Z Oct 03
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, PINR, KDEM, EAID, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN ELECTION UPDATE: ONE WEEK TO BALLOTING 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 2769 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2705 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: Polls show voter preferences largely 
unchanged, with Berger ahead with 41%, followed by Colom 
(22.3%) and Rios Montt (13.3%).  Informal polling conducted 
by Embassy in the countryside supports these results.  The 
OAS and EU Observer Missions say the TSE has addressed 
problems with the voter registration list (\"padron\") 
effectively by setting up special tables for \"observed votes\" 
at all polling places.  There is a growing concern of ours, 
shared by the EU Ambassadors, that continuing (and 
politically motivated) press reports publicizing rumors of 
potential fraud and violence will undermine the credibility 
of a relatively good electoral process.  The Ambassador met 
separately with candidates Lopez Rodas, Rios Montt (reftel) 
and Colom to discuss election issues.  With only a week left 
before the elections, political tensions remain much lower 
than their high point in July, but are, as expected, spiking 
again in the runup to election day.  End summary. 
 
What the Polls Say 
------------------ 
2.  (U) A Noguera poll taken October 24-29 showed GANA 
candidate Oscar Berger significantly ahead with 41.0% of 
voter preferences, up only marginally from September.  UNE\'s 
Alvaro Colom rose significantly from 15.9% in September to 
22.3% in the final week of October.  FRG candidate Rios Montt 
also rose slightly from 12.2% to 13.3%.  Voters continued to 
list violent crime as their most serious concern (46%), 
followed by unemployment (40%), the economic situation (25%) 
and corruption (13%).  Eighty-four percent said they intended 
to vote (which would be a record in Guatemala), and 57.9% 
said they would never vote for Rios Montt (only 7.9% said 
they would never vote for Berger).  The poll also suggested 
that votes for Congress would be much more divided than the 
presidential vote, and that no party is likely to have a 
working majority in Congress.  Following are the voter 
preference percentages: 
 
-         voting preferences as a percentage of respondents 
-                July     August    September    Oct. 24-29 
-         --------------------------------------------- ---- 
Berger - GANA     30.5      39.6       40.7          41.0 
Colom - UNE       12.6      16.7       15.9          22.3 
Rios Montt - FRG  10.3      11.5       12.2          13.3 
Lopez Rodas - PAN  3.4       4.2        4.9           6.2 
 
OAS and EU Observers Say TSE On-Track 
------------------------------------- 
3. (SBU) The electoral observation missions of the EU and OAS 
hosted a meeting for Ambassadors on October 29 in which, 
among other things, they noted that the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal (TSE) will set up a special table at each voting 
place to receive votes from properly credentialled voters 
whose registration is not recorded or is recorded at a 
distant voting place.  This measure is to ensure that 
technical difficulties with the voter registration list 
(\"padron electoral\") do not lead to the disenfranchisement of 
voters.  Regional offices of the TSE have told us that they 
have reviewed the voter registration lists for their 
departments, and that they do not expect any more problems 
than previous years with voters being able to find their 
voting places. 
 
4. (SBU) At the same meeting, the EU Ambassadors, normally 
outspoken in their fears of election day manipulation by the 
FRG, expressed concern instead that the media (largely 
anti-FRG) was generating an unfounded sense that there would 
be significant violence on election day (an argument we have 
attempted to counter through numerous public messages urging 
voters to go to the polls), and that this message could 
undermine voter participation and the credibility of the 
electoral process.  All agreed that the TSE was doing a good 
job, and that it was above partisan manipulation.  And while 
violence after the election typically does occur at the local 
level here, press headlines warning of the possibility of 
election-day violence could scare Guatemalans into staying 
home.  An AID contractor with significant experience in other 
Latin American elections recently noted in his evaluation of 
the process in Guatemala that civil society, the opposition 
and the media are so determined to keep one of the candidates 
(Rios Montt) from winning, that they have lost their 
objectivity to the detriment of the electoral process itself. 
 Their frequent sounding alarm over the potential for 
violence on election day will establish their claim to 
challenge the electoral outcome in the event the candidate 
they oppose makes it into the second round. 
 
Ambassador Meets with Candidates 
-------------------------------- 
5. (C) The Ambassador met at the Residence with PAN 
presidential candidate Leonel Lopez Rodas on October 28, FRG 
candidate Rios Montt on October 29 (reftel) and UNE candidate 
Alvaro Colom on October 31.  He had previously met with GANA 
candidates Berger and Stein (ref B).  Lopez Rodas, who was 
accompanied by Congressional candidate Luis Rubio, said that 
the PAN did not expect fraud on election day, but said he 
does not have confidence that FRG members in remote areas 
will respect the outcome of the election.  He welcomed the 
chance to dialogue with us on bilateral issues, should he 
make it into the second round.  Lopez Rodas (who has not 
broken into double digits in all but his own polls), looked 
tired and did not come across as expecting to make it into 
the second round.  In response to a query from the 
Ambassador, Lopez Rodas said that he would ensure that PAN 
members do not challenge the election results, should they 
lose, by anything but legal means. 
 
6. (C) UNE candidate Alvaro Colom, who was accompanied by 
economic policy advisor Fernando Monroy, was upbeat, 
recognizing that all the independent polls put him in a 
relatively solid second place.  Monroy told us that \"second 
place\" status had brought with it significant contributions 
from new campaign supporters, and that the party would have 
the resources for its final push.  Like the other candidates, 
Colom expressed confidence about the elections being free and 
fair, but qualified it by saying he could not guess how the 
FRG would react to a first round defeat.  He said that, 
should UNE lose in the first round (which he virtually 
discounted), he would challenge the results only by legal 
means, and then only if it was clear that his loss was the 
result of fraud.  Pressed by the Ambassador, he pledged to 
get the message to his supporters that \"taking the streets\" 
on election night, in the event of a defeat, was 
unacceptable.  Colom said that organized crime figures were 
seeking meetings with him, presumably to offer financial 
support, and that he had avoided any contact with them and 
instructed his advisors to do the same.  Like the other 
candidates, Colom said he would welcome a meeting between his 
transition team and the Embassy to discuss in more depth the 
bilateral agenda in the event he makes it into the second 
round. 
 
Comment 
------- 
7. (SBU) Despite isolated acts of violence, potentially 
related to the elections, political tensions overall are much 
reduced from July, although, as one would expect, they are 
spiking again in the runup to election day itself.  There are 
some technical problems with the \"padron electoral,\" but the 
international observation missions are satisfied that they 
will not result in vote fraud, and the TSE has made provision 
to ensure voters are not disenfranchised.  The major 
candidates have all told us they do not expect fraud to have 
an impact on election day, and have pledged to get the word 
out to their supporters that post-election violence is 
unacceptable.  With a week left before balloting, voter 
preferences have not shifted significantly.  In Guatemala, 
surprises are always possible, but so far things look poised 
for an orderly election on November 9. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11828","11/3/2003 0:02","03GUATEMALA2796","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002796 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/03/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EAID, KDEM, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: GOG WORKING ON SOLUTION TO MAJOR FLAP OVER 
ELECTION HOLIDAY LAW 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The Guatemalan Congress passed a law on 
October 28 forbidding \"any productive activity\" on election 
day, the day before and the day after, ostensibly to enable 
migrant workers to return to their homes to vote.  Minister 
of Labor Moreira told reporters that the law forbid all but 
four basic services from being performed on those days (not 
including electricity or water).  Civil society and the 
private sector complained that the law would shut down gas 
stations and prohibit journalists from working, among other 
things, and accused the FRG of passing the law in order to 
create confusion and keep voters at home.  Following a call 
from the Ambassador to Foreign Minister Gutierrez on November 
1 asking that the GOG veto the law, Gutierrez called the 
Ambassador on November 2 to say that both President Portillo 
and FRG Secretary General Rios Montt agree that the law must 
be amended, and that a special session of Congress will be 
called for that purpose on November 4.  Gutierrez said 
Portillo is prepared to veto the law if Congress does not 
amend it.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) In its final regular session before the elections, 
Guatemala\'s Congress passed a law on October 28, only 
introduced that morning by the FRG, amending the Labor Code 
to make election day (both rounds) and the days immediately 
prior to and after the elections national holidays.  The law 
went beyond the normal holiday statues, however, by expressly 
forbidding \"any productive activity\" except public 
transportation, police and private security guards, hospitals 
and \"first aid services provided by the fire department and 
Red Cross.\"  The law goes on to say that the Ministry of 
Government (i.e. the police) would help the Labor Ministry 
enforce this law, unlike the other holidays contained in the 
labor code.  With the elections only days away, many 
congressmen were out on the campaign trail.  Others were 
clearly not paying attention.  There was little discussion of 
the law, and all the parties present approved the measure, 
with only one dissenting vote by a Unionista congressmen. 
The private sector reacted immediately to oppose the measure, 
arguing that it would obligate businesses that had to remain 
open those days to pay their laborers holiday wages. 
 
3. (C)  Minister of Labor Victor Moreira told reporters on 
October 31, however, that the text of the law was quite clear 
in \"forbidding all productive activity,\" and that any sectors 
not specifically exempted by the law would not be able to 
operate, even if they did pay their laborers holiday wages. 
Moreira\'s interpretation of the law (which appears consistent 
with the text) set off a firestorm of controversy as it 
became clear that gas stations, hotels, restaurants and 
supermarkets would be closed, discouraging voters from 
traveling far from home to vote.  It also became clear that 
electrical and water workers would not be allowed to work, 
nor were officials of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal 
exempted, meaning that election workers could be fined for 
holding the elections. 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador called Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez 
on November 1 to express concern about the potential impact 
of the law and to urge him to weigh-in with President 
Portillo to veto it.  Gutierrez acknowledged that the law had 
problems, and promised to raise it with President Portillo on 
his return to the country (later that evening).  The 
Ambassador spoke with OAS Election Observation Mission head 
Valentin Paniagua and EU Election Observation chief 
Sakellariou on November 1 to urge them to express their 
concerns over the law directly to Gutierrez, strengthening 
his hand in urging Portillo to veto the bill. The OAS and EU 
called Gutierrez and are considering issuing a press 
statement on November 2 to keep pressure on the GOG to find a 
solution. 
 
5. (C) Foreign Minister Gutierrez called the Ambassador on 
November 2 to say that he had spoken with President Portillo 
about the law, and that Portillo (and FRG Secretary General 
Rios Montt) agree the law should be modified.  Congress will 
call a special session on November 4 to remove the second 
paragraph from the law, leaving the days as holidays, but not 
forbidding any productive activity.  If Congress can not 
muster the two-thirds majority needed to reform the law, 
President Portillo is prepared to veto it, according to 
Gutierrez.  The Ambassador noted to Gutierrez that time is of 
the essence, as the confusion caused by the law is already 
creating doubts in the minds of voters who will have to 
travel out of town to vote. 
 
6. (C) Minister Moreira told us that the law was an 
initiative of Vice President Reyes Lopez (who was acting as 
President in Portillo\'s absence from the country).  It was 
drafted by FRG Party Whip Aristides Crespo and FRG 
Congressman from San Marcos Department Carlos Bautista. 
Moreira said he was never consulted on the bill.  He told us 
the intent was clearly to allow voters to travel to their 
homes to vote without penalty of their jobs, but agreed that 
the law would have the effect of discouraging voters. 
 
7. (C) First Vice President of Congress Zury Rios told us the 
law was drafted specifically to enable cane cutters on the 
south coast to travel to their communities to vote.  She said 
that the FRG had heard from its local party leaders on the 
Pacific coastal plain that the landowners were discouraging 
the migrant cane cutters from going home (in many cases 
several hours away) to vote, threatening to not pay them for 
the days they were absent.  She was very defensive about the 
law, which she viewed as enfranchising large numbers of FRG 
supporters unfairly being threatened by the landowners with 
the loss of pay if they were not back in the fields by Monday 
morning after the elections.  Following a long discussion of 
the text of the law, she acknowledged that it \"could be 
misinterpreted\" and agreed to look at it again with a view of 
revising it. 
 
8. (C) Comment: The controversial election holiday law, while 
approved by the absent-minded opposition legislators as well, 
is widely viewed as another attempt by some in the FRG to 
create confusion on election day and discourage voter 
turn-out.  President Portillo is seized with the need to 
reform or veto the law before it creates more political 
tension in the final days leading up to the election, and we 
understand Rios Montt is also on board.  We expect this 11th 
hour irritant to the election process to be resolved soon. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11854","11/3/2003 18:11","03GUATEMALA2802","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031811Z Nov 03
","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002802 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: VOTERS IN JALAPA SET TO CAST BALLOTS FOR \"ANYBODY 
BUT RIOS MONTT\" 
 
 
1. Summary: Man-on-the-street interviews with voters in the 
Department of Jalapa suggest a strong backlash against the 
ruling FRG party and its candidate Efrain Rios Montt in the 
November 9 election. Jalapa voted overwhelmingly for the FRG 
in the past two elections, but respondents said the current 
FRG government is doing a bad job, and Jalapanecos are poised 
to throw them out.  There was little enthusiasm expressed for 
either GANA candidate Berger or UNE candidate Colom, but most 
respondents said they would vote for Berger as he is the 
candidate best positioned to unseat the FRG.  The local 
representative of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal said he 
expects the elections will be pulled off without fraud or 
violence in much of the department, but said one municipality 
is bracing for protests after the results are known.  End 
Summary 
 
2. While the Department of Jalapa is only about 60 miles east 
of Guatemala City, it is a rural area with a reputation as a 
cowboy town. Jalapa represents less than 3% of the Guatemalan 
electorate, but its vote results in the last national 
election virtually mirrored national results. As in other 
areas of the country that strongly supported Rios Montt is 
the past two elections, voters in Jalapa are increasingly 
turning to other parties. 
 
3. On October 30, PolCouns, ConOff and IM specialist visited 
the country seat of Jalapa and Sansare, a small town in the 
same department, to meet with representatives of the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal (TSE), the Supreme Electoral Council for 
the Department, and to get the viewpoints on the elections of 
the people in the streets. The TSE workers said they were 
preparing for a large voter turn-out; this was supported by 
the fact that 97% of the people interviewed informally said 
that they would vote on November 9th. The TSE workers claimed 
all of the pieces were in place for a smooth election day. 
According to them, problems with the electoral registry would 
be no worse than in past years. 
 
4. The TSE reps downplayed fears of election-day violence 
overall, but were unified in citing one exception: San Luis 
Jilotepeque, a small mountain town with a history of election 
day violence. In 1995, the losing mayoral candidate and his 
supporters took over the town\'s municipal building the day 
after the election, alleging that they had been deprived of 
victory by fraud. That same candidate is running again this 
year, and is now a member of the FRG. The TSE reps told us he 
has threatened similar actions this year if he does not win. 
Compounding the issue are racial tensions in the town. The 
FRG candidate is an indigenous Mayan, running against a 
\"ladino,\" which is seen by some observers as cause of more 
election run-up tensions. EU observers have already visited 
San Luis Jilotepeque and plan to be there on election day. 
 
5. Man-on-the-street interviews conducted in Sansare and 
Jalapa revealed that voters were not enthusiastic about any 
of the candidates, but were determined to remove the FRG from 
power. Only two respondents (roughly 5% of the sample) said 
they would cast a ballot for FRG candidate Rios Montt. 
Several people said they were going to vote for \"anybody but 
Rios Montt.\"  Oscar Berger (GANA) appealed to most of the 
people, garnering 53% in the informal poll. Alvaro Colom 
(UNE) followed with 25%; Leonel Lopez Rodas (PAN) got 9%. 
 
6. 53% of the respondents cited combating crime and 
insecurity as the greatest challenge for the next party in 
power. 38% said that unemployment was the greatest problem 
currently facing the country.  People also mentioned the 
economy, and lack of quality education and/or health care as 
issues that most concerned them. 
 
7. Interestingly, the majority of the people on the street 
(62%) said that they thought this election would be more 
transparent, and have less fraud than in elections past. This 
perception, along with the fact that 97% of the people 
interviewed vowed to vote, point to probable high voter 
turn-out in Jalapa. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11890","11/4/2003 22:47","03GUATEMALA2827","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2796","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002827 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, PINR, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: IN PORTILLO\'S ABSENCE, ELECTION HOLIDAY LAW 
CAUSING GROWING FRICTION 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2796 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: President Portillo traveled to Panama without 
vetoing the controversial election holiday bill (reftel), and 
opposition to the legislation has taken on a fever pitch. 
The Supreme Electoral Tribunal called on Portillo (who 
returns on the afternoon of November 4) to veto the law 
because of the impediments it creates to the election 
process.  The OAS and EU observation missions, several of the 
domestic observation efforts and we have issued public 
statements urging Portillo to veto the law.  Opposition 
candidates are calling openly for civil disobedience.  FRG 
legislative leaders met with the Ambassador late on November 
3 to argue that the law simply needed to be \"clarified\" by an 
executive decree, but the Ambassador urged them to weigh-in 
with the Executive to veto the bill as it is already creating 
confusion with voters and raising political tensions on the 
eve of elections.  Portillo assured us through his Foreign 
Minister that he would veto the bill if a compromise could 
not be reached.  With public pressure growing, we expect him 
to address the issue publicly on his return to the country. 
End summary. 
 
2. (C) Opposition to the recently passed election holiday 
bill (reftel) is creating an escalation in political tensions 
as sectors of the opposition and civil society begin to 
realize the impact it could have on discouraging voters. 
Many also see this as another in a long series of attempts by 
the FRG to manipulate the elections, and they are determined 
that this is where they will hold the line. The OAS Election 
Observation Mission, joined by two domestic missions, held a 
press conference on November 2 calling on President Portillo 
to veto the bill.  They argued that the law would create 
serious impediments to the electoral process by discouraging 
people from traveling.  The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) 
held a press conference on November 3 also calling on 
Portillo to veto the bill, saying that the law forbid the TSE 
from working on election day and threatened penalties for 
providers of support services to the TSE. 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador met with the legislative leadership of 
the FRG on the evening of November 3 at their request to 
discuss the bill.  The FRG was represented by Majority Leader 
Aristides Crespo, First Vice President of Congress Zury Rios, 
FRG Vice Presidential candidate Edin Barrientos, Minister of 
Finance Eduardo Weymann and FRG legal representative Jorge 
Arevalo.  The FRG leaders argued that the TSE was biased 
against them, that the domestic observation mission was 
partial and under the influence of their arch-enemy Frank 
Larue, that the Human Rights Ombudsman was in league with 
their critics, and that the private sector was determined to 
keep their laborers (who are largely FRG supporters, 
according to the FRG) from voting by not letting them return 
to their distant homes to vote on election day.  The FRG 
leaders said that they were not going to protest the TSE 
partiality against them, but were determined to force 
landowners to let migrant workers go home to vote.  That was 
why they passed the election holiday law, and that is why 
they stand by it.  In response to our earlier appeals to them 
for reconsideration (reftel), they were proposing an 
Executive Decree \"clarifying\" what productive work could be 
done over the three-day holidays, and it would include 
letting TSE members work, keeping hotels and gas stations 
open and authorizing journalists to work. 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador told them that the USG shares their 
concern that all laborers be allowed to vote.  He said, 
however, that the law, even with the amendment they were 
proposing, would continue to create confusion and was more 
likely to discourage voting and unnecessarily stoke the 
political confrontation only days before the election.  He 
urged the FRG leaders to seek ways to diminish tensions in 
these closing days of the campaign, and said that we thought 
the only way to address the current impasse was for President 
Portillo to veto this legislation, and for Congress to draft 
a new law before the second round. 
 
5. (C) On November 4, the official gazette published 
Executive Decree 700-2003 \"clarifying\" the Labor Code\'s 
definition of essential services, expanding the categories 
contained in the election holiday bill (still not signed and 
published) to include electric and water services, 
journalism, gas stations, hotels and employees of the TSE. 
The \"clarification\" (when many sectors were expecting a 
presidential veto) further fueled rising political tensions. 
The private sector organization CACIF held a press conference 
to denounce the holiday law as \"another example of FRG 
fraud.\"  The major opposition parties, which had earlier 
called for civil disobedience against the law, have called a 
press conference for the afternoon of November 4. 
 
6. (U) The Embassy released a press statement on the morning 
of November 4 calling on employers to ensure that their 
employees are able to go home to vote, and calling on the 
government to veto the law.  The Embassy press statement 
follows: 
 
\"Declaration on the Election Holiday Law:  The United States 
Embassy wishes to affirm publicly our view, which we have 
been expressing privately to the Government of Guatemala 
since Saturday.  A fundamental change in the rules under 
which elections are being carried out so close to election 
day can only have the effect of undermining public 
confidence.  We do not think a unilateral clarification of 
the law would be sufficient to restore public confidence. 
Therefore, we respectfully call on the President to veto this 
legislation.  We believe such a veto imposes a moral 
obligation on all employers to take extraordinary steps to 
ensure all employees are able to exercise their right to 
vote.  We call on all national and international observer 
missions to verify that there has been no impediment to the 
right to vote.\" 
 
7. (C)  GANA Vice Presidential candidate Eduardo Stein phoned 
the Ambassador on November 4 to report that our statement 
had just been read aloud at an (OAS-sponsored) Forum of 
Political Parties, to general relief and approbation.  Stein 
could not have been more profuse in his thanks. 
 
8. (C) President Portillo is scheduled to return from Panama 
on the afternoon of November 4.  He assured us (through 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez) and similarly assured a visiting 
delegation from the Robert Kennedy Center that he would veto 
the law if agreement could not be reached to reform it.  The 
President of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal is to meet with 
Portillo on the afternoon of November 4 to press for a 
presidential veto. 
 
9. (C) Comment: With only five days left before national 
elections, the flap over the election holiday law has 
generated renewed tensions and fears of bad behavior by the 
FRG on election day (the FRG leaders, in the meeting with the 
Ambassador, again pledged to respect the results and to 
behave peacefully during the elections).  We expect Portillo 
to veto the law, but the debate has already taken a toll on 
confidence in the electoral process. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11920","11/5/2003 14:59","03GUATEMALA2831","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2796","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

051459Z Nov 03

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002831 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT PORTILLO WILL VETO ELECTION HOLIDAY LAW 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 2796 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2827 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) President Portillo called the Ambassador early on the 
morning of November 5 to say that he would veto the election 
holiday law, as he had promised.  Congress did not hold a 
special session to revise the bill on November 4, and the 
Executive Decree of November 3 (signed by Vice President 
Reyes Lopez in Portillo\'s absence) had not resolved the 
problem.  With tensions mounting and growing international 
pressure for a veto, Portillo has assured us he will veto it 
today.  Foreign Minister Gutierrez also called to Ambassador 
to tell him the controversial law would be vetoed today. 
 
2. (C) Comment:  The removal of the holiday law will ease 
tensions going in to the final days of the election campaign, 
but it will not fully restore confidence in the opposition 
that is waiting to see if the FRG has any other election week 
surprises up their sleeves.  The FRG leadership has promised 
us (and the OAS, EU and MINUGUA) that they will be well 
behaved. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11956","11/6/2003 17:55","03GUATEMALA2845","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE303844","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002845 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, IS, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: UNRWA DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: STATE 303844 
 
Due to a local holiday, we delivered reftel demarche to Luis 
Carranza, Acting Director for Multilateral Affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry on November 3.  Carranza was aware of the 
Fourth Committee vote, scheduled for November 7, and welcomed 
our draft resolution as he is currently putting together 
position papers.  Carranza said that Guatemala agrees in 
principle with our efforts to streamline and revitalize the 
UNGA, but had not yet made a decision about co-sponsoring the 
consolidated UNRWA resolution. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11958","11/6/2003 19:42","03GUATEMALA2850","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/06/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EAID, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: SCENE SETTER FOR GUATEMALA\'S ELECTIONS: A GROWING 
EXPECTATION OF CHANGE 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The November 9 elections will pit Guatemala\'s 
past (represented by General Rios Montt and his authoritarian 
vision of Guatemala rooted in the armed internal conflict) 
against the region\'s future (represented by Oscar Berger and 
Alvaro Colom, and their vision of private sector-driven 
economic growth, free trade and social justice).  All 
indications are that Guatemalans are rejecting Rios Montt\'s 
vision of Guatemala, and will turn out in large numbers on 
November 9 to vote for change.  The ruling FRG\'s attempts to 
manipulate the vote do not appear to have made much of an 
impact, though many in the opposition continue to believe 
Rios Montt\'s candidacy taints the legitimacy of the 
elections.  Fears of election day fraud have largely 
vanished, and violence is expected to be limited to a small 
number of rural locations.  There continue to be problems 
with the voter registration list (\"padron\") which could have 
the impact of confusing some voters on election day, but no 
one at this time expects these problems to be significant. 
No candidate is likely to get 50% of the vote, forcing a 
runoff election on December 28.  Guatemalans are becoming 
more enthusiastic about the election process as the prospect 
for change is growing, and turn-out is expected to be high. 
The prospect for change also offers opportunities to advance 
key U.S. objectives, and we should be prepared to engage 
quickly with the two finalists that emerge from Sunday\'s 
election.  End summary. 
 
Putting the War Behind Them Once and For All 
-------------------------------------------- 
2. (C) Former General and patriarch of the ruling FRG Efrain 
Rios Montt has been a polarizing force in Guatemala politics 
for much of the past thirty years.  His authoritarian 
populism, sprinkled with moral injunctions and liberal 
references to class struggle, has always had a following in 
Guatemala, especially among the rural poor.  While viewed by 
the international community as the perpetrator of some of the 
worst human rights violations committed during the internal 
conflict, he is viewed by many Guatemalans as having restored 
order during a convulsive period in their history.  In 1974 
it is widely believed that he was deprived of the presidency 
by fraud, and at least during the initial months of his 19 
month presidency in 1982-1983 his government was very 
popular.  Polls showed that he would have won the presidency 
by a large majority had he been allowed to run in 1990, when 
the courts first struck down his candidacy.  In the last 
three elections, Rios Montt was the polarizing force.  His 
candidates won in 1990 and 1999, and lost by the smallest of 
margins in 1995.  At 76 years of age, this is almost 
certainly the final battle of his political career, and he 
continues to define the political debate in Guatemala. 
 
3. (C) But times have changed for the General.  The FRG\'s 
four years in power have left many voters believing that Rios 
Montt could not and cannot deliver the promised land of 
better security, more jobs and improved social justice he 
offered in 1999.  Indeed, violent crime and corruption have 
spiraled during the FRG\'s time in office, and most 
Guatemalans have not seen the benefits of anemic economic 
growth.  Surveys conducted in July and again in October by 
the Embassy in the most remote corners of the heartland of 
Rios Montt\'s support revealed an overwhelming rejection of 
the ruling party, and made no distinction between President 
Portillo and the General.  Voter preference polls show him 
running a distant third, 16 points behind second place 
candidate Alvaro Colom.  While the Embassy\'s sample was not 
scientific, and the professional polls are frequently accused 
of having an urban bias, it is clear from every measure that 
Rios Montt is fighting an uphill battle to make it into the 
second round of the election.  We do not discount the 
possibility that the FRG\'s superior organizational ability on 
election day and their payoffs to the ex-PAC\'s and other 
election spending could get them over the hump into the 
second round, but at this point it looks like a long-shot. 
 
4. (C) The vision Rios Montt has tried to sell Guatemalans 
during the election campaign is one of providing law and 
order, and confronting the oligarchy that, in his words, has 
long run Guatemala like their own farm.  While security and 
social justice are issues of importance to a large majority 
of Guatemalan voters, Rios Montt\'s appeal to confrontation is 
increasingly viewed as a legacy of the civil war, a vision 
drawn from Guatemala\'s past, and not the choice of 
Guatemalans for their future. 
 
5. (C) His primary competitors for the presidency are 
center-right GANA candidate Oscar Berger, closely allied to 
the private sector, and center-left UNE candidate Alvaro 
Colom, with closer ties to grass roots civil society. 
Berger\'s message of job creation through investment and free 
trade appeals to Guatemalans (especially in urban areas) who 
believe the country\'s future lies in a stronger relationship 
with the U.S. and regional economic integration.  Colom\'s 
message of combating corruption and increasing social 
spending resonates in rural areas and with the urban poor. 
The Embassy surveys (in rural areas) found that most voters 
identified with Berger and Colom mainly as alternatives 
capable of defeating Rios Montt, and showed less enthusiasm 
for the candidates themselves. 
 
And the Dead Shall Rise 
----------------------- 
6. (C) All the major candidates have told us privately that 
they do not expect significant fraud on election day. 
However, past misbehavior by the FRG (especially their 
violent protests that shut down parts of the capital in July) 
has fueled popular perceptions that fraud is possible. 
Stories of missing voter registration cards, dead people, 
minors and Salvadoran nationals appearing on voter 
registration lists, allegations that the FRG contracted all 
public transportation on election day, and problems with 
voters finding their names double registered or eliminated 
from the voter registration lists are part of every 
conversation on the elections.  The political parties and 
international observers agree, however, that adequate 
safeguards are in place to ensure free and fair elections, 
and all acknowledge that the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) 
is above partisan manipulation.  There will be over 300 
international and thousands of domestic observers spread out 
all over the country, making this the most observed election 
in Guatemala\'s history.  International observers has been 
deployed in rural areas for over a month now, visiting 
potential flash-points, meeting with local leaders and making 
it clear that fraud and violence will not go unreported. 
 
7. (C) The voter registration list (\"padron electoral\") has 
problems resulting, among other things, from the incomplete 
incorporation of a new registry for urban areas, which was 
designed to allow voters to vote closer to their homes. 
Problems have been detected which will affect some voters on 
election day, and the TSE will be opening special \"observed 
vote\" tables at each voting site to address many of these 
problems.  The indelible ink should also ensure that double 
registrations do not result in double voting.  We recognize, 
however, that some voters will encounter difficulties voting, 
and many will view this erroneously as a deliberate attempt 
to manipulate the vote. 
 
8. (C) The decision by the Constitutional Court in July to 
allow General Rios Montt to be a candidate, in apparent 
violation of a constitutional prohibition against those who 
had participated in unconstitutional governments, was for 
many Guatemalans the original sin that fatally flawed the 
2003 election.  Unable to stop a legal process that was 
carefully manipulated by the FRG, many in civil society, the 
media and the opposition have raised alarms publicly about 
every subsequent issue that could potentially be an FRG 
attempt to influence the elections, in order to have a well 
documented basis for crying fraud if the General makes it 
into the second round.  Many of their complaints are valid. 
The compensation package for the ex-PAC\'s was clearly used to 
try to build support for the FRG in the elections (note: When 
the GOG came through with actual cash payments for less than 
half of those who claimed to be ex-PACs, however, protests 
broke out around the country, ultimately working against the 
FRG candidate. End note).  The school breakfast and 
fertilizer programs were also augmented during the election 
year in a thinly-veiled attempt to earn largely rural 
support.  Public works programs, while admittedly less than 
the election year binge of the former Arzu government, have 
also targeted areas where the FRG hoped to strengthen its 
support.  An independent NGO investigating election year 
public spending, working under a USAID grant, concluded that 
while the Portillo government has used public spending to try 
to influence the outcome of the election, the volume of 
spending was not significantly different from previous 
election years and beneficiaries were not selected for their 
partisan preferences. 
 
Throwing the First Stone 
------------------------ 
9. (C) Violence has also been a concern in the 2003 
elections.  By some counts, 29 political activists have been 
murdered since the May opening of the election campaign.  All 
of the international observer groups have investigated these 
murders, however, and agree that most are clearly not related 
to the elections.  MINUGUA believes that five could have been 
politically motivated, and the OAS lists two as being clearly 
politically motivated.  The Washington Office on Latin 
America (WOLA) in its report on the elections said, 
\"relatively few have been proven to be directly related to 
the political campaign.  Many of the incidents involved 
\"common\" rather than \"political\" crime.  It is reassuring 
that there have been few documented incidents of politically 
motivated violence, and it is important to counter alarmist 
opinions and to emphasize the relatively peaceful nature of 
the process to date.\" 
 
10. (C) The violent protests of July 24-25, orchestrated by 
the leadership of the FRG, fed fears that the FRG is capable 
of putting gangs on the streets either on election day to 
discourage the vote, or to burn ballot boxes on the night of 
November 9 if they lose.  Many of our contacts believe, 
however, that the July protests hurt the FRG in the elections 
by making them look to voters like a band of thugs.  Since 
July, the FRG has been careful to convey an image of law 
abiding democrats.  Members of the Executive Committee of the 
FRG visited us and other members of the international 
community on November 3-4 in a gesture that showed that the 
FRG is concerned about its international image.  They assured 
all of us that they will respect the outcome of the election, 
whatever it is, and Zury Rios told us directly \"we will 
behave\" on election day.  While we do not discount the 
possibility of post-electoral violence in hotly disputed 
municipal elections in isolated areas, as has occurred in 
past elections, there are no indications at this point that 
the FRG is planning to dispute the November 9 results in the 
streets. 
 
The Inevitable Second Round 
--------------------------- 
11. (C) Poll results (and the Embassy\'s informal survey in 
rural areas) show the gap between front runner Oscar Berger 
and Alvaro Colom narrowing decidedly.  No candidate is 
expected to get the fifty percent of the vote necessary to 
win the election in one round.  The second round election 
would be held on December 28, less than three weeks before 
the January 14 inaugural.  If Rios Montt makes it into the 
second round, all indications are that the election will 
polarize, with an overwhelming majority voting for whichever 
candidate competes against the General.  If Colom and Berger 
make it into the second round, the election becomes an 
unpredictable contest with a totally new dynamic.  Polls show 
Berger beating Colom by a declining margin in a second round, 
but even Berger\'s closest advisors do not put much faith in 
the numbers.  A group of private sector and civil society 
members, who by and large had thrown their lot in with Berger 
as the only candidate capable of burying the FRG, told us on 
November 6 that they now believe Alvaro Colom would beat 
Berger handily in a runoff election. 
 
12. (U) Public opinion polls show that Guatemalans believe 
they can make a difference in their future by voting and that 
they plan to vote in record numbers in the upcoming 
elections.  While polls have historically overstated the 
actual voter turnout, trends suggest that voter turn out will 
be significantly higher that the average (around 45%) since 
the restoration of democracy.  An early November poll also 
shows an increase in public confidence in the electoral 
process.  Generating public confidence in the election 
process has been a key element in the Ambassador\'s public 
diplomacy strategy over the past 2-3 months. 
 
Comment 
------- 
13. (C) The participation of Rios Montt in the elections has 
created a climate of tension and distrust that has fed fears 
in many sectors of civil society and the population at large 
that elections would not be free and fair.  With polls 
showing the General pulling a distant third, many of those 
sectors are now convinced that Rios Montt will not make it 
into the second round, and if he does there is virtually no 
chance he could win it.  We believe leaders of the FRG may 
have reached the same conclusion and have adjusted their 
strategy to use their legislative strength in the new 
Congress to protect their interests, as we reported in 
September.  Fears that there will be significant fraud or 
violence on election day are subsiding. 
 
14. (C) Many Guatemalans believe the November 9 elections 
will put an end to 20 years of political polarization, and 
that the candidates that emerge will no longer reflect the 
authoritarian structures and policies evolved from the 
internal conflict, but rather will bring Guatemala into a 
closer relationship with the U.S. and their regional partners 
through free trade and a greater set of shared interests.  We 
are poised to meet early on with the transition teams of the 
two victors of the November 9 elections to engage them on 
CAFTA, human and labor rights, transnational crime and the 
full range of bilateral interests. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11959","11/6/2003 21:34","03GUATEMALA2853","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002853 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/26/2013 
TAGS: MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA DOWNSIZES ITS MILITARY, INCLUDING THE 
NOTORIOUS EMP 
 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The first of three voluntary force 
reductions, phased over the next three years, commenced on 
October 29, and involved 1648 Defense Ministry employees 
including 198 career officers, 100 assimilated officers, 600 
non-commissioned officers (NCO\'s) and 750 civilians.  This 
first phase cost $25 million, reduced the military by about 6 
percent and included the final 564 members of the EMP, 
accounting for most of the discharged civilians.  Among the 
non-EMP retirees, criteria for selection-out were well 
considered but appear to have been poorly enforced--setting a 
costly precedent for future phases and leaving the rank 
structure still top-heavy.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The military sought up to $150 million from the 
proceeds of the sale of Eurobonds for the purpose of 
downsizing.  As of September, the Finance Ministry has only 
approved a $25 million budget transfer to cover the first 
phase of military retirement bonuses, severance pay, and 
make-up contributions to the pension fund.  Note: the pension 
fund recently lost $22 million in an ongoing financial 
scandal. 
 
3. (C) The first-round cuts of military personnel were 
targeted at senior NCO\'s and at the ranks of Major through 
Colonel, where the Army has the majority of its excess 
officers.  Priority for bonuses was given to officers who 
have remained on active duty despite physical handicaps 
related to injuries sustained in the internal conflict. 
Bonuses were not to be used for officers within 1.5 years of 
mandatory retirement, which occurs at 33 years of service. 
Remaining funds were intended to retire officers with 
disciplinary problems.  Prioritized lists of servicemembers 
to be retired were drawn up from a large number of positive 
responses to the call for voluntary retirement. 
 
4. (C) Unfortunately, the criteria do not appear to have been 
strictly enforced.  General Carlos Radford Bonilla, who 
should not have qualified because he is less than a year from 
mandatory retirement, is taking the early retirement package. 
 A number of officers in quasi-retired \"disponible\" status 
have also managed to get their names on the list.  Very few 
Colonels have volunteered, but as many as half of all NCOs 
have.  An Air Force Officer told us that 83 of the 160 
Airmen, including all the mechanics, had requested early 
retirement.  One of the three Colonels at the military zone 
in Mazatenango (where only one is needed) told us that half 
of the NCO\'s there had signed up for the package but that 
none of the Colonels had.  According to the criteria, 
officers who have received scholarships from the military to 
train as lawyers, accountants, and doctors were ineligible 
for the early retirement package.  However, the military only 
seems to be holding the line on keeping its pilots.  All of 
the other career officers who requested early retirement were 
granted it. 
 
5. (C) Using his personal situation as an example, one 
Colonel explained why he thought few officers with less than 
25 years of service would find the early retirement package 
attractive.  Leaving now, at his current 22 years of service, 
would result in a payout of about $19,000 and a pension of 
under $900 per month.  After 25 years, officers automatically 
qualify for a severance package upon retirement of 10 months 
wages (about Q120,000 or $15,000 for a Colonel).  Accepting 
early retirement, in his view, is only worth $4,000 (the 
difference between $19,000 now or $15,000 in three years), 
guarantees a low pension, and means never becoming a General. 
 Like many Colonels, this one believes the next government 
will follow President Portillo\'s example and fire all the 
Generals upon taking office, thus freeing up slots for 
promotion. 
 
6. (C) Although some officers seem to be applying a \"bird in 
the hand\" rationale, there is no sense of concern in the 
upper ranks that this may be a unique opportunity.  One 
General, who reaches 33 years of service in February of 2004 
told us he plans to take advantage of phase 2 in May--even 
though he will already be retired.  Under current law, 
military retirements become effective only in January and 
June of each year and the General is confident that the new 
government will find the money for continued downsizing.  It 
is unclear whether this first round will become effective 
immediately on October 29, due to the large number of EMP 
civilians being retired, or whether it will actually take 
effect in January with the retirees in \"disponible\" status 
until then.  At the retirement ceremony, several officers 
wondered when they would actually get their checks. 
 
7. (C) Comment.  The military has reduced its forces on two 
previous occasions since the end of the internal conflict in 
1996.  Although it was poorly managed, this latest effort was 
still a positive effort by the military to reduce its overall 
cost structure.  Also, the Portillo Administration deserves 
some credit for finally keeping its promise to disband the 
EMP.  The first phase of the current round amounted to a 
reduction of about 6 percent of the force.  The remaining 
force of around 27,000 personnel includes about 3,000 mostly 
low-level civilians.  Because it is unlikely that the full 
$150 million originally sought for downsizing will ever be 
available, it was crucial that this first phase of voluntary 
retirement be handled properly.  Unfortunately, most hard 
decisions were avoided.  Allowing Generals and officers close 
to retirement or already in \"disponible\" status to take 
advantage of the package set expensive precedents and 
encouraged many to wait.  On the bright side, reducing the 
force by 6 percent should allow the GOG to reduce the defense 
budget, freeing up resources for the underfunded social 
sector. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11983","11/7/2003 16:39","03GUATEMALA2857","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE305553","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002857 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, IS, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON MIDDLE EAST RESOLUTIONS AT UNGA 
 
REF: STATE 305553 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Luis Carranza, Acting 
Director for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on 
November 6.  Carranza promised to forward our points to Vice 
Minister Aguilera and to Guatemalan Permanent Representative 
to the United Nations, Ambassador Rosenthall, for comment. 
Carranza said that Guatemala agreed in principle with our 
argument that repetitive, one-sided, and purely political 
UNGA resolutions were not helpful, and he added that his 
government\'s initial view of our proposals was positive, 
especially the effort to consolidate resolutions.  However, 
Carranza cautioned that Guatemala would carefully consider 
Arab positions on these issues, especially those of the 
Palestinian representative.  Carranza added that the NAM had 
yet to form a position, and Guatemala would take its views 
into consideration before mapping its own votes. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11995","11/9/2003 14:55","03GUATEMALA2864","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091455Z Nov 03

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002864 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, EAID, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: ALL QUIET ON EVE OF GUATEMALAN ELECTIONS 
 
 
1. With fourteen hours to go before the opening of voting 
tables on November 9, no election-related disturbances have 
been reported.  The prohibition on partisan campaigning went 
into effect at noon on November 7, and all the political 
parties have ceased campaigning.  The sale of alcohol has 
been suspended.  News reports from around the country note 
that everything is normal.  Businesses are open and traffic 
is the same as any weekend. 
 
2. Embassy election observers have reported from their remote 
locations that things are quiet around the country.  We spoke 
with senior representatives of the major political parties 
late on November 8, and none report any problems anticipated 
on election day. 
 
3. The Ambassador toured the Mirador Electoral quick-count 
center and the Election Central of the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal (TSE) on the morning of November 8.  The TSE 
magistrates said that everything was in good shape for the 
elections, and said they expect it to be a civic event 
(\"fiesta civica\").  The Ambassador spoke with the Ministers 
of Defense and Government on the evening of November 7, and 
both say the security forces are prepared to preserve order 
on election day. 
 
4. Comment: Defying months of rumors of pre-electoral 
violence and fears that most economic activity would be shut 
down, Guatemala appears poised to have a peaceful election. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11997","11/9/2003 16:51","03GUATEMALA2867","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002867 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, EAID, KDEM, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN ELECTIONS: POLLS OPEN WITH LONG LINES 
 
 
1. The polls opened on time, and reports from around the 
country indicate that voter participation is larger than in 
previous elections.  Lines are long, and moved slowly at the 
beginning, frustrating many voters, but reports from many 
precincts indicate that by the second hour of voting, lines 
were moving normally.  Changes to the voter registration list 
(\"padron electoral\") caused some confusion at the opening of 
the polls, but they do not appear to have disenfranchised 
voters.  Complaints that the ink used to mark voters\' fingers 
was not working have surfaced in a number of precincts, and 
Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) President Bolanos went on TV 
to explain how to apply the ink so it wouldn\'t come off. 
There have been reports of electrical outages in a small 
number of locations, but there are no indications that these 
are related to the elections. 
 
2. The country is by and large calm.  As of 1000 hrs. local 
time, there were no reports of nationally organized electoral 
violence, though there were some isolated incidents.  Police 
sources tell us that in Chajul (a small town in Quiche 
Department), the voting center opened late and that the crowd 
attempted to rush in.  In the crush, two intending voters 
were killed and five were injured.  Additional police units 
were sent to Chajul to keep order.  This report has not been 
carried by the media.  On the night of November 8, candidate 
for Congress for the center-left UNE Rolando Morales Chavez 
was shot in an apparent hold-up attempt.  Morales is in 
stable condition, and there are no indications that the 
assault against him was politically motivated.  There are 
also reports that former civil patrol members (ex-PACs) are 
blocking the road leading into a small hamlet in Baja Verapaz 
Department.  Other ex-PAC groups around the country, however, 
have suspended their protests to allow voting. 
 
3. The Ambassador visited a polling site in Zone 13 of the 
capital early on the morning and then traveled to the 
Kakchiquel indigenous province of Chimaltenango, where he 
observed voting in the provincial capital and the rural 
communities of Santo Domingo Xenacoj and Sumpango.  Voter 
participation in the precincts of Cimaltenango Department is 
high and the mood is festive. 
 
4. U.S. Embassy observers spread out around the country 
report that all is calm, and that voters have turned out in 
large numbers in every location. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11998","11/9/2003 23:25","03GUATEMALA2869","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002869 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, EAID, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN ELECTIONS: PROBLEMS WITH VOTER 
REGISTRATION LIST GENERATE TENSIONS 
 
 
1. Embassy election observers around the country report that 
voter lines are moving slowly and many intending voters are 
not able to vote because of problems with the voter 
registration list (\"padron electoral\") or their voter 
identification document (\"cedula\").  Authorities in 
Chimaltenango Department told the Ambassador that by 1100 
hrs. over 2,000 intending voters were waiting at the 
municipality to have their identification documents stamped 
after having been turned away at their voting tables. 
Observers in rural communities similarly report that the 
higher-than-anticipated voter turnout and problems with the 
padron are resulting in long lines at the local offices of 
the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE).  In some areas, voter 
frustration is leading to an increase in tensions.  Voting 
was suspended temporarily in the Pacific coastal town of 
Ixtapa early in the morning of November 9, but resumed once 
TSE officials arrived.  OAS Election Observation Mission head 
 
SIPDIS 
Valentin Paniagua told reporters that the delays at the 
voting tables were largely because the TSE had not 
anticipated such a massive turnout, and expressed confidence 
that ultimately all voters would be able to cast their 
ballots.  Voters standing in long lines in Solola told 
reporters they would wait out the long lines saying \"it\'s 
better to lose four hours than four years.\" 
 
2. Sources in the Police confirmed reports that an 
undetermined number of voting tables in the small town of El 
Quetzal, San Marcos Department were burned around noon by 
individuals intent on putting an end to the mayoral 
elections.  It is not clear at this time who carried out the 
destruction of the voting tables, but URNG members told the 
TSE that supporters of UNE and GANA carried out the burning. 
 
SIPDIS 
Press reports indicate that frustrated intending voters 
burned ballot boxes in the coastal town of Coatepeque around 
1400 hrs., arguing that their names were not on the \"padron,\" 
but that FRG members were not similarly excluded from the 
\"padron.\"  Partisan differences have also reportedly boiled 
over in violent confrontations in three municipalities in 
Jalapa (San Luis Jilotopeque, Monjas and Chaparron) and in 
San Antonio Suchitepequez. 
 
3. The Ambassador visited voter precincts in Antigua in the 
early afternoon and found that, unlike the rest of the 
country, Antigua voters are slow to going to the polls. 
Around 30% of voters had shown up at polling sites with only 
three hours left in the. 
4. Unseasonable rains discouraged voters in Northern 
Guatemala in the afternoon hours. 
HAMILTON 
"
"11999","11/10/2003 2:09","03GUATEMALA2870","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

100209Z Nov 03

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002870 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, EAID, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN ELECTIONS: VERY PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
SHOW FRG TRAILING AT 8 PM ON ELECTION NIGHT 
 
 
1. Early election results from around the country (often 
representing only one or two tables) at 8 p.m. on election 
night have given the following results.  We note that the 
sample is too small to be considered statistically reliable, 
but does reflect the vote from the four corners of the 
country.  Berger appears to have an early lead in Guatemala 
City and eastern Guatemala, and Colom is ahead in the 
indigenous west.  Rios Montt is a distant third nationwide. 
 
-                      percentage of vote for 
-                 GANA     UNE      FRG      PAN 
-                Berger   Colom  Rios Montt Lopez 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Totonicapan        27       43       10       16 
Jutiapa            31       23       23        9 
San Marcos         21       28       18       24 
Chimaltenango      18       49       10        4 
Retalhuleu         51       20       13        5 
Zacapa             32       27       26       10 
Ixtapa (Escuintla) 30       32       27       10 
Quezaltenango      48       31        8        5 
Guatemala City     48       31       11        4 
 
2. FRG leaders called a press conference late in the 
afternoon on November 9 to complain that leading daily 
\"Prensa Libre\" and anti-government cable TV Guatevision had 
violated the electoral law by issuing anti-FRG propaganda on 
election day. \"Prensa Libre\" printed a special edition at 
mid-day, which headlined \"FRG JEERED-AT,\" referring to the 
fact that some individuals jeered at Rios Montt when he 
voted.  The special edition was sold throughout the country, 
including inside voting centers (an Embassy officer purchased 
one inside a voting center).  Guatevision has been showing a 
music video all day which talks about the importance of 
making the right choices and uses pictures of masked FRG 
protesters burning tires on July 24.  FRG leaders called on 
the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) to take legal action 
against \"Prensa Libre\" and Guatevision.  The FRG leaders also 
complained that large numbers of their supporters (like those 
of other parties) were disenfranchised by the problems with 
the voter registry and long delays voters suffered around the 
country at voting centers. 
 
3. Tensions remain high in several small towns where voting 
lines remained long at the time the polls were supposed to 
close.  The TSE has announced that, in areas where large 
numbers of intending voters were still waiting to have their 
documents validated, polls will remain open until midnight. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12015","11/10/2003 13:52","03GUATEMALA2871","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EMBASSY SAN JOSE FOR WHA/DAS DAN FISK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/10/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER AND COLOM WIN FIRST ROUND OF GUATEMALAN 
ELECTIONS 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) At 0630 hrs local time on November 10, the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal announced preliminary results of the 
national elections.  With 21% of voting tables reporting, 
GANA presidential candidate Oscar Berger is ahead with 47.7% 
of the vote, followed by UNE candidate Alvaro Colom with 
26.4%.  FRG candidate Efrain Rios Montt came in third with 
11.2%.  Berger won overwhelmingly in Guatemala City, and 
Colom was the favorite in the Mayan indigenous provinces of 
western Guatemala. These early results are heavily 
urban-weighted and may well change as more vote counts come 
in from rural areas. 
 
2. (U) With 97% of tables in the Department of Guatemala 
reporting, former Mayor of Guatemala City Oscar Berger 
received 49% of the vote.  UNE candidate Colom received 27% 
and FRG candidate Rios Montt received 11%.  Former President 
Alvaro Arzu is ahead for Mayor of Guatemala City with 34% of 
the vote, followed by GANA candidate Jorge Briz with 24% and 
FRG candidate Luis Rabbe with 18%. 
 
3. (C) The OAS quick count (which was given to us against the 
instructions of the EOM chief -- please protect) also ranked 
Berger and Colom as the two candidates who would advance to 
the second round, but gave them different percentages, with 
GANA candidate Berger obtaining 36.3%, UNE\'s Colom drawing 
26.5% and FRG candidate Rios Montt trailing with 18.0% of the 
vote.  The domestic observation mission Mirador Electoral 
quick count (also given to us in strict confidence against 
Mirador\'s decision to release only to the TSE -- please 
protect) shows similar trends, with Berger getting 35.7% of 
the vote, followed by Colom with 27.5% and the FRG with 
17.8%.  Once the TSE has more results from rural areas, we 
expect the final vote count results to be closer to the quick 
count results. 
 
4. (U) The OAS Election Observation Mission issued a press 
statement in the early hours of November 10 noting that the 
elections were characterized by significant citizen 
participation, despite problems with the organization and 
administration of the elections.  It said the most salient 
observation on the election was \"the firm will of the 
population to strengthen the country\'s institutionality 
through the democratic mechanisms that are promoted and 
defended by the international community.\"  The OAS laments 
the isolated acts of violence that marred the elections in 
some communities, and notes that the massive voter turnout 
overwhelmed the logistical and organizational arrangements to 
allow citizens to vote.  No evaluation is made on the results 
of the election, saying that the OAS will withhold judgment 
until the Supreme Electoral Tribunal has spoken and any 
challenges are presented.  The OAS statement closes by 
\"highlighting the committed attitude of the voters, who went 
to the polls in massive numbers, in a clear demonstration of 
the commitment of the Guatemalan people with democracy.  This 
is even more significant, taking into account the violence 
and political confrontation that have accompanied this 
process since the convocation of elections.\" 
 
5. (C) Privately, and although they are withholding final 
judgment for the moment, none of the ranking OAS, EU or 
Mirador Electoral officials expect logistical problems or 
problems of violence in some localities to change the 
preliminary results as reported above. 
 
6. (U) It is also worth noting that the fears of Guatemala\'s 
opposition press and civil society -- that gangs tied to the 
ruling FRG would engage in violence to keep the vote down; 
that ex-PACs would block major highways and access to voting 
centers; that the FRG would tie up access to public 
transportation; to name just the most salient conspiracy 
theories -- did not come to pass. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12024","11/10/2003 22:53","03GUATEMALA2880","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE321874","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002880 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, IS, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON MIDDLE EAST RESOLUTIONS AT THE UNGA 
 
REF: A. STATE 321874 
 
     B. STATE 306875 
     C. STATE 305553 
 
Per ref A instructions, the Ambassador spoke with Foreign 
Minister Edgar Gutierrez on November 10.  Gutierrez, who was 
enjoying a local holiday in the wake of national elections 
here yesterday, was unaware of the details of our proposals 
but promised he would not wait until tomorrow to contact his 
staff.  The text of Secretary Powell\'s letter to Gutierrez on 
this topic (ref B) was delivered via diplomatic note to the 
Foreign Ministry on Friday, November 7.  PolOff had earlier 
discussed ref C points with acting Director for Multilateral 
Affairs, Luis Carranza, on November 6.  That discussion led 
us to believe that Guatemala was open to the idea of 
consolidating some of the resolutions and possibly to at 
least abstain on others. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12060","11/12/2003 21:01","03GUATEMALA2889","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

122101Z Nov 03
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EAID, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER AND COLOM BEGIN SECOND ROUND CAMPAIGN; FRG 
DOES WELL IN CONGRESS AND MUNICIPALITIES 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Guatemalan voters turned out in 
history-making numbers on November 9 to say \"no\" to General 
Rios Montt\'s presidential bid, but gave his FRG a large bloc 
in Congress and a majority of the municipalities. 
Preliminary vote results, with 94% of tables counted, give 
Berger 35% of the vote, followed by Colom with 27% and Rios 
Montt with 19%.  The FRG has reacted to its defeat with 
relative silence, though two party leaders said that the FRG 
would concentrate its efforts on the legislative and 
municipal fronts in expectation of the 2007 elections. 
Challenges to the vote are expected in some municipalities, 
and the FRG is talking about filing an injunction against the 
results in Guatemala City, although we expect it realizes a 
challenge would not prosper.  Berger and Colom have already 
begun the second round campaign.  There is a palpable sense 
of relief throughout Guatemalan society that the General is 
no longer a contender.  End summary. 
 
The Presidential Vote 
--------------------- 
2. (U) With 94.4% of the votes counted, GANA coalition 
candidate Oscar Berger consolidated his hold on first place 
in Guatemala\'s November 9 presidential election with 34.6% of 
the vote.  Alvaro Colom, who will face off against Berger in 
a runoff election on December 28, received 26.5%.  FRG 
candidate Efrain Rios Montt came in a distant third with 
19.2% of the vote, and PAN candidate Leonel Lopez received 
8.3%.  Berger was the big winner in Guatemala City (49%), but 
the provinces were split with Colom and Rios Montt taking 
much of the indigenous western highlands, and Berger and 
Colom splitting the Spanish-speaking provinces of the south 
coast and eastern Guatemala. 
 
Record Voter Turnout 
-------------------- 
3. (SBU) Preliminary reports indicate that 58% of registered 
voters cast a ballot on November 9.  Since many intending 
voters were either discouraged by the long lines or were not 
able to vote because of problems with the voter registry, 
actual voter turnout was even higher.  Voter turnout only 
reached 46.2% in 1999 and 53.3% in 1995.  The high voter 
turnout in this election (coupled with the low vote for the 
FRG) is widely interpreted as motivated by voters\' 
determination to punish the FRG for its corruption and poor 
performance on the economy and crime during its four years in 
office.  The elections will have to be held again in eight 
small municipalities where ballots were burned on election 
day.  The results of those new elections will affect only 
their own municipal races. 
 
FRG Takes First Place in Congress and Municipal Elections 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
4. (U) Preliminary results show the FRG winning 42 seats in 
Congress (out of 158), giving it the single largest bloc. 
The GANA coalition (made of three parties) won 49 seats, but 
it is not clear if these parties will eventually form one 
bloc, as in some Departments the GANA parties ran competing 
candidates.  UNE (the party of second place presidential 
candidate Alvaro Colom) won 33 seats, followed by 
center-right parties PAN with 16 seats and Unionistas with 6. 
 The far left party ANN expanded its presence to 6 
legislators at the expense of the far left URNG, which lost 
all but two of its seats.  Preliminary vote counts also show 
the FRG winning 37% of the mayoral races, compared to 25% for 
the GANA coalition and 11% for UNE.  The legislative and 
municipal vote counts are still preliminary, and there may be 
some variation once the vote counts are final. 
 
FRG Reaction to Their Electoral Defeat 
-------------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) The FRG has been relatively silent following the 
announcement of the overwhelming defeat of its presidential 
candidate.  Rios Montt himself has not spoken.  Vice 
Presidential candidate Edin Barrientos told reporters that 
the FRG will not comment until the final votes are counted, 
but said the FRG would respect the will of the voters. 
Congressional majority leader Aristides Crespo told reporters 
that the FRG would continue to be an important political 
force in the country, and would use its large bloc in 
Congress to \"defend the interests of the people.\" 
Congressman Haroldo Quej told reporters that the FRG is 
considering the possibility of filing an injunction against 
the election results in Guatemala City, alleging that many 
FRG voters were not allowed to vote because of \"manipulation 
of the voter registration list,\" but the FRG has not 
initiated any action so far (Note: injunctions are filed in 
all Guatemalan elections against some results, especially at 
the municipal level, but these tend to be pro forma ways of 
objecting to the outcome, and rarely result in recounts. End 
note). 
6. (C) FRG leaders delayed responding to our early attempts 
to meet with them to gauge their reaction to the elections; 
however, we will be meeting with Zury Rios, Antonio Arenales 
and Minister of Finance Eduardo Weymann on November 13. 
 
TSE Congratulates Itself, While Editorials Criticize it 
 
SIPDIS 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
7. (U) President of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) 
Bolanos held a press conference on November 10 to say that 
the TSE was \"profoundly pleased\" with the organization and 
carrying out of the elections.  Editorials in all the 
newspapers uniformly criticized the TSE for poor planning, 
which led to eight-hour long lines at many tables, leading 
many intending voters to go home without voting.  They also 
criticized the TSE for the large number of errors in the 
voter registration list and problems in the application of 
the indelible ink (many voting table officials had tissue on 
hand to enable voters to dry their fingers, and this resulted 
in stains that were barely noticeable). 
 
Berger and Colom Begin Their Second Round Campaigns 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
8. (U) With seven weeks left before the second round 
election, GANA candidate Berger and UNE candidate Colom have 
already begun their second round campaigns.  Colom met with 
representatives of the nine losing small parties in an 
attempt to win their support in the second round.  A smear 
campaign has already begun against Colom, through the media 
and e-mails, accusing him of being an alcoholic and of being 
an ally of the FRG. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
9. (C) There is a palpable sense of relief throughout 
Guatemalan society that the elections were held with a 
minimum of violence and that General Rios Montt will not be a 
contender in the second round.  The 2003 elections put an end 
to 20 years of Rios Montt\'s pivotal role in Guatemalan 
politics.  The large margin between second place candidate 
Colom and third place Rios Montt all but slammed the door on 
any intentions the FRG might have had to contest the national 
results.  The results of the Congressional and municipal 
elections ensure that the FRG will remain an important 
political force in Guatemala and preserve its space for the 
2007 elections, but it will not have the strength on its own 
to block legislative initiatives of the new government that 
require a two-thirds majority.  Berger and Colom will both 
need the legislative support of the other to govern Guatemala 
after January 14, 2004, and we are using our initial, 
post-election contacts with both to impress upon them the 
need to run a clean second round campaign that preserves 
their ability to work with each other after the final 
election. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12087","11/13/2003 22:46","03GUATEMALA2916","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","03GUATEMALA2889","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002916 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: FRG CONGRESSMAN COMMENTS ON ELECTORAL DEFEAT 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2889 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: FRG Congressman-elect Antonio Arenales told 
the Ambassador on November 13 that the FRG accepts its 
electoral defeat and will not challenge the election results. 
 The FRG will not endorse a candidate in the second round 
elections.  Within the party there are those who want the FRG 
to play the role of loyal opposition and those who want to 
make it difficult for the next government to govern 
successfully.  It is unclear at this point which of the two 
factions will predominate.  We will continue to use our 
contacts with the FRG to urge them to support the democratic 
process in Guatemala, consistent with the values they claim 
to uphold.  End summary. 
 
2. (C) In a breakfast with the Ambassador, DCM and PolCouns 
on November 13, FRG Congressman-elect and soon-to-be former 
Ambassador to the U.S. Antonio Arenales said that the FRG 
accepts its defeat in the November 9 presidential elections 
and will not challenge the results (Note: There were reports 
on November 12, per reftel, that the FRG might lodge a legal 
challenge. End note).  He said some in the party (including 
himself) expected the loss of the presidential election, but 
that others are disappointed and \"have their swords drawn\" to 
continue the political confrontation that has characterized 
the past four years.  Arenales suggested that the party\'s 
national leaders (including Zury Rios and Aristides Crespo) 
are beginning to focus on the FRG\'s legislative strategy, 
after winning the largest single party bloc in Congress, 
while some of the leaders in rural areas are not yet 
reconciled to the party\'s presidential defeat.  He said 
General Rios Montt himself is quite at peace (\"tranquilo\") 
about the loss, but suggested the General\'s wife and daughter 
are less so.  Arenales said some in the party believe the FRG 
will be better positioned in the next election if the 
government that takes office on January 14, 2004 is a 
failure, and they are arguing for a frontal opposition to the 
new government to ensure it is not a success.  He urged us to 
weigh-in with our other FRG contacts to convince them of the 
wisdom of not waging an opposition that could make Guatemala 
ungovernable. 
 
3. (C) Arenales said the FRG would not endorse a candidate in 
the second round.  He said that if the FRG picked wrong and 
endorsed the loser, there would be no space for them to reach 
compromises with the new government. 
 
4. (C) Arenales believes that there is space for the FRG to 
work with the new government, whoever is elected on December 
28, on very concrete issues where there is a mutual interest. 
 He is not sanguine, however, that the new government will 
reach out to the FRG and fears they may start the 
relationship off with a confrontation.  He said that if the 
new government tries to repeal the minimum wage raise decreed 
by President Portillo following the FRG\'s electoral defeat, 
it provoke a confrontation with the FRG from the start and 
make it difficult to generate momentum for cooperation. 
(Note: On November 11, President Portillo decreed the largest 
minimum wage increase of his presidency -- 21% for 
agricultural workers, 16% for all others.  The increase was 
announced after it was clear that the FRG would not inherit 
the huge expense this will represent for the national budget, 
and is widely viewed as the FRG\'s parting shot at the new 
government and the private sector. End note). 
 
5. (C) Arenales said many in the FRG blame President 
Portillo\'s corruption for the party\'s electoral defeat, and 
they would like to see him and his Private Secretary, Julio 
Giron, behind bars.  He added that Vice Presidential 
candidate Edin Barrientos is not a member of the FRG\'s inner 
circle and is already effectively marginalized from the 
party\'s decision making.  More surprisingly, he said that 
Vice President Reyes Lopez has lost his standing with the FRG 
leadership, and, along with his son, Juan Francisco Reyes 
Wyld, has been exiled to the Central American Parliament, 
where they will enjoy immunity (from possible new \"Panama 
Connection\" investigations), but have no influence. 
 
6. (C) Arenales expressed concern that Guatemala would become 
\"ungovernable\" if Alvaro Colom wins the presidency in 
December, arguing that his small base in Congress (roughly 
20%), the lack of cohesion of his diverse team, and his 
alleged ties to \"shady businessmen\" (a common, but 
unsubstantiated, rumor) would represent a serious handicap 
from the start.  He said that Berger and his CACIF allies are 
at least \"rational and predictable\" (Note: Conventional 
wisdom is that the FRG favors a Colom victory, as they 
believe Colom would pursue the FRG corruption in the courts 
with less vigor than a CACIF-backed Berger government. 
Arenales\' professed preference for Berger may come from his 
own strong pro-military, anti-left views, which make the 
center-left Colom look like the red menace. End note). 
7. (C) Comment: The FRG is slowly getting used to its 
overwhelming defeat in the November 9 elections, and is 
starting to look at how it can use its large presence in 
Congress and its control of a large number of municipalities 
to protect its interests during the next four years.  It is 
too soon to tell if the FRG will play the role of loyal 
opposition or spoiler, and there are clearly forces within 
the party pulling in both directions.  We will continue to 
use all contacts with the FRG to urge it to play a role 
consistent with the democratic values it claims to represent. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12172","11/17/2003 19:20","03GUATEMALA2937","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002937 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PINR, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL OBSERVATION CONTRIBUTES TO DECLINE 
IN ELECTORAL VIOLENCE 
 
 
1. Summary: Protests, some violent, continue in communities 
where dissatisfaction with the mayoral election results is 
ongoing, but violence overall is much decreased from the 1999 
elections.  Allegations of 29 \"political\" murders during the 
electoral campaign were disputed by international observers 
who placed the figure at two to five.  Even in these, the 
motives were local and personal, though triggerd by politics. 
 Widespread fears of violence, bred by campaign incidents, 
did not materialize.  Ballot boxes were burned in a few rural 
towns by crowds unhappy that they were denied the right to 
vote after standing in line for many hours.  The presence of 
large numbers of international observers, especially in 
communities where violence was widely anticipated, 
contributed to a relatively peaceful election (by Guatemalan 
standards). End Summary. 
 
Heat and Poor Logistics Produce Isolated Violence on Election 
Day 
------------------- 
 
2. While protests against the election results continue in 
some rural communities, the 20 cases reported so far in the 
2003 elections is significantly down from the 38 cases 
reported in 1999.  Furthermore, in 1999 the violence extended 
to relatively urban areas (like Chinautla and Santa Lucia 
Cotzumalguapa), and in 2003 it has been limited solely to 
remote villages.  Most of the disturbances took place along 
Guatemala\'s steamy south coast, in areas where temperatures 
soared as thousands stood in excruciatingly long lines. 
Ballots in 3 communities (El Quetzal, Cuyotenango and San 
Sebastian) were burned when voters learned, after waiting in 
line for up to seven hours, that they were not registered to 
vote.  Many voters who discovered they had been inadvertently 
excluded from the registry were able to correct the error at 
the local Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) office and get 
back in line, but in some communities frustrations boiled 
over.  In El Estor, Izabal, voters broke into the TSE office, 
and in Chisec, Alta Verapaz, voters broke down doors and 
windows to get into a voting center.  In Chajul, Quiche, a 
voting center opened late, resulting in a stampede that left 
2 dead and 10 injured. 
 
UNE Candidate Shot 
------------------ 
3. Dr. Rolando Morales, a Congressional candidate for the 
center-left UNE party, underwent surgery and is in stable 
condition after being shot twice by three armed men outside 
his home in a crime-infested neighborhood of Guatemala City, 
early in the morning on election day.  Initial reports 
indicated that the motive of the assault may have been 
robbery (the view of a top UNE official), but Morales\' wife 
has told the media that she believes the motive was political 
as her husband was carrying nothing of value.  The incident 
is under investigation. 
 
Campaign Violence Bred Unrealized Fears of Election Day 
Violence 
------------------- 
4. Press reports claiming 29 people had been killed in 
pre-election violence and fears that the FRG would stage 
violent protests in the event they lost (like they did on 
July 24-25) fueled concerns that the potential for violence 
on election day was high.  MINUGUA and the OAS investigated 
reports of pre-electoral violence and concluded that most of 
the murders were not related to the elections.  MINUGUA 
believes that five of the murders could have been related to 
the election campaign, and the OAS cited two.  The Washington 
Office on Latin America issued a report on the election 
saying that most of the murders had been the result of common 
crime, a judgement we agree with.  Even in those cases where 
politics clearly was a factor, the circumstances were local 
and personal.  For example, an FRG supporter shot and killed 
an young opposition activist who was defacing FRG political 
posters. 
 
Reports of Post-electoral Violence 
-------------------- 
5. Protests against the results of local elections continue 
as results are still being counted.  No one party or civic 
association has a monopoly on the often violent protests at 
the municipal level so far.  In Playa Grande, Quiche, crowds 
refused to accept the URNG\'s victory in the Mayor\'s race and 
continue to stage public protests.  In Tamahu, Alta Verapaz, 
a mob burned down the house of the re-elected FRG mayor and 
clashed with police, resulting in 4 persons injured. 
Siquinala and Masagua, both in Esquintla Department, report 
non-violent demonstrations by GANA and Unionista supporters 
against the outcomes in mayor\'s races there.  In La Gomera 
(also in Escuintla Department) GANA supporters reportedly 
burned down the voting precinct when their mayoral candidate 
lost. 
 
6. Comment:  Generalized fears that the tense confrontation 
that characterized the 2003 elections would result in an 
escalation of electoral violence proved unfounded. Election 
day was relatively calm and acts of violence affecting voting 
tables on election day or after the votes were counted were 
less than in 1999.  The large presence of international 
observers (over 300 on election day) and their presence in 
communities where violence was expected doubtless contributed 
to reducing mob actions against voting tables. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12173","11/17/2003 22:45","03GUATEMALA2942","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY ELECTION OBSERVATION: DISORGANIZATION, NOT 
VIOLENCE, THE REAL PROBLEM 
 
 
1.  Summary:  Guatemalans refused to be intimidated by 
predictions of violence and fraud, and braved the 
disorganized election process to vote in record numbers. 
Thirty-nine Embassy observers of the November 9 national 
elections witnessed this display of democratic participation 
by Guatemalans who turned out in droves, despite rampant 
predictions of electoral violence and fraud.  The turnout 
(58% est.) is all the more impressive in light of 
disorganization in the voter registration system, which 
caused some voters outside the capital to wait up to 10 hours 
to cast their ballots; the average wait in the capital was 
closer to two hours.  Separating voters by those who updated 
their registration caused confusion nationwide, and had the 
perverse effect of adding to the wait for those voters who 
had gone to the trouble to update their voting information. 
Poorly planned line management, compounded by poor procedures 
to address problems encountered on voting day, caused many 
voters outside the capital to become frustrated; it also 
disenfranchised a number of intending voters, who gave up 
before voting.  EmbOffs did not witness the widespread fraud 
and violence that many Guatemalans had feared.  Instead, 
administrative difficulties at the voting booths were the 
major impediments to voting.  End Summary. 
 
Background:  Embassy Participation in OAS Observation 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2. Thirty-nine Embassy officers observed the Guatemalan 
elections, under the umbrella of the OAS Election Observation 
Mission.  The Embassy sent five teams to observe the 
electoral process outside the capital and to participate in 
the OAS quick count.  Those teams visited the demographically 
and geographically diverse provinces of San Marcos, 
Esquintla, Alta Verapaz, El Progresso, Jutiapa, Sacatepequez, 
and Chimaltenango.  Twenty other Embassy observers, including 
three EmbOffs from Embassy San Salvador, observed the 
elections in and around Guatemala City and in the indigenous 
communities west of Guatemala City.  RSO provided security 
for the team which visited Escuintla province, where 
electoral violence was expected in several municipalities. 
On Election Day and at an election observation post-mortem 
held November 12, Embassy election observers shared their 
impressions, which included common themes and also stark 
contrasts particular to the sites they visited. 
 
Bad Planning/Implementation, Esp. Outside the Capital 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3.  While most voting stations opened on time on Election 
Day, the first and strongest impression that struck our 
observers was of disorganization.  The Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal (TSE), responsible for organization and training of 
election volunteers, set up separate voting tables for voters 
who had and had not updated their registration.  However, 
each voting table was designed to receive 600 registered 
voters.  As a result, the lines at tables for non-updated 
voters were short, with only 150-200 people showing up in the 
course of the day, while the lines at the updated voter 
tables often exceeded 500.  In addition, many voters did not 
appear in the electoral register due to computer problems 
with the lists.  These voters were required to seek 
verification of their status from local TSE representatives, 
which were unprepared to deal with these requests 
expeditiously.  Most of our observers reported a generally 
calm and even festive atmosphere.  Others noted a more tense 
atmosphere, with voters yelling at the poll workers and 
expressing frustration over long lines.  Line cutters were 
roundly rebuffed (real democracy in the making!).  Throughout 
the country, partitioned voting stations where up to four 
voters could mark their ballots at one time were too few in 
number and had no screens to ensure privacy. 
 
4.  Outside the capital, polling stations seemed adequately 
supplied but often were not adequately marked.  Signs were 
often not posted in a central or prominent location, and were 
difficult to follow and impossible to understand by 
illiterate persons.  In some instances government officials 
assigned to assist voters were themselves illiterate.  There 
was significant confusion about how to apply the indelible 
ink.  Some election officials helpfully provided tissues to 
wipe the ink off voter\'s fingers immediately after 
application.  Others apparently did not shake the bottle, and 
our observers and media reported complaints that the ink, as 
a result, did not work.  Due to confusion and lack of 
guidance, voters often waited several hours in one line to 
learn that they were not on the list at the table, were sent 
to other tables where their names did not appear, and finally 
were sent to the TSE office, where long lines and few 
personnel added further to the wait.  Some who put up with 
this returned to the voting booth only to find it closed 
after 6:00 p.m.  EmbOffs estimate that in some remote towns, 
up to 25% of voters left or could not vote because of the 
disorganization. 
 
5.  In Guatemala City, by contrast, most voting places 
finished processing long lines by closing time.  At a few 
sites, remaining voters were permitted to stay to vote after 
6:00 p.m. but the doors were closed to new voters.  The trend 
throughout the city was that the lines and confusion were 
much less than in the countryside, and although there were 
still waits of several hours, all voters were able to cast 
their ballots.  Although performance varied, in general 
Embassy observers found much higher levels of organization at 
the capital\'s polling stations, which were generally larger, 
with between four and 30 voting tables each.  Some included 
marimba bands and the atmosphere, initially tense as long 
lines formed early, became more festive and relaxed as the 
lines diminished.  International and domestic observers from 
the OAS, EU, University of San Carlos and Human Rights 
Ombudsman\'s office were present in most capital voting 
stations.  Public Ministry personnel were also visible at 
many voting stations in the capital.  Most voting tables in 
the capital were also being observed by party representatives 
of the five larger political parties, who were generally 
cooperative at the tables we observed.  TSE officials at one 
site complained of delays associated with elderly voters who 
took time at the voting tables to mark their ballots. 
Elsewhere, Embassy observers noticed that elderly and 
handicapped voters were allowed to pass to the front of the 
line by organizers. 
 
Violence and Fraud Low, Despite Fears 
------------------------------------- 
 
6.  Though initial tension and growing frustration with the 
voting process was apparent through the course of election 
day, our observers did not witness any violence.  One of our 
observer teams, visiting Purhula, Baja Verapaz province, left 
the voting station at 6:00 p.m. on the advice of local 
police, who could not guarantee security.  Some voters there 
had begun drinking (despite the ban on alcohol sales) after a 
long and frustrating day waiting to vote. 
 
7.  Our observers did not witness fraud directly; however, 
the general disorganization of the voting process fed 
conspiracy theories and allegations of fraud against the FRG. 
 We heard hearsay reports of vote-buying by the FRG in the 
towns of Rodeo, San Marcos and Villanueva, Guatemala 
province.  In Rodeo, political parties traded accusations of 
selling beer and facilitating the use of false identification 
cards (\"cedulas\").   A Christian Democratic Party mayoral 
candidate in Rodeo claimed to have received a death threat 
from the Progressive Liberator Party. 
 
Big Turnout Makes Wait Longer 
------------------------------ 
 
8.  Guatemalans refused to be intimidated by predictions of 
violence and fraud, and braved the disorganized election 
process to vote in record numbers.  Observers noted a high 
turnout of women and young voters, even in rural areas.  Some 
voters waited up to 10 hours to vote.  Long lines were caused 
by the disorganized voting process combined with an 
exceptionally high turn out.  Lines were so long and closely 
packed that one observer saw a line of nearly 100 voters fall 
like dominoes after a man in the back of the line tripped; 
the last man fell face first onto the voting table.  Outside 
the capital, where voting peaked between 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. it 
was common to hear stories of people leaving their homes 
early in the morning only to wait all day to vote.  In the 
town of Guanaguazapa, Escuintla province, a man told our 
observers he had left his house at 5:00 a.m., walked 6 miles 
to vote at the 7:00 a.m. opening, and still had not voted as 
of 2:00 p.m.  At 10:30 a.m. in the town of Puerto San Jose, 
Escuintla, voters told us \"we have moved 6 meters in 3 
hours.\"  In El Progreso, one of our observers saw an elderly 
blind person vote after waiting for 3 hours in oppressive 
heat.  A man we spoke to in Iztapa, Escuintla province, told 
us he had entered the line knowing that it was going to take 
him a minimum of 4 hours before he would be able to cast his 
ballot. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  Despite these hardships, voters across the country voted 
in record numbers, reflecting a ground swell of participation 
in this controversial election.  In hindsight, the 
pre-election hype over possible violence and electoral fraud 
may have distracted from planning for what turned out to be 
the true culprit on election day:  the disorganization of the 
voting process.  Our observers have some common-sense 
suggestions and the OAS has already made recommendations 
based on its observation for fixes to the TSE.  With any 
luck, the second round of voting, on December 28 to select a 
president and vice president, will go more smoothly. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12200","11/18/2003 16:33","03GUATEMALA2948","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181633Z Nov 03

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002948 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EAID, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: RIOS MONTT CONCEDES, AND OTHER POST-ELECTION 
DEVELOPMENTS 
 
 
1. Summary: On November 14, FRG presidential candidate Rios 
Montt publicly accepted the election results which put an end 
to his presidential aspirations.  No challenges have been 
filed to the results of the national elections (and only 
minor challenges in municipal races).  The Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal told reporters that many of the technical and 
administrative problems experienced in the first round of the 
election would be corrected before the second round.  Berger 
began campaigning in the countryside immediately after his 
first round victory, and Colom took a week\'s holiday in 
California.  The losers in the November 9 election are 
beginning to line up behind Berger or Colom for the second 
round.  End summary. 
 
2. In the first public appearance since his electoral defeat, 
FRG candidate Efrain Rios Montt ran a TV spot on November 14 
acknowledging his loss in the November 9 elections.  Speaking 
for the FRG, he said \"we have accepted the results of the 
first round of elections, and we recognize the results cited 
by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal.\"  He went on to thank his 
supporters for voting for the FRG and giving it a large bloc 
in Congress.  The period in which challenges to the elections 
could be filed expired on November 14.  Challenges were filed 
to the results of municipal elections in a handful of small 
towns, and the elections will be repeated in five rural 
municipalities where ballots were burned on election day. 
 
3. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) held a press 
conference on November 14 in which President Bolanos said 
that the TSE would be making adjustments to voting procedures 
in the second round of elections on December 28 to correct 
some of the problems that resulted in long lines and 
significant voter frustration during the first round.  Among 
the changes, the TSE plans to increase training for the 
officers manning the voting tables, and to make sure that TSE 
officers at each voting site are better prepared to address 
problems involving the voter registration list.  Noticeably 
absent from the proposed changes were any mention of reducing 
the number of voters per table or correcting the underlying 
problems with the voter registration list itself. 
 
4. The second round campaign is already in full swing for 
GANA candidate Oscar Berger, while Alvaro Colom took the week 
off to visit Disneyland with his wife and stepson.  Berger, 
recognizing that he lost much of the rural vote in the first 
round to Colom, spent the week after the first round 
campaigning in small towns around the country (Salcaja and 
Coatepeque in the west, and Gualan and Esquipulas in the 
east). 
 
5. The losers in the November 9 first round election are 
beginning to line up behind the remaining two candidates. 
The PAN Executive Committee printed a full page add in the 
major dailies calling on their supporters to vote for Alvaro 
Colom in the second round, through influential PAN leader 
Abraham Rivera and a number of newly-elected PAN mayors came 
out endorsing Berger.  The FRG has not endorsed either 
candidate in the second round, and apparently does not intend 
to. 
HAMILTON 
"
"12206","11/18/2003 23:01","03GUATEMALA2956","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002956 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EAID, PHUM, MASS, ETRD, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: CAPITALIZING ON POLITICAL CHANGE IN GUATEMALA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The assumption of power on January 14, 2004 
of a new government more aligned with USG interests offers an 
opportunity to advance our priority goals in Guatemala by 
engaging creatively up front on our shared interests in free 
trade, human rights, strengthening democracy and 
counter-narcotics cooperation.  Key elements of this 
engagement will be sending a high-level delegation to the 
inaugural, seeking an invitation from Mexico for the 
President-elect to attend the special SOA and increasing our 
FY-04 assistance to the GOG, including DA, ESF and INL funds. 
 For only the second time since the restoration of democracy, 
the incoming government will not have a majority in Congress, 
and an unequivocal embrace by us in its early days and weeks 
will be key to securing domestic support for moving our 
priorities to the forefront of the new government\'s action 
plans.  The Department may wish to give consideration to 
holding a PPC to discuss ways in which we can take advantage 
of this opportunity. End summary. 
 
2. (C) The change of government on January 14, 2004, and with 
it the departure of the Portillo administration, 
characterized by corruption and political confrontation, 
offers us the best opportunity we have had in several years 
to advance USG interests in Guatemala. Both of the contenders 
in the final round of Guatemala\'s elections share our views 
on free trade, human rights, strengthening democracy and the 
war on drugs, and are committed to addressing these issues 
concretely early on.  They will have to work with a deeply 
divided Congress, however, and will inherit a depleted 
treasury, a poorly functioning judiciary and government 
institutions that suffer from congenital bureaucratic 
inertia.  Our decisive engagement with the new government at 
the outset will be crucial to generating popular and 
legislative support for the new government\'s efforts in these 
areas and will ensure that these priorities receive the new 
GOG\'s prompt attention. 
 
3. (C) By sending a Cabinet-led Presidential delegation to 
the January 14 inaugural, we would send an unmistakable 
message to the new government and the people of Guatemala 
that the USG is prepared to engage seriously with the new 
administration in the pursuit our common objectives.  The new 
government will need that vote of USG confidence to convince 
its opponents -- and there will be many in Congress -- to 
give it time to prove it can bring about change.  This will 
prove particularly important in reassuring Guatemalans that 
the free trade agreement, negotiated by the old, discredited 
government, is good for both Guatemalans and Americans, and 
that we are negotiating free trade in a much broader context 
of growing cooperation. 
 
4. (C) We should also review all of our engagement options in 
Guatemala -- from FY-04 assistance levels and the Millennium 
Challenge Account, to support for rule of law and 
counter-narcotics assistance -- to see how we can take 
maximum advantage of the election of a like-minded government 
in Guatemala.  The new government inherits macroeconomic 
stability, but it will be desperately short of resources. 
Fiscal reforms as called for in the Peace Accords and 
ill-fated Fiscal Pact will be needed before government 
revenues can begin to sustain meaningful reforms in such 
critical areas as education and health care.  We, and the 
rest of the international donor community, will need to 
engage early with the new government so that it has the basic 
fiscal tools to mobilize more resources and prevent them from 
being lost to corruption.  However, it will take time to 
raise revenues internally.  ESF and DA levels to Guatemala 
have been declining in the past years, in large part because 
of concerns regarding the lack of vision or political will of 
the Portillo government to address the country\'s social and 
economic problems.  We ask that serious consideration be 
given to increasing FY-04 ESF and DA, especially in support 
of trade capacity building and rule of law programs and, by 
extension, to CICIACS.  Delaying review of assistance levels 
until FY-05 would limit our ability to help the new 
government get its reforms off the ground and would risk 
squandering the early months, when it might count on greater 
support in Congress.  Similarly, increasing INL assistance 
would send a concrete signal to the new government that 
combating narcotics trafficking has got to be an early 
priority of the GOG, and that we are prepared to back up 
their political will with increased USG engagement in support 
of counter-narcotics programs. 
 
5. (C) President Portillo has announced that he will 
participate for Guatemala at the Presidential Summit in 
Monterrey, Mexico on January 12-13, only hours before leaving 
office.  It is in the USG\'s interest that the president-elect 
participate in that forum in order to get to know his 
regional counterparts and to show Guatemalans that their new 
government enjoys international support.  We believe it is 
important that we impress upon the Mexican hosts the 
importance of inviting the new Guatemalan president to 
participate in this event as well, as was done with the 
out-going and in-coming presidents of Brazil at the 1994 SOA 
in Miami. 
 
6. (C) In view of the window of opportunity the change of 
government in Guatemala offers to advance USG interests here, 
consideration might be given to holding a PCC to explore 
further ways to capitalize.  Many of the failures that are 
associated with Guatemala -- from rising crime to falling 
social indicators -- are a product of the poor governance and 
corruption of Alfonso Portillo.  His departure and 
replacement by a more progressive government -- whichever of 
the two is elected -- offers an opportunity we can not afford 
to miss. 
 
7. (C) We will send in a separate cable with recommendations 
on adjusting our military-to-military relationship with the 
new government. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13058","1/6/2004 15:52","04GUATEMALA8","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE343170","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPRATMENT FOR NP, T, AND L 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHSA, PARM, MNUC, KTIA, GT 
SUBJECT: PSI SHIPBOARDING AGREEMENT ON HOLD PENDING NEW 
GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 343170 
 
Embassy is prepared to raise reftel request with the GOG 
after the inaugural of President Berger on January 14.  We 
have no indication from our pre-election contacts with 
Berger\'s foreign policy advisors that pursuing a shipboarding 
agreement, as suggested in reftel, would be 
counterproductive.  The MFA advised us in December that the 
outgoing Portillo government had not taken a position on the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), and in the absence 
of guidance, lower officials at the MFA were unable to 
discuss a PSI shipboarding agreement.  We will present reftel 
proposal to the MFA after President Berger\'s new Foreign 
Minister is in office. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13127","1/8/2004 20:36","04GUATEMALA25","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

082036Z Jan 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/AS NORIEGA AND WHA/PPC ALAIN NORMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL, AMGT, GT 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY GUATEMALA\'S 90-DAY PLAN: FIRST QUARTER 2004 
 
REF: 03 STATE 349946 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Oscar Berger\'s assumption of power on January 14 opens 
the door to an improved bilateral relationship and increased 
GOG cooperation with us in a wide range of areas.  Embassy 
Guatemala\'s highest priority goals for the first quarter of 
2004 will be to establish a positive, solid working 
relationship with the new administration, negotiate the terms 
of an Article 98 agreement with the GOG and secure Guatemalan 
Congressional approval for an extension of the Mayan Jaguar 
counter-narcotics exercises. 
 
Building Bridges to the New Government 
-------------------------------------- 
2. (C) Embassy Guatemala\'s highest priority goal during these 
next 90 days will be to build on our positive relationship 
with President-elect Oscar Berger and his team of advisors 
and Cabinet members, to cement the relationship and ensure 
that the Berger government is responsive from the outset to 
USG interests.  The Ambassador and Country Team members 
briefed Berger and his most senior advisors on USG bilateral 
priorities in December, 2003, and will use introductory calls 
on new ministers to raise specific action requests on pending 
matters.  We have received assurances from Berger that he 
will continue the highly productive bilateral inter-agency 
working group meetings on counter-narcotics cooperation and 
trafficking in persons.  We will use the next 90 days to get 
to know the members of the new government at every level and 
to build on Berger\'s political will to address the pending 
matters in our bilateral relationship. 
 
Negotiating an Article 98 Agreement 
----------------------------------- 
3. (C) Attempts to get the Portillo government to negotiate 
an Article 98 Agreement were consistently and successfully 
thwarted by Portillo\'s senior foreign policy advisors, 
including Foreign Ministers Orellana and Gutierrez.  We have 
raised our interest in concluding an Article 98 Agreement 
with President-elect Berger and his advisors, and they have 
expressed an openness to the proposal.  In our early meetings 
with Minister of Foreign Affairs-designate Briz, we will 
request an expedited time-table for negotiating an Article 98 
Agreement.  Our goal for the first quarter of 2004 will be to 
reach agreement with the GOG on the text of an Article 98 
Agreement, with Congressional ratification to follow, 
possibly in the second quarter. 
 
Extending Mayan Jaguar 
---------------------- 
4. (C) In December, 2001 Guatemala\'s Congress ratified an 
agreement authorizing U.S. troops to enter Guatemala to 
participate in joint counter-narcotics exercises.  These 
exercises, called \"Mayan Jaguar\" in Guatemala (\"Central 
Skies\" in the U.S.), have been successful at disrupting 
cocaine trafficking patterns through Guatemala.  Host 
government authority to conduct these exercises expired in 
December, 2003, and the current Congress adjourned without 
approving an extension.  We have already advised 
President-elect Berger that securing a two-year extension of 
Mayan Jaguar will be one of our highest priorities with the 
new government and Congress.  Berger is a strong supporter of 
USG counter-drug efforts in Guatemala, and we will urge him 
to send Congress before February a draft legislative decree 
authorizing the extension.  We will lobby the major 
legislative blocks to secure prompt Congressional 
ratification. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13129","1/8/2004 22:01","04GUATEMALA26","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

082201Z Jan 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PINR, MOPS, MARR, GT 
SUBJECT: NEW MINISTER OF DEFENSE CESAR MENDEZ: BIOGRAPHICAL 
INFORMATION 
 
 
Classified By: Poloff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Brigadier General Cesar Augusto MENDEZ Pinelo 
(53) was named to be the next Minister of Defense by 
President-elect Berger on January 7.  Mendez is a protege of 
former General Otto Perez Molina, a ranking member of 
Berger\'s GANA coalition.  Embassy databases contain no 
derogatory information related to Mendez.  Human rights 
groups view his appointment as positive.  In recent years, 
Mendez has kept a low profile and faces mandatory retirement 
in September 2004.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Mendez was part of the military\'s peace commission, 
headed by Perez Molina, and he assisted in the negotiation of 
the Peace Accords that put an end to the 36-year internal 
conflict.  He was Director of Operations for the Chief of 
Staff in 1996 when the final accords were signed.  Mendez has 
spent the last few years out of the limelight as Defense 
Attache in Spain and, until recently, Honduras.  As a General 
Officer, Mendez held major (post-conflict) commands in Quiche 
and Quetzaltenango, the two most important military zones in 
the largely indigenous highlands.  Mendez was Deputy Director 
of Intelligence and Assistant Chief of Staff for the 
Presidential Military Staff (EMP) when Perez Molina headed 
those units.  Mendez has also served as Director and Deputy 
Director of the Military Academy (Escuela Politecnica), 
positions that provide substantial influence through shaping 
new officers. 
 
3. (C) Mendez\'s curriculum vitae, obtained by the DATT, lists 
substantial human rights training inside and outside of 
Guatemala.  Although Mendez commanded troops in combat during 
the worst years of the war, rising from platoon commander to 
battalion executive officer before moving into logistics in 
1985, our databases contain no derogatory information.  Frank 
LaRue, Director of CALDH, a major human rights NGO in 
Guatemala, told the Ambassador that, as Guatemala military 
officers go, Mendez was one of the most interested in human 
rights.  LaRue added that Mendez\'s absence from the country 
in recent years gives him a relatively fresh perspective on 
the military\'s role in a democracy and suggests that he was 
not a part of the corrupt clique of military and former 
military officers who had significant influence with the 
Portillo Administration. 
 
4. (U) Mendez speaks fluent German and Italian, which he 
picked up while training in those countries.  Mendez returned 
to Germany in 1989 for Command and General Staff College. 
His English is described as \"conversational.\"  Mendez is a 
practicing Catholic.  He does not drink alcohol and is 
considered to be very religious.  He has four adult children, 
all studying in Guatemala.  Mendez\'s tenure as MOD will be 
short as he faces mandatory retirement in September 2004 
after 33 years of service. 
 
5. (C) Comment: Berger\'s appointment of Mendez was almost 
certainly due to the influence of Mendez\'s long-time ally 
Perez Molina, who heads Berger\'s security portfolio.  Perez 
Molina had other choices for MOD, such as the higher-profile 
General Bustamante.  In picking Mendez, Perez Molina has 
opted for an apparently squeaky-clean, quietly competent, and 
loyal protege that he can replace without a ripple in less 
than a year.  Mendez\'s short tenure will provoke immediate 
jockeying to replace him. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13159","1/9/2004 17:00","04GUATEMALA29","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","02GUATEMALA3134","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091700Z Jan 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000029 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, KJUS, GT, UN 
SUBJECT: CICIACS: PENDING CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 3134 
 
     B. 03 GUATEMALA 20 
     C. FISK-HAMILTON TELCON 1/6/04 
 
Classified By: Human Rights Officer Katharine Read, for reasons 1.5 (B) 
 and (D). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: On January 7, the Government of Guatemala 
and the UN signed an agreement to establish a Commission on 
the Investigation of Illegal Bodies and Clandestine 
Apparatuses (CICIACS) at the UN Headquarters in New York. 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez represented the GOG at the signing 
ceremony, and pledged to present the agreement to the 
Guatemalan Congress for ratification on January 8.  Divisions 
in the lame duck Congress make the ratification unlikely 
until the new Congress in sworn in on January 14.  CICIACS 
comes with a hefty price tag but promises to be worth it. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On January 7, the Government of Guatemala and the UN 
signed an agreement to create the CICIACS, after an extended 
negotiation.  The Commission will offer an unprecedented new 
model to fight organized crime, human rights abuses, and 
corruption. (Reftel A)  The UN-GOG agreement still requires 
Congressional ratification before the Commission can be 
established; Foreign Minister Gutierrez vowed to present the 
document to the Guatemalan Congress for immediate 
ratification upon his return from New York on January 8. 
 
3. (U) Public reaction to the UN-GOG agreement has been 
mixed.  Most human rights groups, political leaders, and 
civil society leaders have praised the agreement, noting that 
CICIACS will work within the Guatemalan system and 
strengthen, not undermine, domestic institutions.  However, 
some legal experts and private lawyers charge that the 
agreement is unconstitutional; they believe an international 
commission operating with domestic investigative powers will 
violate Guatemalan sovereignty. 
 
4. (C) On January 6, and following Ref C telcon, the 
Ambassador urged President Portillo to work on Attorney 
General Carlos de Leon to be more genuinely supportive of 
CICIACS. (Reftel B)  Portillo said he would, over a 
previously scheduled breakfast the next day.  On January 7, 
De Leon was quoted saying \"the creation of this Commission 
(CICIACS) is very important for the strengthening it will 
bring to the investigatorial and prosecutorial systems.\"  De 
Leon also noted, however, that it was crucial that the 
CICIACS exist within the legal framework established by the 
Constitution, a comment which may point to continued 
reservations and behind-the-scenes opposition. 
 
5. (C) Comment: A special session of the lame-duck Congress 
before the January 14 inauguration now seems unlikely due to 
strong resistance to FRG-supported initiatives in the days 
before the new Congress takes office.  An FRG attempt to pass 
an adoption law fizzled on January 7 for similar reasons. 
 
6. (C) Prospects for passage of CICIACS in the new Congress 
are better.  The Berger-Stein team has indicated that they 
intend to support CICIACS passage.  We will remain vigilant 
against efforts by opponents of the measure to thwart an 
early vote on CICIACS. 
 
7. (C) Finally, and to reiterate a point which we have made 
previously and which the Ambassador briefed to Department 
officials in December, CICIACS has become an innovative, 
robust proposal for getting to the heart of organized crime 
in Guatemala.  It is an initiative that could obviate a \"Plan 
Guatemala\" 3.5 years from now.  Its price tag has gone up 
considerably (estimated at $10-12 million annually over its 
two to three year life.)  That will be spread, however, over 
fiscal years \'04-\'07.  We will be seeking resources in our 
\'06 MPP submission but urge Department officials to identify 
financial support from \'04 and \'05 budgets. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13160","1/9/2004 17:03","04GUATEMALA30","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA22","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EAID, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER NAMES PROFESSIONAL, EXPERIENCED CABINET 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 0022 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary and introduction: On January 7, 
President-elect Oscar Berger announced the members of his 
cabinet.  He also named eight \"policy coordinators\" 
(super-ministers) to head functional areas.  It is not clear 
what their relationship will be to the ministers, but Berger 
has described them to us as his policy advisors with 
responsibility for coordinating implementation by the Cabinet 
ministries and independent agencies.  The Berger team is made 
up of experienced professionals drawn from the private sector 
and civil society groups that supported his campaign. 
Several are former ministers and some are his personal 
friends.  Very few professional politicians were named to the 
Cabinet, as Berger\'s electoral coalition (GANA) was made up 
of three small parties that had no previous presence in 
Congress or the Executive.  Two women and two Mayan 
indigenous representatives were named.  Berger scored a major 
coup in recruiting CALDH Director LaRue to head the 
Government\'s human rights office, assuring implementation of 
a progressive human rights policy. Press commentary has been 
largely favorable.  End summary and introduction. 
 
The Inner Circle 
---------------- 
2. (C) Executive Secretary for Coordination - Eduardo 
Gonzalez Castillo.  Gonzalez is a prominent banker and former 
Minister of Economy who coordinated the GANA presidential 
campaign.  Gonzalez is Berger\'s closest advisor, and was the 
architect of GANA\'s campaign platform.  He is a member of 
Guatemala\'s economic elite (his father is a major coffee 
exporter and bank owner and his mother is from the Castillo 
family that owns the largest brewery), and his presence in 
the government is a guarantee that private sector interests 
will not be ignored.  Gonzalez, who holds a degree in 
business administration from the University of Pennsylvania, 
is an advocate of trade liberalization and modernization of 
the state.  He is dynamic, self-confident and views 
Guatemala\'s interests as inextricably linked to the United 
States.  He speaks fluent English. 
 
3. (C) President\'s Private Secretary - Alfredo Antonio Vila. 
Vila is a businessman (sugar producer) and long-time 
associate of Berger who held important jobs in the Municipal 
Government of Guatemala City while Berger was Mayor (heading 
the water and public transportation services).  He holds a 
law degree, but has never practiced.  He served as Director 
for the Chamber of Free Enterprise.  Vila served as Berger\'s 
private secretary during the campaign, and maintained 
communication with the Embassy. 
 
4. (C) Secretary General of the Presidency - Jorge Arturo 
Arroyave.  Like Vila, Arroyave was a close collaborator of 
Berger\'s during his tenure as Mayor of Guatemala City. 
Arroyave, who holds a law degree from the public University 
of San Carlos, was Secretary General of the Municipality of 
Guatemala under Berger, and served previously as the head of 
the Civil Registry. 
 
Policy Co-ordinators 
-------------------- 
5. (C) Implementation of the Plan of Government Coordinator - 
Richard Aitkenhead Castillo.  Aitkenhead (47) is an economist 
who served as Minister of Economy and later as Minister of 
Finance for Presidents Serrano and De Leon.  In the 
center-right Arzu administration, Aitkenhead served as head 
of the Peace Commission and Coordinator for International 
Assistance.  Aitkenhead holds a masters degree in public 
administration from Harvard.  He is a supporter of free 
trade, is pro-U.S. and is expected to be the coordinator of 
economic policy in the Berger government.  Aitkenhead speaks 
fluent English. 
 
6. (C) Coordinator for Security and Defense - Otto Perez 
Molina.  Former General Perez Molina is the Secretary General 
of the Patriotic Party, one of the three parties that made up 
Berger\'s electoral coalition (GANA).  Perez Molina was forced 
to retire from the military by President Portillo (who 
retired all 20 generals when he assumed office).  Perez 
Molina served as Army intelligence chief in 1992-1993, and 
represented the military during negotiations with the 
guerrillas that led to the signing of a comprehensive peace 
accord in 1996.  The Archbishop\'s Human Rights Office (ODAG) 
told the Embassy in 1994 that they had no evidence of Perez 
Molina\'s involvement in human rights abuses.  Perez Molina is 
not a personal friend of Berger\'s, but was a key ally during 
the campaign.  Berger has delegated to Perez Molina 
coordination of all security matters, including 
responsibility for the Ministries of Defense and Government 
(i.e. the police).  Perez Molina does not speak English. 
 
7. (C) Coordinator for Political Reform and the Institutions 
of the State - Mario Fuentes Destarac.  Fuentes Destarac is 
the Dean of the Law School of the Jesuit Rafael Landivar 
University, and was the legal advisor to Berger\'s 
presidential campaign.  He writes a weekly op ed in daily \"El 
Periodico,\" and was an outspoken critic of the Portillo 
Government.  Fuentes Destarac was the Secretary of the 
Constitutional Court and is considered one of Guatemala\'s 
leading constitutional lawyers. 
 
8. (C) Coordinator for Investment and Competitiveness - 
Miguel Fernandez.  Fernandez is a prominent businessman who 
owns Guatemala\'s largest in-bond processing plant.  His 
company employees 14,000 workers and produces clothing for 
Levis and the Gap, among others.  A classmate in elementary 
and high school, he is one of Berger\'s closest friends. 
Fernandez is also the Director of the Guatemalan branch of 
the Harvard-affiliated business school INCAE. 
 
9. (C) Coordinator for Modernization of the State - Harris 
Whitbeck.  Whitbeck (69) is a prominent businessman 
(construction), former American citizen and founding member 
of the FRG, who quit the Portillo government in 2002 to join 
the Partido Patriota.  The Partido Patriota originally named 
Whitbeck its presidential candidate in the 2003 elections, 
but when Berger threw his hat in the ring, Whitbeck 
graciously declined his nomination and supported the Berger 
campaign.  Whitbeck coordinated rural development projects 
for two FRG governments (1983-4, 1999-2002), and got to know 
many mayors and rural community leaders.  He was able to 
build on these contacts to increase Berger\'s support in rural 
areas during the campaign.  Whitbeck (like Berger) is a 
strong supporter of decentralization.  His son, Harris 
Whitbeck Jr., is a correspondent for CNN. 
 
10. (C) Coordinator for Megaprojects and President of the 
Social Investment Fund - Luis Flores Asturias.  Flores (56) 
was Vice President in the government of Alvaro Arzu 
(1996-2000).  Flores\' first career was dentistry, where he 
rose to be professor in Guatemala\'s leading public and 
private universities.  He studied dentistry at the University 
of Alabama.  He got into politics in 1987, when he became one 
of the founders of the center-right National Action Party 
(PAN), and was elected to Congress for PAN in 1990.  Flores 
is a life-long friend of former President Alvaro Arzu, and 
was drafted into politics by Arzu.  When Arzu\'s faction of 
the PAN lost the party leadership in 2001, Flores Asturias 
got out of politics, but returned in 2003 to support another 
friend, Oscar Berger. 
 
11. (C) Coordinator for Local Development - Rodolfo Paiz 
Andrade.  Rodolfo \"Fito\" Paiz is one of the heirs to 
Guatemala\'s largest supermarket fortune, and has been active 
in politics since the restoration of democracy in 1984.  The 
Harvard-educated Paiz served as Minister of Economy for the 
Christian Democratic government of Vinicio Cerezo 
(1986-1990), and was candidate for President for his own 
small party (DIA) in the 2003 elections.  When he lost the 
first round election, he publicly endorsed Berger in the 
runoff election.  Paiz is articulate and speaks English 
fluently. 
 
12. (C) Coordinator for Tourism - William Kaltschmitt. 
Kaltschmitt was the President of Guatemala\'s Olympic 
Committee and first Guatemalan Ambassador to Cuba after the 
restoration of diplomatic relations in 1998.  He comes from a 
prominent business family and owns a business that imports 
agricultural chemicals. 
 
Ministers 
--------- 
13. (U) Foreign Affairs - Jorge Briz Abularach (see reftel). 
 
14. (U) Defense - BG Cesar Augusto Mendez Pinelo (see septel). 
 
15. (C) Minister of Government - Manuel Arturo Soto Aguirre. 
Soto was Berger\'s third choice for Minister of Government, 
after human rights activist Helen Mack (although Mack is 
prepared to serve on a Security Advisory Council Berger 
intends to establish) and businessman Carlos Vielman turned 
down the offer.  Soto is a long-time judge and former 
magistrate of the Supreme Court.  He served as a congressman 
for the FRG in 1991-1995, and joined the Partido Patriota in 
2002.  He was considered briefly as a vice presidential 
running mate to Harris Whitbeck for the Partido Patriota in 
the 2003 elections.  His selection as Minister of Government 
was a concession to Otto Perez Molina, who has been put in 
charge of security policy. 
 
16. (C) Minister of Finance - Maria Antonieta del Cid.  One 
of two women on Berger\'s team, Del Cid is the Director of the 
Monetary Board, Director General of the (private) Banco del 
Quetzal, has worked on Central American issues for the IMF, 
and is a former Vice President of the Bank of Guatemala.  She 
is highly respected in banking circles in Guatemala.  She 
holds a degree in economics from the University of Illinois. 
 
17. (C) Minister of Economy - Marcio Cuevas.  Cuevas is a 
prominent businessman (textiles) and the Chairman of the 
Non-Traditional Exporters Association.  He is a long-time 
contact of the Embassy, a supporter of free trade, and was an 
active opponent of the FRG government.  He served as Vice 
President of the private sector umbrella organization (CACIF) 
until recently.  He is positively disposed towards the U.S. 
 
18. (C) Minister of Agriculture - Alvaro Aguilar.  Aguilar is 
a non-traditional exporter who served as General Manager of 
the Non-Traditional Exporters Association.  He is an engineer 
by training.  Aguilar worked on the unsuccessful Berger 
presidential campaign in 1999, and was a major supporter in 
the 2003 campaign. 
 
19. (C) Minister of Health - Marco Tulio Sosa.  Sosa is a 
businessman and chemical engineer whose tenure as Minister of 
Health under Alvaro Arzu (1996-1999) was viewed as highly 
successful.  Though not a health professional, Sosa 
introduced innovations in the Health Ministry during his 
first term (including introducing public-private partnerships 
and reducing corruption in the purchase of medicines and 
equipment) which gained the Arzu administration a positive 
image in providing public health.  Sosa served as a 
congressman for the center-right PAN party in 1991-1995. 
 
20. (C) Minister of Communication and Public Works - Eduardo 
Castillo.  Castillo was the Deputy Mayor for Guatemala City 
during Berger\'s terms as Mayor.  He is an architect by 
training and managed the infrastructure and construction 
projects for the capital. 
 
21. (C) Minister of the Environment and Natural Resources - 
Manuel Salazar Tezaguic.  Salazar Tezaguic is one of two 
Mayan Indigenous representatives in the cabinet.  He is a 
cultural anthropologist, musician and professor of philosophy. 
 
22. (C) Minister of Energy and Mines - Roberto Gonzalez. 
Gonzalez is a consultant for private energy companies in 
Guatemala.  He worked closely with Berger in the municipal 
government of Guatemala City, where he served as deputy 
director of the waterworks (EMPAGUA) and general manager of 
the municipalities public transportation system. 
 
23. (U) Minister of Education - not yet named. 
 
24. (C) Minister of Labor - not yet named.  We have heard 
that Jorge Lewis, General Manager of Fritolay\'s Guatemalan 
subsidiary, has been offered the position, but that he has 
not made a decision yet on whether he will accept. 
 
Other Berger Team Members 
------------------------- 
25. (C) Presidential Spokesperson - Rosa Maria de Frade.  De 
Frade was the press spokesperson for Berger\'s presidential 
campaign and was the architect of his public affairs 
strategy.  She has a Ph.D. in psychology from the University 
of Madrid, and served as Guatemala\'s Ambassador to Costa Rica 
and Venezuela during the Arzu Administration.  Most recently 
she was the director for human resources for Pepsico\'s 
regional operations. 
 
26. (C) Peace Secretary - Victor Montejo.  Montejo is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen of Jacalteco Maya origin.  He holds 
a Degree in Anthropology from the University of California. 
He was elected as a Congressman for the GANA coalition in the 
2003 election. 
 
27. (C) Secretary for the Presidential Commission for Human 
Rights (COPREDEH) - Frank LaRue.  LaRue, an American citizen, 
is a prominent human rights activist and is the founder and 
director of the Legal Action Center for Human Rights (CALDH). 
 He is also a professor of human rights at the Jesuit Rafael 
Landivar University.  Berger had long told us that he wanted 
to include human rights leaders to serve in his government, 
and his recruitment of LaRue is a major coup for civil 
society groups that have for many years watched governments 
assign a low priority to advancing human rights.  Along with 
the nomination of other representatives of civil society, the 
LaRue nomination demonstrates Berger\'s genuine interest in 
having a socially and politically progressive government, 
belying the characterization carried by the U.S. press of a 
\"return to the conservative governments of the last 20 years.\" 
HAMILTON 
"
"13231","1/13/2004 15:06","04GUATEMALA58","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131506Z Jan 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: NEW GOVERNMENT AND MAJOR OPPOSITION PARTY AGREE ON 
GOVERNABILITY PACT 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The incoming GANA government reached 
agreement on January 12 with the UNE and PAN delegations in 
Congress to elect the congressional leadership board and to 
support a progressive legislative agenda.  The agreement 
gives the center-left UNE party of Alvaro Colom the 
Presidency of Congress and divides the major committees 
evenly between GANA and UNE.  After negotiations between GANA 
and UNE broke down on January 11, and at the request of Vice 
President-elect Eduardo Stein, the Ambassador met with UNE 
leader Colom early on January 12 to encourage him to find a 
compromise.  The agreement that was reached excludes the FRG 
from the Congressional leadership slate (though they will be 
offered the chairmanship of some commissions) and makes it 
possible for the Berger Government to begin its mandate 
without a hostile legislature.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) Late in the evening of January 12, negotiators for 
GANA reached agreement with the newly-elected Congressional 
leaders for the center-left UNE party and center-right PAN to 
form a loose legislative coalition for the purposes of 
electing the new Congressional leadership slate and 
supporting a legislative agenda that includes Peace Accord 
implementation and fiscal reform.  Between them, the three 
parties have close to a hundred votes (out of 158), ensuring 
that they can elect the leadership slate at the inaugural 
session on January 14.  Under the terms of the agreement, UNE 
(which came in second in the December 28 presidential runoff 
election) will get the positions of President, First Vice 
President and First Secretary of Congress (the officer who 
manages the Congressional budget -- and patronage), while 
Gana will get the next tier of positions (Note: UNE will 
share its positions with the PAN. End note).  GANA will get 
the chairmanship of the Budget Committee, and UNE/PAN will 
get the Oversight Committee.  GANA and UNE/PAN will evenly 
split fourteen more committees, and the remaining committees 
will be divided between the FRG and the small parties.  In 
principle, UNE/PAN are committed to support GANA for the 
presidency of Congress in 2005.  The agreement also commits 
the parties to supporting a legislative agenda covering 
social and economic policy. 
 
3. (C) GANA and UNE had been negotiating the governability 
pact long before the December 28 runoff elections, and had 
reached basic agreement on the outlines.  Ill will following 
a bruising campaign, however, led Colom to renege on the 
original commitment and insist on new concessions that would 
have virtually emasculated GANA\'s legislative power.  At the 
request of Vice President-elect Eduardo Stein, the Ambassador 
met on January 12 with UNE Secretary General Colom to hear 
his views on the impasse and to urge Colom to not break off 
the negotiations with GANA in the pursuit of an agreement 
that would ensure governability.  Colom acknowledged that UNE 
would ultimately have to reach agreement with GANA, as he 
would not contemplate the only alternative -- negotiating 
with the FRG.  Colom said that UNE\'s decision to vote with 
the FRG in the closing legislative session (on an important 
bill limiting the new government\'s budgetary flexibility) was 
taken solely to show GANA that it had to negotiate seriously 
with UNE, but that UNE did not want to form an unholy 
alliance with the FRG. 
 
4. (C) GANA leaders told us early on January 12 that Oscar 
Berger had responded to Colom\'s threats to withdraw from the 
governability pact by asking his negotiators to not break off 
talks with UNE.  He viewed an agreement with UNE (and the 
PAN) as critical, despite their demands for new concessions. 
GANA has no illusions that UNE will be a faithful partner in 
the Congress over the long run, but the governability pact 
will keep the opposition parties from banding together during 
this first year to exclude GANA from the Congressional 
leadership and the key Budget Committee.  Meanwhile, GANA is 
actively (if discreetly) trying to recruit defectors from all 
the parties in Congress -- a time-honored, if unsavory, 
tradition in Guatemala.  GANA currently has 52 legislators 
(out of 158), and there are reports that up to 22 UNE 
legislators (out of 33 elected for UNE) want to join.  UNE 
leaders accuse GANA of buying off their congressmen with cash 
payments.  There are reports of expected defections from PAN, 
the FRG and the Partido Unionista as well. 
 
5. (C) Comment: The governability pact, while not a guarantee 
of blanket legislative support for the Executive, was a major 
coup for Berger.  The alternative -- a pact between UNE and 
the FRG -- would have given full control of Congress to 
Berger\'s enemies.  Berger\'s instinct to seek a compromise 
(opposed to the preference of some of his advisors to 
confront) was critical to securing this agreement.  Berger 
still has an uphill battle to build a legislative majority 
loyal to him, but the prospects are better with the FRG 
marginalized and several key legislative leadership positions 
in GANA\'s hands. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13306","1/15/2004 22:46","04GUATEMALA89","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OVIP, PREL, PGOV, PINR, ETRD, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: VISIT OF GOV. BUSH FOR BERGER INAUGURAL 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Governor Jeb Bush headed the White House 
Delegation to the inauguration of Guatemalan President Oscar 
Berger, January 13-14, 2004, and met privately with both 
outgoing President Portillo and incoming President Berger. 
In the meeting with Berger, Governor Bush pledged continued 
USG support for Guatemalan democracy, and discussed the 
benefits of CAFTA.  Berger responded that his government will 
seek closer ties with the U.S.; said that his advisors had 
still not seen the full text of the CAFTA agreement initialed 
by the Portillo Government; and expressed concerns about the 
treatment of some sectors, beer in particular.  The U.S. 
Delegation attended a presentation by the non-traditional 
export association, where Governor Bush spoke about the 
growing importance to the U.S. and Guatemala of bilateral 
trade and investment.  In a lunch with several of the new 
ministers, civil society leaders and private sector 
representatives, Governor Bush restated the priority 
President Bush assigns to strong relations with our 
hemispheric neighbors.  Press coverage was uniformly positive 
and the visit strongly supported U.S. interests in enhanced 
cooperative relations with the incoming government.  End 
Summary. 
 
Delegation Membership 
--------------------- 
 
2. (U) Governor of Florida Jeb Bush and his wife Columba 
headed the White House Delegation to the inaugural of 
President Oscar Berger, January 13-14, 2004.  The U.S. 
Delegation also included the Ambassador, Hamilton (Tony) 
James (Vice Chairman of the Blackstone Group), Bob Martinez 
(former Governor of Florida and Managing Director of Carlton 
Fields) and Alberto Piedra (former Ambassador of the U.S. to 
Guatemala, 1984-87), and was accompanied by State Department 
Deputy Chief of Protocol Jeffrey Eubank and Protocol Officer 
Christian Vanderbrouk, and Alan Florez, aide to Governor Bush. 
 
Meeting with President Portillo 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Following their arrival in Guatemala City in the 
early evening of January 13, Governor Bush and the U.S. 
Delegation met privately at the Palace with outgoing 
President Alfonso Portillo.  The Governor thanked Portillo 
for the warm bilateral relationship during his four years as 
President, noting that his negotiation of a free trade 
agreement with the U.S. (CAFTA) would be an historic legacy 
that would transform Guatemala.  Portillo said he was honored 
that President Bush had sent his brother to Guatemala to head 
the U.S. Delegation, and expressed pride in Guatemala\'s 
recent elections that had had record voter turnout.  He said 
he was looking forward to retiring from politics.  Governor 
and Mrs. Bush attended President Portillo\'s farewell dinner 
for heads of state at the Palace on the night of January 13, 
and other delegation members participated in a dinner hosted 
by outgoing Minister of Foreign Affairs Edgar Gutierrez also 
at the Palace. 
 
Meeting with President-Elect Berger and VP-elect Stein 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
4. (SBU) The delegation had a breakfast briefing by the 
Country Team on January 14, followed by a private meeting 
with President-elect Oscar Berger.  Berger was accompanied by 
Vice President-elect Eduardo Stein, Foreign 
Minister-designate Jorge Briz, Vice Foreign 
Minister-designate Jorge Skinner-Klee, and Berger\'s Private 
Secretary Alfredo Vila.  Berger welcomed Governor Bush, and 
 
SIPDIS 
said he was honored that President Bush had sent his brother 
to represent him at the inaugural.  Berger apologized for the 
poor relationship President Portillo had had with the United 
States, and pledged to make strengthening the bilateral 
relationship one of his first priorities.  Governor Bush said 
that CAFTA would boost economic growth on both sides of our 
borders and strengthen the bilateral relationship more 
broadly.  Berger said that his government was deeply 
committed to CAFTA, but noted that the Portillo Government 
had not shared a full text of the agreement with the incoming 
government.  He said that the lack of transparency with which 
the Portillo Government had negotiated CAFTA had created some 
doubts that the new government hoped to quickly clear up. 
Foreign Minister Briz expressed particular concern about 
CAFTA\'s liberalization of beer imports, noting that Guatemala 
has a new brewery that would have difficulty competing 
without some form of protection from imports (Note: The 
owners of the new brewery were major contributors to Berger\'s 
electoral campaign. End Note).  Governor Bush responded that 
a limited number of individual industries in the U.S. and 
Guatemala would be negatively affected in the short term by 
trade liberalization, but that CAFTA would have an overall 
effect of boosting both of our economies. 
 
5. (SBU) Berger said that his government would strengthen 
cooperation with us on fighting transnational crime, 
especially narcotics trafficking, and said he will fully 
support the creation of the UN Mission to attack organized 
crime and threats against human rights workers (CICIACS). 
Berger said that he would name a Vice Minister of Foreign 
Affairs dedicated to migrant issues, to improve GOG services 
to its citizens living outside the country.  He noted that 
remittances from Guatemalans in the U.S. exceeded all of 
Guatemala\'s traditional exports in 2003.  Governor Bush told 
Berger that the United States is acutely sensitive to the 
need to document illegal aliens in order, among other things, 
to find ways to bring down the transaction costs for 
remittances.  He noted that security concerns arising from 
September 11 and legal authorities belonging to the states 
would have to be taken into account in finding a solution to 
this situation.  Berger said he looked forward to working 
with us to find a solution. 
 
Other Delegation Activities 
--------------------------- 
 
6. (U) The U.S. Delegation met with the non-traditional 
export association (AGEXPRONT), and received a presentation 
on this growing sector of the Guatemalan economy.  Guatemalan 
exporters expressed their support for CAFTA\'s potential to 
encourage investment and trade, and emphasized the growing 
optimism within Guatemala about the new, pro-business 
government and prospects for overcoming the effects of low 
world coffee prices.  With assistance from USAID, AGEXPRONT 
is helping Guatemalan coffee producers find niche markets for 
high quality, ecological and organic coffees, while also 
promoting a range of non-traditional products including 
apparel, handicrafts, and non-traditional agricultural goods. 
 They also emphasized the central role that Florida plays as 
the main entry-point for Guatemalan exports to the U.S. 
 
7. (U) The Ambassador hosted a lunch at the Residence for the 
delegation to meet key leaders, including a number of 
designated ministers (Economy, Finance, Agriculture, Culture) 
and other key members of the incoming government, prominent 
civil society leaders (including Nobel laureate Rigoberta 
Menchu and human rights defender Helen Mack, who were seated 
a Governor Bush\'s side), and private sector representatives. 
Governor Bush praised the role these members of Guatemalan 
society had played in strengthening their democracy, remarked 
on the sense of optimism he sensed at this historic moment 
and conveyed President Bush\'s interest in and support for the 
region. 
 
8. (U) The U.S. Delegation participated in the inaugural 
ceremony at the National Theater on the afternoon of January 
14.  In his departure speech, President Portillo exhaustively 
defended his government\'s performance, to deafening silence. 
In his shorter speech President Berger used his remarks to 
call for unity instead of confrontation, but proceeded to 
denounce the corruption of the outgoing government.  The 
audience gave Portillo the loudest applause when he 
surrendered the presidential sash. 
 
9. (U) Following the conclusion of the inaugural ceremony, 
the U.S. Delegation departed Guatemala by milair at 1900 hrs. 
local time. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10. (U) The Presidential delegation advanced U.S. interests 
and the bilateral relationship tremendously by effectively 
conveying U.S. support for and interest in Guatemalan 
democracy.  That message was warmly received by both outgoing 
and incoming governments, despite their mutual animosity. 
The goodwill generated by Governor Bush\'s public and private 
appearances and the delegation\'s composition and behavior was 
evident throughout the visit and in press coverage, which was 
uniformly positive.  President Berger was effusive in his 
praise for the delegation\'s visit in private remarks to the 
Ambassador on January 15. 
 
11. (U) This cable was prepared following the departure of 
Governor Bush and his party. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13342","1/16/2004 16:39","04GUATEMALA97","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE10423","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/SHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT, OIC, UNHRC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SUPPORTS AUSTRALIA FOR CHR 60 CHAIR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 10423 
 
Sylvia Corado, Director for Multilateral Affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry, told Poloff on January 16 that Guatemala 
supports Australia for the Chair of the 60th Commission on 
Human Rights.  Corado said that Guatemala shares our view 
that the effort to call for a vote is ill-advised.  Corado 
assured us that Guatemala would vote for Australia if it 
becomes necessary. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13352","1/17/2004 13:14","04GUATEMALA108","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, AND PM/B 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, KTIA, MASS, GT, ICC 
SUBJECT: ARTICLE 98 LETTER TO SECRETARY POWELL FROM 
OUTGOING GUATEMALAN FOREIGN MINISTER GUTIERREZ 
 
1. Outgoing Foreign Minister Gutierrez sent a letter, dated 
January 13 (his last day in office), to Secretary Powell 
stating his understanding that Guatemala is exempt from the 
restrictions on U.S. military aid under the Servicemember\'s 
Protection Act of 2001 (SPA), due to the fact that Guatemala 
has not ratified the Treaty of Rome.  Gutierrez closes by 
reassuring the Secretary that Guatemala is interested in 
continued efforts to reach an agreement.  A copy of the 
letter has been faxed to WHA/CEN.  Our unofficial translation 
of the text is at paragraph 3. 
 
2.  Comment:  We have explained repeatedly to Gutierrez and 
the MFA that, while Guatemala is technically exempt from the 
provision of the SPA, we may well apply prohibitions as a 
matter of policy.  The Ambassador has an appointment with new 
FM Jorge Briz January 20 to discuss this issue, inter alia. 
 
3.  Begin unofficial translation: 
Edgar Gutierrez 
Minister of Foreign Relations 
 
Guatemala, January 13, 2004 
 
Dear Secretary of State: 
 
I wish to thank you for having met with me and my 
counterparts, the Foreign Ministers of Central America, on 
the margins of the last United Nations General Assembly, 
because I firmly believe that this meeting effectively 
contributed to strengthening our bilateral agenda. 
 
I also wish to acknowledge receipt of your letter of November 
21, 2003, which refers to your interest in completing an 
agreement to prohibit the extradition of U.S. citizens to the 
International Criminal Court.  Furthermore, I am aware that 
the United States has provided Guatemala, via joint 
humanitarian military exercises, medical attention and other 
benefits to certain rural regions of my country. 
 
I understand that according to Section 2007 - Prohibition 
Against U.S. Military Assistance to Members of the 
International Criminal Court - of the Servicemember\'s 
Protection Act, that your government may waive the 
prohibition in those cases where the President of the United 
States determines that it is in the U.S. interest to do so, 
or in those cases where a country has signed an agreement 
with the U.S. based on Article 98 of the Treaty of Rome. 
 
I wish to reiterate that although my country has subscribed 
to the Treaty of Rome, we have not yet finalized the process 
of approval and ratification.  As this is the case, I believe 
that the requirements of Section 2007 are not applicable to 
Guatemala. 
 
As you indicated in your letter, I note that you have 
developed a special version with the goal of addressing the 
concerns of some countries.  For example, I understand that 
some Article 98 agreements include a paragraph that is 
reserved for agreements with countries that are not parties 
to the Treaty of Rome, and specifies that said agreement 
remains subject to the international obligations of the 
parties. 
 
The Government of Guatemala, Mr. Secretary, under its guiding 
principals, will be disposed to continue working with you 
towards achieving a mutually satisfactory agreement. 
 
Sincerely, 
/s/ 
Edgar Gutierrez 
Minister of Foreign Relations 
 
End unofficial translation. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13478","1/23/2004 18:09","04GUATEMALA162","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE12518","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, ETRD, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA & CAFTA ENVIRONMENT PUBLIC SUBMISSION 
PROCESS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 12518 
 
1.  Embassy learned from GOG that its preference is to have 
SIECA (Secretaria de la Integracion Economica 
Centroamericana) (a SICA body, as is the CCAD) enforce the 
environmental chapter because its members include ONLY the 
Central Americans.  An office of trade and environment within 
SIECA (NAFTA secretariat-like) is the idea.  They are not in 
favor of CCAD simply because its members include outsiders. 
These are currently the DR, which is due to dock with the 
CAFTA countries, and Panama.  We note that the composition of 
the Ministry of Economy is changing with the inauguration of 
a new government last week, so its views are subject to 
change. 
 
2.  We don\'t know of any taint that will remain with CCAD 
from the former executive director\'s tenure.  CCAD currently 
has and will have new ministers of environment holding the 
president pro tempore position due to post-election cabinet 
changes.  Guatemala\'s Minister of Environment has been in 
place a week and El Salvdor, which takes over the CCAD in 
July, has elections in March. 
 
2.  The OAS has many more members than CCAD but has a good 
reputation in Guatemala.  If it were chosen to handle the 
CAFTA public submission process, the GOG could live with it. 
 
3.  AID/Guatemala believes CCAD is the appropriate vehicle 
for this process and has responded through its own channels 
in support of CCAD. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13517","1/26/2004 20:26","04GUATEMALA178","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE11998","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000178 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/USOAS, WHA/PPC, WHA/BSC, S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, GT, OAS 
SUBJECT: SMALL GUATEMALAN DELEGATION TO 4TH CICTE IN 
MONTEVIDEO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 11998 
 
Silvia Corado, Director for Multilateral Affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry, confirmed on January 26 that Guatemala\'s 
delegation to the Fourth Regular Session of the OAS 
Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism (CICTE), will be 
led by Guatemalan Ambassador to Uruguay, Jose Luis Dominguez. 
 The other two members will be Marco Antonio Merida Zea, 
Executive Director of the Ports Commission and Elvis Molina, 
representative of the Superintendency of Banks.  Guatemala 
has not yet ratified the Inter-American Convention Against 
Terrorism, but has submitted its annual report to the CICTE. 
Citing scarce resources, Corado said Guatemala would not be 
able to announce any financial, technical, or other 
assistance to the CICTE at the Montevideo meeting. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13518","1/26/2004 21:45","04GUATEMALA182","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AC/ISN AND IO/UNP, USUN (POL) AND GENEVA 
(CD). 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, CT, UNGA, CDG 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE RESPONSE: URGING THE GRULAC TO SELECT 
REFORM-MINDED CANDIDATE TO CHAIR THE 59TH UNFC SESSION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 14634 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Silvia Corado, Director 
for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on January 
26.  In response to our points, Corado stated that Guatemala 
agrees in principle with the need for reform, and stressed 
that Guatemala would evaluate each reform proposal on its 
merits. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13550","1/27/2004 20:31","04GUATEMALA197","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE343694","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS NASA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPA, TSPL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA GRANTS OVERFLIGHT CLEARANCE FOR 2004 
NASA DC-8 AIRSAR DEPLOYMENT TO CENTRAL AMERICA, MARCH 1-9, 
2004 
 
REF: 03 SECSTATE 343694 
 
1.  Embassy sent a diplomatic note to the Ministry of Foreign 
Relations requesting overflight clearance for subject 
scientific mission.  EconOff received a faxed letter directly 
from the Guatemalan Civil Aviation authority granting 
overflight clearance for the mission.  Following is an 
informal translation of the text. The original will be 
forwarded to Department when it is received. 
 
2.  Text: 
(Letterhead - Direccion General de Aeronautica Civil) 
 
Guatemala 
January 19, 2004 
 
Sirs 
Embassy of the USA 
Guatemala 
 
REF:  PERMISO GO-032-2004 
 
Dear Sirs: 
 
      I am writing to you to inform you that this agency 
grants your request to overfly Guatemalan territory, in the 
DC-8, modified version Douglas DC-8-72, registration N817NAQ, 
NASA 817, for the period March 1-10, 2004.  This permission 
is valid for an additional 72 hours in case of mechanical or 
weather problems. 
 
      In order to be in effect, the mission must be in 
compliance with all Guatemalan and International Civil 
Aviation laws and also be responsible for all damages the 
aircraft might cause in the air as well as to people or 
property on the ground. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Engineer Leonel Haroldo Bucaro 
Manager of Air Navigation and Operations 
 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"13578","1/28/2004 15:10","04GUATEMALA206","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281510Z Jan 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000206 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, KDEM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES: PRESIDENT OF CONGRESS ROLANDO 
MORALES 
 
 
1.  (U) Dr. Rolando Morales Chavez (47) of the Union Nacional 
para la Esperanza (UNE) party was elected President of 
Congress on January 14, 2004, as part of a governability pact 
negotiated between the ruling GANA party and the center-left 
UNE and center-right PAN blocks in Congress.  Morales is a 
close political ally of UNE Secretary General (and 
unsuccessful Presidential candidate) Alvaro Colom. 
 
2.  (U) Morales is a medical doctor by profession, with a 
medical degree from the San Carlos University of Guatemala 
and an MPA from the University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill.  He has been active in center-left politics since 1993. 
 He ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 1995, and was one of 
the founders of the DIA party in 1997.  He again ran 
unsuccessfully for Congress on the far-left ANN slate in 
1999, and joined the UNE in 2001.  He was elected to Congress 
on UNE\'s national list in November, 2003. 
 
3.  (U) Morales is married to Lucy Lainfiesta, a social 
worker who is also active in UNE.  They have two children. 
Morales speaks fluent English, but prefers to use Spanish in 
official meetings. 
 
Revolutionary Past 
------------------ 
 
4.  (SBU) There are unconfirmed reports that Morales provided 
medical assistance to members of the Armed People,s 
Revolutionary Organization (ORPA) during the internal 
conflict. 
 
Victim of Electoral Violence 
---------------------------- 
 
5. (U) Morales was shot twice (in the leg and hand) by 
unknown assailants on November 9, 2003, only hours before the 
voting centers opened for the first round of the 2003 general 
election.  His aggressors made no attempt at robbery, and the 
attack was widely believed to have a political motive. 
 
Early Signs: Dialogue, Transparency, and Human Rights 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
6. (SBU) Since his appointment as President of the Congress, 
Morales Chavez has sought to facilitate dialogue with other 
political factions and to increase transparency in Congress. 
He publicly opened the ceremonial door of the Congress 
building and its galleries to the public, after former 
President of Congress Efrain Rios Montt had ordered them shut 
four years ago.  Morales met publicly with Human Rights 
Ombudsman Sergio Morales shortly after taking office, 
publicly promising to consider increasing funding for the 
Ombudsman\'s office.  He also publicly expressed his personal 
support for a proposed International Commission to 
Investigate Clandestine Groups (CICIACS). 
 
7.  (SBU) At a January 26 meeting with the Ambassador, 
Morales invited members of the Governing Board of Congress 
from other parties to attend, and projected a warmly 
collegial style.  He was clearly comfortable with USG 
interlocutors and professed a commitment to work together 
with us on areas of shared interest.  In a telcon the 
following day with the Ambassador, he said he had expressed 
publicly his support for a renewal of authority to conduct 
joint anti-drug exercises and operations in Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13616","1/29/2004 21:50","04GUATEMALA223","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA A/S NORIEGA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2014 
TAGS: PREL, OVIP, PGOV, SNAR, EAID, ETRD, PHUM, MASS, KTIA, GT 
SUBJECT: SCENE SETTER FOR THE FEBRUARY 3-5 VISIT TO 
GUATEMALA OF WHA A/S ROGER NORIEGA 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David E. Lindwall, reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
Summary: 
--------- 
1. (C) Your visit to Guatemala comes as President Berger and 
his team are anxious to demonstrate publicly that bilateral 
relations have improved and that we have a shared agenda on 
trade and investment, fighting domestic corruption and 
transnational crime, and the 1996 Peace Accords.  As he did 
with Governor Bush and with private sector unhappiness over 
CAFTA deal growing, Berger will seek your help for \"an 
adjustment;\" he also wants a big assist in investigating and 
prosecuting corrupt officials of the Portillo government. 
Other request include increased assistance in the war on 
drugs, protection for Guatemalan immigrants in the US, 
financial assistance for a major reduction of the military 
and getting off the FATF list of non-cooperating countries. 
We would like you to raise  CICIACS, the labor GSP petition, 
TIP and Article 98.  End summary. 
 
Off to a strong start 
--------------------- 
2. (C) In his first days in office, Berger secured a 
governability pact with two reform-minded parties in 
Congress, ensuring a pro-government majority in the fractious 
legislature for now.  He named a capable and experienced team 
of ministers and advisers who have increased public 
confidence that his government will deliver job creation and 
improved public security.  The governability pact gave 
effective control of Congress to the center-left UNE party, 
requiring Berger to negotiate on important legislation; 
implications there are still unclear. 
 
3. (C) Despite finding their ministries with few resources 
and having little formal transition, Berger\'s team has begun 
to implement his agenda.  Berger has toured areas of the city 
with serious crime problems, and has launched joint 
military/police patrols in areas dominated by gangs. 
Minister of Education Acena is defusing a threatened 
nation-wide teachers strike.  The Ministry of Economy is 
engaged on CAFTA (a problem area -- see para. 5 below).  The 
government will soon launch a campaign targeted at 
eliminating malnutrition in the areas affected by famine. 
 
4. (C) Berger has drawn public attention to the improvement 
in the US-Guatemala relationship.  He is an admirer of the 
ARENA governments in El Salvador, and is convinced that 
progress and development in El Salvador have been driven to a 
large extent by the policy of successive ARENA governments to 
ally themselves closely with the U.S.  Foreign Minister Briz 
invited the Ambassador over to the Ministry only days after 
taking office and called in the press corps to make the point 
that the Berger government values its relationship with us. 
Briz told the Ambassador that the GOG wants to give the Peace 
Corps the Orden del Quetzal (Guatemala\'s highest recognition) 
in March, in glaring contrast to Portillo\'s bestowing the 
medal on the Cuban medical brigade.  President Berger invited 
the Ambassador and DCM for a private breakfast at the Palace 
on January 29.  Berger\'s ministers are by and large long-time 
contacts of the Embassy, and have reaffirmed the priority 
they attach to maintaining close ties with us in their new 
positions. 
 
CAFTA 
----- 
5. (C) Berger is a true believer in free trade and is a 
strong supporter of CAFTA, not only as a mechanism to 
increase trade and investment, but as a symbol of a new and 
much broader relationship between our two countries.  But 
with Guatemala\'s private sector increasingly upset over the 
outcome for Guatemala and convinced that the Portillo 
government negotiated CAFTA in bad faith, making some 
concessions intentionally for the purpose of punishing the 
economic sectors that financed Berger\'s election campaign, he 
is concerned that this issue is becoming politically 
unmanageable.  USTR made some \"adjustments\" this week to 
accommodate these concerns and gave Guatemala treatment more 
similar to that given the other countries. However, the 
Portillo government\'s concession on beer was not addressed 
and remains a particular concern to Berger as the owners of 
Guatemala\'s newest brewery were his largest campaign 
contributors.  Berger will tell you, as he did the Ambassador 
on January 29,  that he will \"continue fighting\" for beer. 
We and USTR have countered Berger\'s concerns by noting that 
Guatemala\'s negotiators worked hard and achieved an outcome 
that, on balance, is very similar to what others achieved 
(Note: See Guatemala 207 for a more detailed analysis of the 
Berger government\'s views on reopening CAFTA, and our 
response. end note). 
Corruption investigation 
------------------------ 
6. (C) There is growing press attention to major corruption 
cases involving senior officials of the Portillo government, 
and Berger will ask you for USG support to investigate and 
prosecute former officials.  He recently asked us to cancel 
the visas of a number of former officials (including 
President Portillo); we told him that all visa revocations 
have to follow due process and that we may have a law 
enforcement interest in not/not revoking visas at this point. 
 Neither should we close that door, however.  Other Berger 
officials have asked us about pending investigations in the 
US against Portillo-era officials, and it is clear that 
Berger intends to pursue some legal action against the most 
egregious cases of corruption under the previous government. 
The past few days have seen a feeding frenzy in the press as 
reports of investigations of former GOG officials by US 
authorities have made the news.  We have made it clear that 
we can not comment on ongoing judicial investigations in the 
United States.  At the January 29 meeting, Berger welcomed 
the offer to receive a briefing on the status of the 
investigation from U.S. law enforcement officials. 
 
Immigration 
----------- 
7. (C) During the campaign, Berger met with Guatemalan 
immigrants to the US, recognizing the growing importance of 
their remittances to family members in Guatemala (which, at 
close to $2 billion in 2003, exceeded foreign currency 
earnings from coffee, sugar, and tourism combined).  Berger 
and Foreign Minister Briz have told us that migrant issues 
will be high on their agenda, and have asked us informally if 
the US would consider extending TPS benefits to Guatemalan 
migrants.  Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs 
Maura Harty, during a January 21 visit to Guatemala, told 
senior MFA officials that President Bush\'s initiative on 
immigration is designed to address the concerns the Berger 
government is interested in, and urged the GOG to follow that 
process carefully.  The Ambassador reinforced that point and 
further noted to Berger on January 29 that Guatemala is 
increasingly taking advantage of the H2-B program, and said 
the Berger government can take credit for the consolidation 
of this program in coming years. 
 
Counter-narcotics cooperation 
----------------------------- 
8. (C) President Berger is also determined to crack down on 
drug trafficking through Guatemala, and cocaine seizures 
during his first two weeks in office have already topped 
1,200 kilos.  Berger is looking for additional resources to 
dedicate to the war on drugs, and would like to see our 
financial assistance increase.  He told the Ambassador on 
January 29 that the poor state of maintenance of Guatemala\'s 
air force assets makes it difficult for the GOG to provide 
support at the level it would like to counter-narcotics 
operations.  We have told him that the seizure in 2003 of $22 
million in cash demonstrates the potential for Guatemala to 
use seized assets to fund GOG efforts in the war on drugs, 
and encouraged him to seek an agreement with the Supreme 
Court on how to use those funds (Note: The Constitution 
assigns all seized assets to be administered by the Supreme 
Court.  We have long encouraged the GOG to negotiate an MOU 
with the judiciary which would allow for the sharing of those 
assets -- currently not being used -- with the narcotics 
police and other GOG agencies active in the war on drugs. End 
note). 
 
Reducing the military 
--------------------- 
9. (C) The spiraling military budget during the Portillo 
administration convinced Berger to reduce the armed forces. 
He told the Ambassador on January 29 that he commissioned the 
new Minister of Defense to devise a plan to reduce the 
military, and sent the first draft back asking the Minister 
to cut deeper.  Berger would like to cut 16,000 officers and 
troops, and estimates that severance benefits alone will cost 
roughly $200 million.  He would like to finance it with 
foreign aid, and hopes to enlist Nobel laureate Rigoberta 
Menchu to pass the hat among traditional donors.  He asked 
for our help.  The Ambassador told Berger that, irrespective 
of our support for military reform, the donor community would 
not easily be persuaded to finance job layoffs, and urged 
Berger to explore ways to finance the reform by selling 
valuable property currently owned by the military.  On 
military assistance more broadly, the Ambassador noted that 
current congressional prohibitions could only be overcome by 
profound reforms in the military and a serious and public 
accounting for past human rights violations. 
 
Berger is open to our agenda 
---------------------------- 
10. (C) Berger will welcome engaging in a dialogue with you 
on our priorities in the bilateral agenda.  He has asked the 
Foreign Ministry to review the status of our discussions on 
an Article 98 Agreement, and appears poised to expedite a 
negotiation.  The Foreign Ministry is also preparing draft 
legislation to renew authority for Mayan Jaguar 
counter-narcotics exercises, and is preparing a presentation 
for an upcoming GSP review.  Berger is also anxious to resume 
meetings of the bilateral working groups on counter-narcotics 
cooperation, trafficking in persons and labor rights, and the 
Foreign Ministry intends to convoke all three groups during 
February. 
 
11. (C) Berger strongly supports the creation of CICIACS, 
though that ball is now in the hands of Congress and the 
Constitutional Court.  We expect him to use his considerable 
political capital to positively influence debate in Congress, 
but his influence with the high court is limited.  The 
Constitutional Court magistrates have not tipped their hands 
on how they might rule on CICIACS\' constitutionality.  This 
initiative is unprecedented in form and scope, and -- while 
expensive -- could save us significantly greater expenditures 
five to ten years down the road.  This is definitely an area 
where we can already see around the corner. 
 
Comment 
------- 
12. (C) Berger will use your visit to gauge how important 
these issues are to us, and to see if there are any 
additional resources we can bring to bear to advance our 
common agenda.  Your restating the priority we attach to 
concluding an Article 98 Agreement, passing a law extending 
Mayan Jaguar, increasing cooperation against drugs and 
illegal alien smuggling, tightening GOG actions against 
trafficking in persons, improving respect for labor rights 
and signing CAFTA will not be lost on Berger or his team.  We 
look forward to your visit and believe it will significantly 
advance USG interests with the new government. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13650","1/30/2004 18:24","04GUATEMALA233","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE9439","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

301824Z Jan 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER BRIZ\'S RESPONSE TO SECRETARY\'S 
LETTER 
 
REF: STATE 9439 
 
1. On January 30, the Embassy received a letter from Foreign 
Minister Jorge Briz (dated January 23) responding to the 
Secretary\'s letter congratulating Briz on being named Foreign 
 
SIPDIS 
Minister.  The original letter is being pouched to WHA/CEN. 
Following is an Embassy translation of Foreign Minister 
Briz\'s letter to the Secretary. 
 
2. (begin translation) 
Guatemala, January 23, 2004 
 
His Excellency Mr. Colin L. Powell 
Secretary of State 
 
SIPDIS 
Washington D.C., United States of America 
 
Your Excellency Mr. Secretary of State: 
 
I have the honor to greet Your Excellency and to say that I 
received your kind note of January 14, in which you 
congratulate me on being named Minister of Foreign Affairs of 
Guatemala, and expressing your desire that the relations 
between our two countries and peoples increase and improve. 
 
I want to thank You Excellency for your kind gesture, and 
take this opportunity to express the testimony of my highest 
and most distinguished consideration. 
(signed) 
Jorge Briz Abularach 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
 
(end translation. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13674","2/2/2004 19:25","04GUATEMALA244","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000244 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA: CHRIS KUSHLIS AND BILL BLOCK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2009 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, ECON, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S CALL ON NEW MINISTER OF FINANCE 
BONILLA:  GETTING A HANDLE ON WHAT SHE HAS INHERITED 
 
Classified By: EconCouns Steven S. Olson for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
1.  (C)  Ambassador called on new Minister of Finance Maria 
Anonieta de Bonilla on January 22.  Bonilla is a former 
banker and executive director at the IMF and IDB and is close 
to economic cabinet coordinator Richard Aitkenhead and new 
tax and customs chief Willy Zapata (septel).  Her immediate 
concern is getting a better understanding of the budget and 
past spending levels.  The Congress has frozen spending at 
2003 levels, the courts have suspended about 10% of her tax 
base, and she has inherited unfunded obligations from the 
previous government.  She nevertheless hopes to be able to 
keep the deficit near 2% of GDP.  She wants to renew the IMF 
Stand-by when it expires, but it isn\'t an especially pressing 
concern.  She wants to be off the FATF NCCT blacklist to save 
interest costs when Guatemala goes back to the market to 
borrow. 
 
2.  (U)  Ambassador and EconCouns paid a courtesy call on new 
Finance Minister Maria Antonieta (\"Toni\") de Bonilla on 
January 22. 
 
Getting a Handle on Spending 
---------------------------- 
3.  (C)  Bonilla said that she was still trying to get a 
grasp of the state of the nation\'s finances.  Her first 
concern was obtaining detailed information on the previous 
year\'s spending.  The Congress had not approved a budget for 
CY 2004 budget, leaving her with the equivalent of a 
continuing resolution at 2003 levels, while the opposition 
FRG and UNE parties had banded together at the beginning of 
the year to prohibit transfers among accounts (a practice the 
Portillo government used extensively and that rendered its 
congressionally-approved budgets meaningless).  Meanwhile, 
the Constitutional Court had definitively suspended the 
(unpopular) IEMA assets-based alternative minimum tax on 
businesses, and the former government had made binding 
commitments to new spending not contemplated in the 2003 
budget levels she was forced to work with.  Her initial 
calculations suggested a Q.2.5-3.0 billion loss in revenues 
from the IEMA (roughly 10% of the budget), an Q.800 (US$100) 
million additional obligation for compensation to former 
civilian militias (ex-PACs), and additional obligations for 
severance benefits to downsize the military, all on top of 
non-discretional spending that that consumed over 70% of the 
budget. 
 
Deficit Will Grow; New Stand-by Desired but Not Urgent 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
4.  (C)  Bonilla said it was inevitable that the 2004 deficit 
would be higher than the approximate 1.5% of GDP achieved in 
2003.  She assumed she would find as yet undiscovered 
obligations inherited from the last government on top of the 
ones she already knew about and the IEMA problem.  Without 
action, she could see the deficit quickly approaching 5% of 
GDP.  She would be looking to achieve 2%, principally through 
austerity measures and cutting waste.  She said that 
President Berger had given her 72 hours inform the cabinet 
how much needed to be cut and where. 
 
5.  (C)  Asked, she said she had not had any detailed 
conversations with the IMF and wasn\'t ready to start 
discussing a renewal of the stand-by agreement.  She said 
that she would want an SBA eventually, but there was no great 
urgency.  Perhaps a Fund monitoring agreement could be put in 
place if there were a gap between one SBA and the next.  Her 
greatest priority was to find areas in the budget where 
wasteful spending could be cut to permit investment in the 
high-impact social programs the Berger campaign had promised. 
 
Interest Rates, Deficit Financing, and the FATF 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
6.  (C)  Bonilla said that significant new bond financing was 
inevitable to cover the continuing deficit and roll over 
maturing debt.  She believed some savings on interest rate 
costs were possible, particularly if Guatemala could get off 
the Financial Action Task Force\'s blacklist of 
Non-Cooperating Countries and Territories.  Ambassador 
explained that we had tried to encourage others to join a 
technical review before the FATF February plenary and that 
there was a growing consensus that Guatemala was about ready 
to be removed from the list.  However, travel schedules of 
review team members were already fully booked.  Bonilla said 
she had heard the same thing.  She hoped that Guatemala could 
get off the list and go to financial markets before the 
apparent U.S. recovery started driving interest rates back up. 
 
Improving Tax Collection; Abadio On His Way Out 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
7.  (C)  EconCouns asked what the prospects were for 
improving revenue collection by attacking contraband and 
corruption in customs and thereby broadening the tax base. 
Would there be changes in the customs and taxation authority 
(SAT), and if so, were there any names being circulated? 
Bonilla said that President Berger had made clear that he 
wanted the head of the SAT, Marco Julio Abadio, out as 
quickly as possible.  She said she did not know of any names 
being mentioned as possible replacements.  (Note:  Abadio 
resigned the next day in lieu of being fired.  Respected 
former Central Banker Willy Zapata was sworn in to replace 
him on January 27.  Zapata had thought he was moving to the 
Superintendence of Banks (septel).)  Bonilla said that she 
assumed that significantly more taxes could be collected with 
better administration of the SAT and a crackdown on 
corruption and contraband, but she did not yet have an 
estimate of how much additional revenue could be raised with 
current tax rates.  She had not spoken to Abadio (and 
evidently had no wish to do so). 
 
Comment and Bio Notes 
--------------------- 
8.  (C)  Bonilla is friendly, U.S. trained, competent, 
respected, and experienced.  She has served Guatemala as Vice 
President of the Central Bank, Executive Director at the IDB 
and then IMF, was general manager of a small bank (Banco 
Quetzal), and was one of the banking sector\'s representatives 
on the Monetary Board, which sets the country\'s monetary 
policy and is the board of directors for the central bank. 
She is also very much the cautious technocrat, unwilling to 
stray far in her comments from the hard data she has in hand. 
 She is close to the presidential coordinator for economic 
policy, former finance minister Richard Aitkenhead, and to 
new SAT Superintendent Willy Zapata.  Zapata and Bonilla were 
classmates at the University of Illinois (where Bonilla 
received her MSc in Economics in 1989), and Zapata and 
Aitkenhead were schoolmates in Guatemala.  It is a strong and 
unified team.  We sense that Bonilla will focus on being the 
accountant and controller with perhaps less of a policy role 
than her predecessor, Eduardo Weymann.  That would not be a 
bad thing.  The new government has a lot of talent and 
experience within its ranks to draw upon, and Guatemala could 
certainly use some concentrated attention on minding the 
books and financial controls after the excesses of the 
Portillo administration. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"13675","2/2/2004 19:39","04GUATEMALA245","Embassy Guatemala","SECRET","03GUATEMALA772","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000245 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA: CHRIS KUSHLIS AND BILL BLOCK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2009 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, KCOR, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: DESPISED TAX AND CUSTOMS CHIEF ABADIO QUITS; IS 
REPLACED BY WILLIE ZAPATA, WHO THOUGHT HE WAS BECOMING 
SUPERINTENDENT OF BANKS 
 
REF: A. 2003 GUATEMALA 772 
 
     B. 2003 GUATEMALA 2593 
 
Classified By: EconCouns Steven S. Olson for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
Summary 
------- 
1.  (C)  President Berger appointed respected banker and 
former Central Bank President Willy Zapata to be the new 
Superintendent of Tributary Administration on January 28. 
His exceptionally unpopular predecessor, Marco Tulio Abadio, 
quit as rumors circulated that the government sought his 
removal.  President Berger publicly called for civil 
society\'s views on Abadio\'s performance, knowing what the 
response would be, in a deft move to expedite Abadio\'s 
departure.  Abadio is widely considered the implementer of 
the former government\'s campaign of \"fiscal terrorism\" 
against its private sector opponents, though he may also have 
had his own agenda.  Zapata\'s appointment was a surprise. 
Only days earlier, he had called on EconCouns to report that 
he would become an advisor to Superintendent of Banks Douglas 
Borja until Borja could \"retire\" gracefully.  Zapata would 
then take over.  Borja had performed well on most occasions 
but was thought to have covered for cronies of former 
President Portillo, a childhood friend who appointed him. 
The problem was such that Borja\'s own money laundering 
investigators did not share all of what they knew with him. 
Zapata contrasted Borja\'s attitude with that of Central Bank 
president Lizardo Sosa, who did not have Berger\'s confidence 
but was insisting on riding out the remainder of his recently 
renewed term.  End Summary. 
 
Zapata New Head of Taxes and Customs (SAT) 
------------------------------------------ 
2. (U)  President Berger swore in respected economist and 
former central bank president Willy Zapata as new head of the 
Superintendence of Tax Administration (SAT) on January 28. 
The SAT is the Guatemalan equivalent of the IRS and Customs 
Service combined.  The previous SAT superintendent, Marco 
Tulio Abadio, was held in contempt by the private sector and 
much of civil society, which saw Abadio as corrupt and as the 
implementer of the FRG government\'s policy of \"fiscal 
terrorism\" against its critics.  Abadio had resigned on 
January 23 as rumors circulated that he would be dismissed 
imminently.  True to character, Abadio fired a broadside 
against the press, particularly \"El Periodico\" president Jose 
Ruben Zamora, whom he called a tax evader and drug user as 
well as a slanderer.  He also lashed out at Berger for being 
manipulated by the press and using it to disparage him rather 
than calling him up and asking him to leave.  He warned that 
if anybody dared to push him any further, he would go public 
with the information he had collected on the \"tax evaders\" 
who backed the new government. 
 
Unsubtle Abadio Deftly Forced Out 
--------------------------------- 
3.  (C)  Abadio had a longstanding feud with the press, 
especially \"El Periodico\" and Zamora, who was particularly 
persistent and outspoken in condemning \"fiscal terrorism.\" 
Abadio, not known for his subtlety, responded by practicing 
\"fiscal terrorism\" (never-ending audits and threats of 
criminal tax evasion charges) on Zamora.  Berger indeed used 
the press to put pressure on Abadio, but not, as Abadio 
implied, because he lacked the nerve to fire him.  Abadio 
still had two more years in his term, and Berger\'s legal 
grounds to fire Abadio depended on relatively vague language 
suggesting the authority to dismiss at the very beginning of 
a new administration if the President lacked confidence in 
the SAT chief.  The other route would have been to 
demonstrate malfeasance or nonfeasance, which offered the 
prospect of months of public mud wrestling over who was 
really to blame for missed tax targets:  Abadio or a 
recalcitrant private sector that caused some of his taxes to 
be thrown out by the courts.  Berger\'s public call for civil 
society to speak its mind was sure to generate a groundswell 
in support of the President\'s \"lack of confidence\" and belie 
Abadio\'s charges that Berger was acting solely to protect his 
tax evading cronies.  Abadio (who is smart, if not subtle) 
evidently saw what was coming and cut his losses while he 
could. 
 
Zapata Thought He Was Replacing Borja, Not Abadio 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
4.  (C)  Zapata did not expect to be the new head of the SAT. 
 He had told Econ Counselor only days earlier of Berger\'s 
plan to name him an advisor to Superintendent of Banks 
Douglas Borja until enough time had passed for Borja to 
\"retire\" gracefully.  Zapata, an insider in Berger\'s economic 
team who is close to economic policy coordinator Richard 
Aitkenhead and Minister of Finance Maria Antonieta de 
Bonilla, said that Borja\'s departure had already been 
negotiated and that he would be assuming the advisory role on 
Feb. 1.  A retirement date for Borja had yet to be set, but 
it probably would be within a couple of months.  Zapata would 
then take over as new Superintendent.  Zapata said that Borja 
recognized that the new government wanted him out because of 
his connections with former president Portillo, who appointed 
him.  Zapata said that Borja agreed to leave peacefully if 
the new administration would let him do so gracefully.  Borja 
and Portillo are said to have grown up together in Zacapa. 
 
5.  (C)  EconCouns spoke again with Zapata on February 29. 
Zapata said the change in plans and his move to the SAT were 
unexpected.  The government had not thought that Abadio would 
move out as quickly and easily as he did, and it did not have 
other willing candidates readily available.  Zapata admitted 
that taking on the SAT had given him pause, noting that the 
job would be \"dangerous.\"  He said he looked forward to 
repairing the damage done to the institution during Abadio\'s 
tenure, but there were \"bigger problems\" he wanted to discuss 
in more detail the following week.  (Comment:  \"Bigger 
problems\" was undoubtedly an allusion to the influence of 
organized crime in Customs.) 
 
Borja Did Some Good, but Too Close to Portillo 
--------------------------------------------- - 
6.  (C) Zapata gave mixed reviews of the recent performance 
of the Superintendence of Banks (SIB) but expressed his 
confidence in the leadership of the SIB\'s financial 
intelligence unit (IVE).  He said he would seek to improve 
their anti-money laundering capabilities.  Zapata credited 
Borja with having done some good in his position, such as 
implementing new financial reform legislation and pursuing 
the criminal case against former banker and Portillo 
financier Francisco Alvarado McDonald.  However, Borja\'s 
actions were suspect in other areas, such as allowing the 
failed state mortgage bank (CHN) to absorb failed private 
Banco del Nororiente (BANORO), permitting a cover-up of the 
illegal activities of a friend of Portillo who ran the bank 
(Reftel A).  The friend, Bruno Straga, fled to his native 
Italy and allegedly sold a large Zacapa farm to Portillo for 
about $250.  Zapata mentioned examples of waste in the SIB\'s 
budget and sloppiness in handling sensitive banking 
information as areas where he would look to reform the SIB. 
 
7. (S) Zapata was aware that Borja\'s connections with the 
former administration left his own IVE reluctant to pass 
along to him information regarding particularly sensitive 
cases linked to Portillo or Portillo\'s allies.  Comment:  The 
problem is real.  IVE has been passing information to the 
Embassy for some time that it doesn\'t share with the 
Superintendent.  Most recently, in a meeting the day before 
with EconOff, IVE officials passed along information 
regarding suspicious transactions by former VP Reyes using 
U.S. bank accounts (this information has been relayed through 
appropriate law enforcement channels).  The information was 
provided with the request that the source not be revealed, 
even to others within the SIB.  End Comment. 
 
Lizardo Sosa Insists on Staying Put at the Central Bank 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
8.  (C)  Zapata contrasted Borja\'s willingness to step down 
with the defiant attitude of Central Bank President Lizardo 
Sosa, who vowed to stay on for the rest of his recently 
renewed term despite clear signals from the Berger 
Administration that he would not be included in executive 
branch consultations on policy.  Zapata didn\'t think it would 
be too much of a problem for the Berger government:  the 
Monetary Board controlled monetary policy, and the competent 
professional staff of the Central Bank, led by Vice President 
Mario Garcia Lara, would implement that Board\'s instructions 
whether or not Sosa chose to cooperate. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C)  The SAT was a mess, and Abadio had to go.  Both AID 
and the World Bank stopped working with the organization 
under Abadio\'s tenure, and he methodically removed many of 
its better-trained staff and replaced them with people he 
personally recruited.  He was widely considered the attack 
dog of confrontational former Vice President \"Paco\" Reyes, 
though former Finance Minister Weymann told EconCouns that 
Abadio had his own agenda (presumably of extortion) and was 
beyond anyone\'s control toward the end.  We note that Abadio 
was an early enemy of the FRG administration as Controller 
General until half-way through its term, when he suddenly 
shelved the \"Panama Connection\" case implicating Portillo, 
Reyes and others in offshore money laundering and was 
rewarded shortly after by being named to the more powerful 
SAT.  He is thought to have assiduously collected dirt on 
everyone he can, and we expect he can be very dangerous when 
cornered. 
 
8.  (C)  Zapata was a superb choice for the SIB, where his 
strategic vision and banking knowledge would have served him 
well.  Those same skills will be useful at the SAT, but he 
will also need to be fearless and tough if he intends to get 
corruption and organized crime out of Customs.  We know him 
more as a theorist than an operator, but longtime friends say 
he is actually quite tough and up to the task.  The inability 
of the IVE to share information freely within the SIB or with 
the Public Ministry (Attorney General\'s office) has been a 
serious weakness in Guatemala\'s anti-money laundering 
efforts.  Borja\'s replacement by Zapata is now by the 
wayside, but his replacement will still come about.  Current 
odds seem to favor Edgar Barquin, Borja\'s principal deputy 
and a career SIB official who was instrumental in building 
the IVE.  Barquin seems quite the opposite of Zapata, more an 
operator than a strategist, but he would still be an 
excellent choice. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"13679","2/2/2004 22:44","04GUATEMALA247","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

022244Z Feb 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000247 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ENERGY FOR GARY WARD 
TREASURY FOR OASIA: CHRIS KUSHLIS AND BILL BLOCK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2009 
TAGS: ENRG, EMIN, PGOV, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW MINISTER OF ENERGY AND 
MINES ROBERTO RODRIGUEZ:  ENERGY BACKGROUND AND FRIEND OF 
MARKET ECONOMICS 
 
 
Classified By: EconCouns Steven S. Olson for reason 1.5(d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
1.  (C)  Ambassador called on new Minister of Energy and 
Mines Roberto Gonzalez on January 28.  Gonzalez has strong 
free-market credentials and beliefs, has a background in the 
electric power sector, and shares our views on respecting 
contracts, attracting investment, reducing subsidies, and 
preserving market based regulation.  He appreciated AID\'s 
assistance to date and welcomed its continuation.  Despite a 
general atmosphere of open hostility by the new government to 
its predecessor, he had the grace to recognize the strengths 
of the previous minister and of the regulatory board the 
prior government named (and tried, unsuccessfully, to 
subvert).  End Summary. 
 
New Minister Close to Berger, Free Market Background 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
2.  (SBU)  Ambassador and EconCouns called on new Minister of 
Energy and Mines Roberto GONZALEZ Diez Duran on January 28. 
Gonzalez, 36, was personal aide to President Berger during 
the recent campaign, and his professional and academic 
background is in the electric power sector.  His views are 
decidedly pro-market.  His undergraduate work was at the 
Francisco Marroquin University (where the libertarian bent 
requires study of Austrian economists Mises and Hayek).  He 
has a Masters in Finance from the Universidad Catolica in 
Chile and has studied at the University of Chicago and at the 
Adam Smith Institute in London, where his focus was on 
\"natural monopolies.\"  He has worked as a consultant on power 
sector regulation and pricing and on co-generation at a large 
sugar mill. 
 
Focus on Power, Investment and Cutting Subsidies 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
3.  (SBU)  Ambassador congratulated Rodriguez on recent 
comments to the press concerning the need to respect 
contracts with electrical generators and distribution 
companies.  Rodriguez said that his entire focus was on 
attracting private investment, and one had to start by 
respecting the contracts of existing investors.  He was fully 
aware of the terms of existing power purchase agreements 
(PPAs) and the functioning of the Central American merchant 
market.  He would like to try to lower PPA costs if contracts 
could be renegotiated to the satisfaction of all parties, but 
it was clear to him that the real problem in the price 
structure was the subsidized \"social tariff\" for users of 
less than 300 KWh per month.  (Note:  The IMF has recommended 
the social tariff\'s elimination.) 
 
4.  (SBU)  Rodriguez had told the press that the \"social 
tariff\" subsidy had to be removed or reduced for all but the 
poorest of users, and he had mentioned the concept of 
increasing rates gradually, keeping the existing rate for the 
first 100 KWh/month, a higher rate for the next 100 
KWh/month, and so on up to a flat rate at a level to be 
determined.  The overall effect would be to reduce the cost 
paid by small businesses and larger household consumers by 
requiring the middle class to pay its fair share.  300 KWh 
was simply too high for the social tariff, as it meant that a 
relative handful of small businesses and wealthier households 
bore the burden of a subsidy for the vast majority of 
Guatemalans, while the largest industries were able to 
negotiate competitive rates with the private merchant 
generators.  Market signals were being subverted and not 
conveying the proper incentives to market participants. 
Ambassador commented that all the minister had said coincided 
with our thinking. 
 
5.  (SBU)  Rodriguez said that he had President Berger\'s 
agreement in principle to reduce the social subsidy, but the 
President had asked him to wait 30 or 45 days before acting. 
Comment:  A little delay is probably a good thing.  It 
provides time to make the public case for why reform is 
necessary and allows the government to deliver some positive 
results in its social services agenda, e.g. healthcare, and 
not have rate hikes its first concrete action.  End Comment. 
 
Rodriguez Welcomes AID\'s Assistance 
----------------------------------- 
6.  (SBU)  Rodriguez had just met with AID contractor PA 
Consulting, which had produced a study of pricing and 
regulatory options for the ministry.  He welcomed AID\'s 
assistance and was delighted to hear that AID was willing to 
continue collaborating.  EconCouns noted that Guatemala 
served as the model for regulating the interconnected 
regional energy market and said that it was important that 
the market-oriented regulatory framework in Guatemala not 
fall prey to populist initiatives of the sort the Congress 
had been discussing over the course of the past year. 
 
Regulatory Board and Former Minister Did Well 
--------------------------------------------- 
7.  (C)  The Ambassador asked Rodriguez\'s opinion of the 
national electrical energy regulatory board (CNEE). 
Rodriguez said that the FRG government had interfered with 
the board and forced changes in its membership, but the board 
members had maintained their independence and made decisions 
on sound technical criteria.  He recounted how the FRG had 
forced one member to resign and replaced him with one of its 
congressmen, but the congressman had left after a couple of 
months when he realized he couldn\'t cause any mischief. 
EconCouns commented that we remembered the story exactly the 
same way.  He also congratulated the minister for his 
graciousness in complimenting his predecessor Raul Archila in 
remarks to the press.  Rodriguez said that Archila (not an 
FRG member) was \"a hero\" for protecting the ministry from 
harm from a government that was otherwise a disaster. 
 
Wants to Meet with U.S. Investors in Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- - 
8.  (U)  Rodriguez asked if we could help organize a meeting 
of U.S. energy and mining interests, as he would like to get 
to know them as quickly as possible and hear their concerns. 
Ambassador said we would like to arrange such an event and 
would be back in touch shortly. 
 
Comment 
------- 
9.  (SBU)  Rodriguez is personable, seemed to want to work 
with us closely, and shared our view on virtually everything 
we discussed.  He was not yet up to speed on his mining 
portfolio, though he was reading up on the Glamis Gold Marlin 
project in San Marcos Department (Glamis is headquartered in 
Reno Nevada.  The Marlin site has initial estimated reserves 
of 1.4 million ounces of gold associated with ten times than 
in silver.  Investment is estimated at close to $100 
million.)  The only deterrent to a longer and more detailed 
discussion was the minister\'s insistence on practicing his 
English, which was either not quite as good as he believed or 
hadn\'t been practiced recently.  We anticipate a good and 
fruitful relationship with him (and hope that his English 
comes back or he decides that Spanish is fine). 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"13705","2/3/2004 15:50","04GUATEMALA251","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, DRL/IL, AND EB 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
DOL FOR ILAB:JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EINT, GT 
SUBJECT: ADDRESSING LABOR VIOLATIONS BY US FIRMS: THE 
GALLERY APPAREL CASE 
 
 
1.  Subject:  Since mid-December, a U.S.-owned maquila has 
been closed, throwing up to 800 workers, mainly single 
mothers, out of work after failing to meet a payroll.  The 
GOG has requested USG assistance resolving the workers\' 
claims against the U.S. owners, Robert and Steven Alexander 
of Medley, Florida.  Embassy efforts to encourage dialogue 
between the U.S. owners and their former employees, and 
compliance with Guatemalan labor laws, have been fruitless. 
Coming in the context of GSP review and CAFTA Track Two 
efforts, this case undermines the U.S. interest in promoting 
labor law enforcement in Guatemala.  Embassy appreciates the 
Department\'s efforts to help move this case toward 
resolution.   End Summary. 
 
Facts of the Case 
----------------- 
 
2.  According to legal documents and information gathered 
from worker representatives and U.S.-based owners, these are 
the facts in the case: 
 
--  A maquila factory in Mixco, a municipality adjacent to 
Guatemala City, rented by Gallery Apparel Services, S.A. and 
employing between 650 and 800 workers, was closed by the 
police on December 21, 2003.  Police reportedly intervened to 
quell looting by employees, and continue to guard the 
facility. 
 
-- Gallery Apparel\'s local managers had abandoned the factory 
after missing payment of the workers\' biweekly salary and 
mandated extra month\'s salary on December 16, fearing for 
their safety. 
 
-- In addition, workers were not paid severance before the 
factory was closed, according to worker representatives and 
the GOG. 
 
-- Workers have petitioned the Ministry of Labor, Human 
Rights Ombudsman\'s Office, this Embassy and the Public 
Ministry, requesting assistance to have the company meet its 
legal obligations.  The workers are being assisted by the 
prominent human rights NGO Center for Legal and Human Rights 
(CALDH), which has appealed for support from the Presidential 
Commissioner for Human Rights, Frank LaRue.  (Note:  LaRue 
told LabAtt on January 31 that labor disputes are not within 
his commission\'s mandate.) 
 
-- Gallery Apparel is owned by AmCits Robert Michael 
Alexander (age 45) and Steven Edward Alexander (44) of 
Medley, Florida (tel. 954-624-1934). 
 
-- Gallery Apparel\'s legal representative listed in its 
Mercantile Registry is John Thomas Maitland. 
 
-- The Embassy received a diplomatic note from the Foreign 
Ministry dated January 12, 2004, which attached a request for 
USG collaboration on this case from former Labor Minister 
Victor Moreira.  The note mentioned Maitland by name, and 
listed his address in Florida (11305 N.W. 128th St. Medley, 
Florida 33178, USA).  On January 20, Ambassador Ana Maria 
Dieguez, Director of Migration Affairs at the Foreign 
Ministry, told LabAtt that Maitland is a Canadian citizen but 
renewed the MFA\'s request for USG assistance to resolve the 
complaints against the U.S. owners of Gallery Apparel.  The 
MFA sent a second diplomatic note on January 16 which 
clarified that Maitland is a Canadian but Steven and Robert 
Alexander, the co-owners, are AmCits; the note repeated the 
earlier request for USG assistance.  The Embassy has not yet 
responded to either diplomatic note, pending guidance from 
the Department. 
 
-- On January 9, LabAtt spoke with Mr. Robert Alexander at 
his number in Florida.  He said that he and his brother 
Steven are co-owners of Gallery Apparel, which has operated 
for six years in Guatemala, former under the name 
\"Gringotex.\"   He estimated the number of workers at between 
625-650.  He said times had been hard (a truck had been 
hijacked, an employee fired for embezzling), and the company 
informed workers before December 16 that the company would 
have difficulty making the mandated Christmas bonus payment. 
Mr. Alexander claimed to be a good employer, who won a 
second-place award from VESTEX, the maquila association.  He 
normally visited the factory regularly, but now fears to 
return. 
 
-- According to Mr. Alexander, the day after the December 16 
payroll and bonus was missed, workers took over the factory. 
Management employees walked out of the factory on December 
17.  His local general manager and legal representative, Mr. 
Andres Vielman Rosales, then quit.  Eventually, after a 
committee of workers sold off bolts of fabric and reportedly 
started looting the factory and scuffles broke out, police 
intervened to secure the factory.  Mr. Alexander said he was 
in the process of determining his legal and insurance 
responsibilities and the current condition of the factory, 
which is a rented facility.  He has heard that his sewing 
machines were strewn outside the factory and may be 
irreparably damaged. 
 
-- LabAtt encouraged Mr. Alexander to meet his legal 
obligations to his workers and to contact worker 
representatives, who wish to speak with him.  He suggested 
seeking the assistance of local counsel or VESTEX to help 
communicate with his workers.  Mr. Alexander said he would 
probably be in touch with Guatemalan authorities shortly, 
perhaps through new legal counsel.  He is concerned about 
taking responsibility for his rented facility from the police 
and securing it. 
 
-- Mr. Vielman did not attend a meeting with Labor Ministry 
inspectors on January 19, citing scheduling conflicts.  The 
inspectors cited him to attend a conciliatory panel meeting 
on January 27, and indicated that the Ministry will fine him 
if he does not appear.  When Mr. Vielman did not appear 
personally on January 27, sending a legal representative in 
his place, the MOL inspector cited Mr. Vielman to appear in 
person on February 5. 
 
-- LabAtt met with worker and CALDH representatives on 
January 21; they requested LabAtt assure Robert Alexander 
they would guarantee his safety if he were to return to 
Guatemala to negotiate an amicable resolution of the dispute. 
 LabAtt conveyed this message to Steven Alexander by TelCon 
on January 22.  Alexander did not reveal any intention to do 
so. 
 
-- So far, this case has not entered the courts, since the 
MOL is seeking an amicable resolution.  If that does not 
happen, they will likely impose a fine on Gallery and the 
workers will be free to go to court.  The workers claim they 
would prefer to avoid that if the Alexanders are willing to 
negotiate. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
3.  We are unclear what legal obligations might be 
enforceable in the U.S. in these cases, and not unsympathetic 
to the U.S. owners fears for their security should they 
return to the Guatemala.   Embassy appreciates the 
Department\'s ongoing review of legal options in cases of 
labor violations by U.S. employers abroad, and guidance on 
how to proceed. 
 
4.  It is clearly in the USG interest to send a consistent 
signal on labor rights enforcement.  Encouraging the 
Alexander brothers of Florida to address the complaints of 
their former workers now would advance the USG (and the 
company\'s) interest by resolving the case before it enters 
the tortuous labor justice system.  Experience with past 
cases (e.g. DYMEL, Crowley containers) argues for early 
intervention in labor disputes to prevent delayed justice 
(and escalating costs to the employer).  Anything less risks 
sending an ambiguous signal to the GOG at a moment we are 
pressing for its commitment to enforce labor law in Guatemala. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"13706","2/3/2004 15:51","04GUATEMALA252","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE333935","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, ELAB, KCRM, PREL, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS: U.S. EFFORTS IN GUATEMALA 
 
REF: 03 STATE 333935 
 
1.  Summary:  Following is the Embassy response to Reftel 
request.  End Summary. 
 
Overview of Human Rights and Democracy Environment 
and U.S. Strategy for Improving It 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
2.  Guatemala held free and fair elections in November and 
December of 2003.  While there have been major advances in 
human rights since the end of the civil conflict and signing 
of the Peace Accords in 1996, state institutions charged with 
enforcing the rule of law remain weak and serious human 
rights problems persist.  The U.S. strategy to improve the 
situation is to encourage and support the new government\'s 
efforts to strengthen these institutions, support civil 
society groups promoting human rights, and to support a new 
innovative UN proposal to investigate clandestine groups 
believed to be involved in attacks on human rights workers. 
It is encouraging that since 1996 civil society has blossomed 
in Guatemala and is now a major contributor to the new 
government\'s human rights policies. 
 
U.S. Reponses to Human Rights Abuses Such as Torture and 
Extra-Judicial Killings and Efforts to Strengthen Militaries\' 
Respect for Human Rights 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
3.  The Embassy expressed interest to authorities 
investigating key human rights abuses during the year. 
Authorities were generally cooperative and in several cases 
shifted resources to investigate cases of particular concern. 
 The Ambassador also attended important human rights trials 
and publicly promoted human rights and its defenders on 
several occasions.  From its genesis as a proposal from civil 
society, the Ambassador has championed the proposed UN 
Commission to Investigate Clandestine Groups (CICIACS). 
USAID provided support to NGOs that have formed a \"Coalition 
in Favor of CICIACS.\"  An agreement was signed between the UN 
and the GOG to create the CICIACS on January 7, 2004.  The 
agreement would use international experts to investigate and 
prosecute cases involving links between attacks on human 
rights defenders, organized crime, official corruption, and 
narco-traffickers in Guatemalan courts.  It awaits 
Congressional approval and Constitutional Court review. 
 
4.  When in March 2003 MINUGUA published evidence of the use 
of torture by state agents against three narco-traffickers in 
Rio Hondo, the Ambassador urged the Minister of Government 
and the Minister of Defense to investigate the allegations 
and punish any GOG officers found to be responsible.  The 
ministers agreed to take measures to prevent any recurrence 
of torture, but to our knowledge no action was taken to 
sanction individuals responsible for this incident. 
 
5.  To foster more professional security forces and reduce 
human rights abuses, the Embassy and SOUTHCOM encouraged the 
Defense Ministry to incorporate human rights training into 
the Army\'s Civil Affairs curriculum.  Partly as a result, the 
Minister of Defense opened a human rights office in June 2003 
and provided it with permanent staff.  Members of SOUTHCOM\'s 
Human Rights Division will visit Guatemala in February 2004 
to discuss the GOG\'s implementation of a regional human 
rights initiative.  In 2004, USAID will provide $600k to a 
project to strengthen civilian-military relations, with UNDP. 
 
U.S. Efforts to Strengthen Democracy and the Rule of Law, 
Civil Society, Political Parties, Free and Independent Media, 
and Other Institutions 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
6.  The Embassy fielded approximately 40 official observers 
under the OAS Electoral Observation Mission for the November 
and December 2003 rounds of the general election.  The USG 
provided a total of $2.8 m. for the election, mostly through 
USAID.  USAID is now considering providing technical support 
to the new Congress, and support for the negotiation of 
electoral reforms to increase voter participation. 
 
7.  USAID continued to support ($4.2 m. over three years) 
grassroots human rights promotion, including training local 
human rights promoters, media campaigns, targeted support for 
the Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman (limited training 
and equipment), and support for the Human Rights Movement, a 
coalition of human rights NGOs.  A key Movement leader, Frank 
LaRue, was appointed by President Berger to lead the 
Presidential Human Rights Commission in January 2004.  Under 
this program, USAID also supported with $250k a media and NGO 
campaign to raise public awareness of the recommendations of 
the Historical Clarification Commission, five years after it 
issued its report.  Since 1999, USAID has provided $4.3 m. to 
fund exhumations of clandestine cemeteries dating to the 
civil conflict, and mental health projects for victims. 
USAID also funded negotiations between civil society and the 
government on the creation of a National Reparations Plan, 
which was established to compensate victims of the civil 
conflict. 
8.  To improve the country\'s judicial system, USAID funded 
(approximately $2 m. in 2003, with similar levels of support 
planned for 2004) the expansion of a network of Justice 
Centers to improve access to justice and modernize the 
justice sector by implementing oral debate in pre-trial 
hearings and administrative reforms to promote efficiency and 
transparency in judicial operations.  The Embassy sent 
journalists, government officials and civil society leaders 
on International Visitor Programs in 2003 on topics including 
human rights, democracy and investigative journalism. 
 
U.S. Efforts To Encourage Respect for the Rights of Women, 
Children, Minorities, and People with Disabilities 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
9.  USAID supported the creation of a Presidential Commission 
Against Racism and Discrimination Against Indigenous Groups 
in 2002 under a $250k four-year program.  In 2004, USAID is 
considering providing $50k to the Commission for the 
development of a strategic plan of action and a similar 
amount to a human rights NGO to develop a draft national 
policy against discrimination and racism.  USAID also 
supported a National Indigenous Congress held in August 2003, 
which promoted indigenous political participation through the 
creation of a National Indigenous Assembly, which is 
currently in formation.  The Mission participates in a donor 
dialogue on indigenous issues to prevent duplication of 
efforts. 
 
U.S. Efforts to Promote Religious Freedom 
----------------------------------------- 
 
10.  Religious freedom is generally respected in Guatemala. 
Embassy officers expressed USG support for religious freedom 
while meeting with religious leaders and GOG authorities to 
prepare the annual human rights report and the report on 
international religious freedom. 
 
U.S. Efforts to Strengthen Workers\' Rights 
------------------------------------------ 
 
11.  In 2003, USDOL announced a four-year, $6.7 m. regional 
project to promote labor rights education and strengthen 
labor inspectorates in Central America.   The USG negotiated 
a regional free trade agreement (CAFTA) with Central American 
nations which incorporated labor rights protections.  If 
ratified, it will supersede existing labor conditions under 
the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP).  An inter-agency 
USG delegation conducted bilateral labor consultations in 
May; USTR held hearings on open GSP labor petitions in 
October.  In all these exchanges, USG officials expressed 
concern about the need for the GOG to fully investigate past 
violence against trade union leaders; reform its labor 
justice system; and reinstate workers illegally fired for 
unionizing activities. In November, the Embassy expressed 
concern to the GOG over the potential for anti-union violence 
at a maquila where a new union, the third in the sector, had 
been organized.  The GOG responded quickly and violence was 
avoided.  The GOG successfully encouraged the negotiation of 
collective bargaining agreements at the Choi 
Shin/Cimatextiles plants, which became the first two such 
agreements to take effect in this sector. 
 
U.S. Efforts to Combat Trafficking in Persons 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
12.  Guatemala was rated a Tier II country in the 2003 U.S. 
Trafficking in Persons Report to Congress.  The Embassy and 
G/TIP briefed the GOG on the implications of the report in 
July 2003, and urged the GOG to step up its efforts to 
prevent, prosecute and punish this crime.  In response, the 
GOG formed an inter-institutional group comprised of 
ministries, Congress, the Attorney and Solicitor General\'s 
Offices, and the judiciary, to better coordinate these 
efforts.  At the Embassy\'s urging, the Attorney General 
authorized the creation in 2004 of a new anti-TIP prosecution 
unit in the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Women. 
Embassy DHS worked closely with GOG immigration officials to 
seek victims of TIP in brothels in and near the capital. 
Several under-age victims were found, and arrests made of 
traffickers that remain to be prosecuted.  The Embassy has 
urged the GOG to stiffen sanctions against TIP.  USAID\'s HIV 
program has supported an NGO providing job training to TIP 
victims and is considering supporting a regional TIP victim 
support network of NGOs. 
 
Addendum: USG-funded (over 100K) Human Rights or Democracy 
Programs 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
13.  USAID Electoral Support: 
 
$750 K - TA to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) 
$500 K - Domestic Electoral Observation 
$368 K - International Electoral Observation 
$100 K - Election Monitoring/Assistance 
$300 K - TSE Public Information Campaign 
$200 K - Municipal candidate debates and forums 
$100 K - TA to TSE Magistrates 
$210 K - Health Advocacy (electoral) 
$250 K - Electoral forums and candidate radio interviews 
 
Other USAID Support: 
 
$305 K - Indigenous Projects 
$2 m.  - Justice Modernization Programs 
$4.2 m.  - Human Rights Support to Grassroots Human Rights 
Promotion (for NGOs, media campaigns, support to the Human 
Rights Ombudsman) 
$4.3 m. - Support for exhumations and mental health programs 
HAMILTON 
"
"13711","2/3/2004 21:20","04GUATEMALA258","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/CI  M. BERNIER-TOTH 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO OFFICES OF REPS. CAMP AND DELAHUNT 
ALSO PLEASE PASS TO JOE CUDDIHY AT DHS HQS 
 
MEXICO FOR DHS  OSCAR LUJAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOCI, CVIS, CASC, PREL, OVIP, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR FEBRUARY 4-6 NODEL VISIT OF 
REPRESENTATIVES CAMP AND DELAHUNT 
 
1.  Summary: Your visit, only three weeks after Oscar 
Berger assumed the presidency, will draw fresh 
attention to the emotional issue of international 
adoptions in Guatemala.  Your Guatemalan interlocutors 
will also be anxious to discuss unrelated issues such 
as the rapidly evolving trade relationship, U.S. 
assistance in the war on drugs, the proposed United 
Nations investigative unit against organized crime 
(CICIACS), and protection for Guatemala immigrants in 
the U.S. End Summary. 
 
 
 
The Adoptions Issue 
------------------- 
 
2.  Guatemala has been unable to establish a 
transparent and credible legal system for adoptions. 
Persistent charges of coerced and paid relinquishment 
plague Guatemala\'s current notarial adoption system, 
in which private attorneys represent the biological 
parents, the adopting parents and the child.  Under 
this system, the government has no supervisory role 
during the initial act of relinquishment of the child 
by the birth mother.  After the attorney takes custody 
of the child and matches the child with the adopting 
parents, he presents the case to the Guatemalan and 
U.S. governments for approval.  At this point, it is 
emotionally devastating for the adopting parents if 
the authorities have reason to question the match; it 
is much worse in the instances when they try to 
dissolve it. 
 
3.  In recent years, several countries have suspended 
adoptions, among them Canada, the Netherlands and the 
UK, but the U.S. instituted DNA testing and birth 
mother interviews to continue processing adoptions and 
to try to ensure they are legitimate.  These 
procedures have solved the problem of confirming the 
biological link between the mother and child, but they 
are less reliable in determining the true 
circumstances of the relinquishment. 
 
4.  The Guatemalan government\'s attempt to implement 
the Hague Convention on Intercountry Adoption in 2003 
failed when the nation\'s highest court ruled that 
Guatemala\'s accession to the Convention was 
unconstitutional.  There is now reform legislation 
pending in the Congress, consistent with the 
Convention, which would require the biological mother 
to relinquish the child under the supervision of a 
family court judge and the Department of Social 
Welfare.  A powerful adoption attorney lobby has 
thwarted reform for years, however, and evolving 
alliances in the new Congress mean passage is not a 
sure thing. 
 
5.  We have consistently emphasized the U.S. 
government\'s support for legitimate adoptions in 
Guatemala, our concern for reducing the vulnerability 
of everyone involved to charges of adoption fraud, and 
the U.S. government\'s own commitment to legitimate 
adoptions through implementation in 2005 of the 
international community\'s agreed-upon solution to the 
adoption issue: the Hague Convention on Intercountry 
Adoption. 
 
Trade (CAFTA) and the Economy 
----------------------------- 
 
6.  Former Mayor of Guatemala City and businessman 
Oscar Berger believes in free trade and is a strong 
supporter of U.S.  Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA).  He is concerned, however, that the 
previous government negotiated poorly and/or 
deliberately to the disadvantage of businesses that 
supported his campaign.  Guatemala has the largest and 
most diversified economy in Central America, but it 
also suffers one of the hemisphere\'s highest levels of 
poverty and income inequality.  Most of the poverty is 
concentrated among the rural, indigenous population, 
contributing to social and political tensions. 
Guatemala\'s traditional agricultural sectors have 
fared poorly in recent years, with low world prices 
for coffee undermining what was once the country\'s 
leading export crop.  Low coffee prices have also 
sharply reduced the availability of seasonal jobs that 
many subsistence farmers depend upon for a cash 
income.  On a more positive note, exports of 
nontraditional products such as fruits, vegetables, 
flowers and foliage have shown relatively strong 
growth in recent years, as have exports of apparel 
from the maquila industry and income from tourism. 
Family remittances of nearly $2 billion per year (!) 
have become the country\'s largest source of foreign 
exchange.  Berger understands the potential CAFTA has 
to transform the Guatemala economy through transparent 
rules and dispute resolution mechanisms that have been 
lacking and need to be implemented in order to attract 
investment and create jobs. 
 
Anti-drug Cooperation 
--------------------- 
 
7.  The Berger Administration shares our commitment to 
reducing drug trafficking and consumption and we 
expect them to be good partners in the anti-drug 
effort.  A U.S.-Guatemala binational working group on 
drug trafficking meets regularly to establish goals 
and resolve problems.  Recent advances in cross-border 
anti-drug cooperation with Mexico show promise for 
denying drug traffickers free access to remote areas 
of northern Guatemala.  Working with the U.S., the 
Guatemalan anti-drug police developed operational 
plans for intercepting drug-laden aircraft that 
resulted in the seizure of more than 9,000 kilograms 
of cocaine in 2003.  In the first month of 2004, more 
than 1,000 kilograms were seized. 
 
8.  In spite of these successes, the Guatemalan anti- 
drug effort faces real problems.  Lack of anti- 
conspiracy laws and other law enforcement tools make 
it extremely difficult to arrest trafficking 
organizations\' major players.  Drug-related corruption 
is a constant threat to law enforcement and the 
judiciary.  Lack of in-country resources and U.S. 
prohibitions on assisting the Guatemalan military 
(which ferry the police and prosecutors to an 
interdiction site but do not otherwise participate) 
limit the availability of aircraft and equipment 
needed to interdict drug flights and carry anti-drug 
police to remote landing sites.  Nonetheless, 
Guatemala\'s interdiction effort is much stronger now 
than it was between 2000 and early 2003, and we look 
forward to an increasingly successful anti-drug 
partnership. 
 
CICIACS 
------- 
 
9.  Organized crime, especially in areas such as 
narcotrafficking, alien smuggling, trafficking in 
persons, and contraband, thrives in Guatemala.  On 
January 7, the U.N. and the Guatemalan Government 
agreed to establish CICIACS, a Spanish acronym for the 
Commission on Investigation of Illegal Bodies and 
Clandestine Security Apparatuses, to investigate human 
rights cases, corruption, drugs and organized crime. 
This unprecedented initiative gives the U.N.-run 
commission independent authority to investigate and 
prosecute cases within the Guatemalan judicial system. 
CICIACS enjoys support from both the outgoing and 
incoming administrations, but the new Guatemalan 
Congress must ratify it.  We have also been strong 
supporters of CICIACS.  Although it will cost 10 to 12 
million U.S. dollars per year, CICIACS could well 
obviate a \"Plan Guatemala\" 3 to 5 years from now. 
 
Guatemalan Migrants 
------------------- 
 
10. Top officials in the Berger government are keenly 
interested in President Bush\'s proposed immigration 
reform and are well aware that the U.S. Congress plays 
a key role in defining who may benefit.  We have been 
pointing out that debate on immigration reform in an 
election year will be robust and the initiative will 
be subject to change.  You may be asked about 
extending the special immigration benefits of 
Temporary Protected Status (TPS) to Guatemalans, which 
we have discouraged the Guatemalans from thinking is 
in the cards.  El Salvador and Honduras do benefit 
from TPS and the issue has acquired some importance 
for the Berger government, as Berger visited a number 
of migrant communities in the U.S. during his campaign 
and pledged to press their concerns. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"13733","2/4/2004 18:37","04GUATEMALA272","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - CHRIS KUSHLIS AND BILL BLOCK 
ENERGY FOR GARY WARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2009 
TAGS: ENRG, EMIN, PGOV, PINR, GT 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW MINISTER OF ENERGY AND 
MINES ROBERTO GONZALEZ:  ENERGY BACKGROUND AND FRIEND OF 
MARKET ECONOMICS 
 
Classified By: EconCouns Steven S. Olson for reason 1.5(d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
1.  (C)  Ambassador called on new Minister of Energy and 
Mines Roberto Gonzalez on January 28.  Gonzalez has strong 
free-market credentials and beliefs, has a background in the 
electric power sector, and shares our views on respecting 
contracts, attracting investment, reducing subsidies, and 
preserving market based regulation.  He appreciated AID\'s 
assistance to date and welcomed its continuation.  Despite a 
general atmosphere of open hostility by the new government to 
its predecessor, he had the grace to recognize the strengths 
of the previous minister and of the regulatory board the 
prior government named (and tried, unsuccessfully, to 
subvert).  End Summary. 
 
New Minister Close to Berger, Free Market Background 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
2.  (SBU)  Ambassador and EconCouns called on new Minister of 
Energy and Mines Roberto GONZALEZ Diez Duran on January 28. 
Gonzalez, 36, was personal aide to President Berger during 
the recent campaign, and his professional and academic 
background is in the electric power sector.  His views are 
decidedly pro-market.  His undergraduate work was at the 
Francisco Marroquin University (where the libertarian bent 
requires study of Austrian economists Mises and Hayek).  He 
has a Masters in Finance from the Universidad Catolica in 
Chile and has studied at the University of Chicago and at the 
Adam Smith Institute in London, where his focus was on 
\"natural monopolies.\"  He has worked as a consultant on power 
sector regulation and pricing and on co-generation at a large 
sugar mill. 
 
Focus on Power, Investment and Cutting Subsidies 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
3.  (SBU)  Ambassador congratulated Gonzalez on recent 
comments to the press concerning the need to respect 
contracts with electrical generators and distribution 
companies.  Gonzalez said that his entire focus was on 
attracting private investment, and one had to start by 
respecting the contracts of existing investors.  He was fully 
aware of the terms of existing power purchase agreements 
(PPAs) and the functioning of the Central American merchant 
market.  He would like to try to lower PPA costs if contracts 
could be renegotiated to the satisfaction of all parties, but 
it was clear to him that the real problem in the price 
structure was the subsidized \"social tariff\" for users of 
less than 300 KWh per month.  (Note:  The IMF has recommended 
the social tariff\'s elimination.) 
 
4.  (SBU)  Gonzalez had told the press that the \"social 
tariff\" subsidy had to be removed or reduced for all but the 
poorest of users, and he had mentioned the concept of 
increasing rates gradually, keeping the existing rate for the 
first 100 KWh/month, a higher rate for the next 100 
KWh/month, and so on up to a flat rate at a level to be 
determined.  The overall effect would be to reduce the cost 
paid by small businesses and larger household consumers by 
requiring the middle class to pay its fair share.  300 KWh 
was simply too high for the social tariff, as it meant that a 
relative handful of small businesses and wealthier households 
bore the burden of a subsidy for the vast majority of 
Guatemalans, while the largest industries were able to 
negotiate competitive rates with the private merchant 
generators.  Market signals were being subverted and not 
conveying the proper incentives to market participants. 
Ambassador commented that all the minister had said coincided 
with our thinking. 
 
5.  (SBU)  Gonzalez said that he had President Berger\'s 
agreement in principle to reduce the social subsidy, but the 
President had asked him to wait 30 or 45 days before acting. 
Comment:  A little delay is probably a good thing.  It 
provides time to make the public case for why reform is 
necessary and allows the government to deliver some positive 
results in its social services agenda, e.g. healthcare, and 
not have rate hikes its first concrete action.  End Comment. 
 
Gonzalez Welcomes AID\'s Assistance 
----------------------------------- 
6.  (SBU)  Gonzalez had just met with AID contractor PA 
Consulting, which had produced a study of pricing and 
regulatory options for the ministry.  He welcomed AID\'s 
assistance and was delighted to hear that AID was willing to 
continue collaborating.  EconCouns noted that Guatemala 
served as the model for regulating the interconnected 
regional energy market and said that it was important that 
the market-oriented regulatory framework in Guatemala not 
fall prey to populist initiatives of the sort the Congress 
had been discussing over the course of the past year. 
 
Regulatory Board and Former Minister Did Well 
--------------------------------------------- 
7.  (C)  The Ambassador asked Gonzalez\'s opinion of the 
national electrical energy regulatory board (CNEE).  Gonzalez 
said that the FRG government had interfered with the board 
and forced changes in its membership, but the board members 
had maintained their independence and made decisions on sound 
technical criteria.  He recounted how the FRG had forced one 
member to resign and replaced him with one of its 
congressmen, but the congressman had left after a couple of 
months when he realized he couldn\'t cause any mischief. 
EconCouns commented that we remembered the story exactly the 
same way.  He also congratulated the minister for his 
graciousness in complimenting his predecessor Raul Archila in 
remarks to the press.  Gonzalez said that Archila (not an FRG 
member) was \"a hero\" for protecting the ministry from harm 
from a government that was otherwise a disaster. 
 
Wants to Meet with U.S. Investors in Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- - 
8.  (U)  Gonzalez asked if we could help organize a meeting 
of U.S. energy and mining interests, as he would like to get 
to know them as quickly as possible and hear their concerns. 
Ambassador said we would like to arrange such an event and 
would be back in touch shortly. 
 
Comment 
------- 
9.  (SBU)  Gonzalez is personable, seemed to want to work 
with us closely, and shared our view on virtually everything 
we discussed.  He was not yet up to speed on his mining 
portfolio, though he was reading up on the Glamis Gold Marlin 
project in San Marcos Department (Glamis is headquartered in 
Reno Nevada.  The Marlin site has initial estimated reserves 
of 1.4 million ounces of gold associated with ten times that 
of silver.  Investment is estimated at close to $100 
million.)  The only deterrent to a longer and more detailed 
discussion was the minister\'s insistence on practicing his 
English, which was either not quite as good as he believed or 
hadn\'t been practiced recently.  We anticipate a good and 
fruitful relationship with him (and hope that his English 
comes back or he decides that Spanish is fine). 
HAMILTON 
"
"13825","2/10/2004 0:07","04GUATEMALA305","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA207","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000305 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA: CHRIS KUSHLIS AND BILL BLOCK 
USTR FOR REGINA VARGO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2009 
TAGS: ECIN, ETRD, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER BRIZ DESCRIBES AMBITIOUS AGENDA 
FOR REGIONAL CUSTOMS UNION, BEGINNING WITH EL SALVADOR 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 207 
 
Classified By: EconCouns Steven S. Olson for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
1.  (C)  EconCouns and an AID delegation called on Foreign 
Minister Briz Feb. 6 to discuss integration.  Briz confirmed 
that a customs union, beginning with El Salvador, was a top 
priority of President Berger.  He noted that El Salvador and 
Guatemala already had harmonized 96% of their external 
tariffs and that Nicaragua and Honduras were close behind. 
Costa Rica was \"something else\" to be taken up later. 
Guatemala is withdrawing immigration controls from the 
Salvadoran border unilaterally.  Briz said the biggest 
problem would be with products where tariff phase-out 
schedules differed under CAFTA (read:  beer).  He said El 
Salvador\'s President Flores wanted to finish before leaving 
office, but Econ Minster Lacayo was opposed.  Deciding how to 
share revenues collected on the periphery was easier than it 
had been made to appear, as businesses would report the 
proper jurisdiction in order to access tax credits or 
deductions.  He wants discretion taken away from customs and 
was interested in our concerns over noncompliance with the 
WTO customs valuation agreement and SIECA\'s draft of regional 
contraband regulations.  He supports contracting customs 
services to an outside firm and emphasized the importance of 
removing internal customs controls to eliminating corruption 
and organized crime.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U)  EconCouns accompanied an AID delegation during a 
Feb. 6 call on Foreign Minister Jorge Briz.  AID had sought 
the meeting to review Guatemala\'s plans and assistance needs 
for the coming years in the area of Central American regional 
integration.  EconCouns sought to learn more concerning 
recent statements by President Berger and his cabinet 
(reftel) on Guatemala\'s desire to open its borders with El 
Salvador within 90 days, with Honduras and Nicaragua to 
follow when ready.  The press had just announced Guatemalan 
plans to remove its immigration officials unilaterally and 
immediately from its borders with El Salvador.  (Note:  This 
cable does not cover discussion of how AID\'s regional program 
could best interface with Guatemalan priorities.) 
 
Customs Union a Top Priority 
---------------------------- 
3.  (C)  Briz confirmed that building a customs union was 
among Berger\'s top priorities, although it would take a 
little longer than the 90 days Berger announced.  He said 
that El Salvador and Guatemala already applied the same 
common external tariff on 96% of all items, and Honduras and 
Nicaragua were in the 90%-92% range.  Costa Rica was 
\"something else,\" and not an immediate priority like the 
others but an eventual partner in the scheme.  Most of the 
products not yet harmonized could be with a minimum of 
political will.  Sugar was still complicated on the 
Salvadoran side, but it could be resolved.  Coffee was \"not a 
problem.\"  He said that the \"only real problems\" were ones 
created by differing tariff rate reduction schedules 
negotiated in the CAFTA, and he said he assumed that 
EconCouns knew what he meant (Comment:  Beer, where Guatemala 
gave immediate access at the very end of the negotiation, to 
the surprise and consternation of many (reftel).  End 
Comment.)  He said it would make a mess of internal efforts 
to create the customs union if there were large volumes of 
internal trade of foreign goods that customs union members 
taxed differently. 
 
Little Risk in Removing Immigration Controls 
-------------------------------------------- 
4.  (C)  Briz said that removing immigration from the borders 
with El Salvador posed no real risks.  He said that 
Salvadoran controls over arrivals from third countries were 
much better than anything Guatemala had on its land borders 
with El Salvador.  The Guatemalan system on the land borders 
was a mess and would not detect anyone from outside the 
region who had made it past the Salvadorans.  There was no 
real interest in controlling Salvadorans, particularly as 
integration was what the President wanted. 
 
Flores Wants a Legacy; Lacayo Not Enthusiastic 
--------------------------------------------- - 
5.  (C)  Briz said that Salvadoran President Flores was eager 
to move ahead, telling Berger emphatically that he wanted the 
custom union on his watch, \"not Tony Saca\'s.\"  EconCouns said 
he\'d heard that not everyone was so enthusiastic.  Briz 
responded that (Salvadoran Minister of Economy Miguel) 
\"Lacayo is against it, for some reason.\" 
 
Distributing Revenues Easier than it Seems 
------------------------------------------ 
6.  (SBU)  EconCouns commented that previous talks within the 
regional economic integration body SIECA reportedly ran into 
serious problems over how to distribute among members the 
taxes collected when goods entered the customs union\'s 
periphery.  How would that be resolved?  Briz said it would 
be much easier than people had thought, as it would rely on 
businesses rather than customs officials to decide. 
Businesses knew in what jurisdiction they needed tax 
deductions and/or value added tax credits to offset income or 
taxes received on their sales, and they would have every 
incentive to declare that jurisdiction when they imported a 
product or bought it from a wholesaler. 
 
Combating Corruption by Eliminating Customs 
-------------------------------------------- 
7.  (C)  Briz added that customs officials and the organized 
crime figures who controlled them were the principal sources 
of corruption in the country.  That is why internal borders 
had to go and external borders had to be simplified as much 
as possible.  He said there was simply too much discretion 
given to bureaucrats, and it had to be eliminated.  He was 
aware of arbitrary valuation of goods by customs officials 
but not that Guatemala was obliged to do away with such 
practices as part of the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement.  He 
seemed delighted when EconCouns told him that there was an 
international obligation, and he asked his staff to follow 
up. 
 
Integration Isn\'t Bureaucratization 
----------------------------------- 
8.  (C)  EconCouns commented that there were other areas 
where SIECA\'s work seemed to be creating more problems than 
solutions.  AID Deputy Director added that the USG was 
looking for efficiency and best practices, not harmonization 
at the level of the country with worst practices.  EconCouns 
described draft regional contraband legislation that 
decriminalized contraband of value less than $100,000 per 
incident, a de minimis level far higher than contained in any 
country\'s current regulations.  Briz responded, \"That\'s just 
about everything.\"  The draft also called for all confiscated 
merchandise to be auctioned to the public, including pirated 
goods and pharmaceutical products that couldn\'t meet national 
health standards.  Briz shook his head knowingly and asked if 
we could get him a copy of the draft.  He commented, 
\"Integration shouldn\'t mean bureaucratization.\" 
 
Best Solution is to Privatize Customs 
------------------------------------- 
9.  (C)  Briz said that he thought the best solution for a 
customs union would be to contract customs inspection and 
collection to a single private company for all of the union\'s 
members.  The current system was simply too entrenched and 
penetrated by organized crime.  If there was a reason for El 
Salvador to be reluctant to open its internal border with 
Guatemala, it was because Guatemala\'s corruption and 
contraband had become a problem for them. 
 
Comment 
------- 
10.  (C)  The talk is revolutionary.  It also makes a lot of 
sense, but that means less, politically, than it should.  We 
have known Jorge Briz well as the outspoken President of the 
Chamber of Commerce from days when he was one of the most 
acerbic critics of the FRG government and its ties to 
organized crime.  He led the successful revolt against 
raising taxes in August 2001 on grounds that the government 
would simply steal them, and he was the target of thousands 
of anonymous trash-talk flyers allegedly printed at the 
government\'s print shop on orders from then Vice President 
Reyes.  (Minugua investigated and found evidence to back the 
allegations, but Reyes successfully invoked his immunity and 
blocked any further action.)  Briz\'s contempt for borders and 
Guatemala\'s corrupt customs apparatus is something he, a 
businessman, feels personally and passionately.  It\'s not 
something he picked up from reading about trade theory or 
political science.  It\'s going to take a little \"fire in the 
belly\" and pragmatic entrepreneurial vision to get 
integration moving after decades of studying it in places 
like SIECA.  Briz and Berger make it sound simple, and if 
only it were, but it will take a tremendous effort on many 
people\'s part to develop the leadership and follow-through 
necessary to move from words to a functioning customs union. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13855","2/10/2004 17:12","04GUATEMALA317","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 GUATEMALA 000317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EAID, MOPS, KTIA, ETRD, KCOR, PHUM, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: WHA A/S ROGER NORIEGA\'S FEBRUARY 3-5 VISIT TO 
GUATEMALA 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
1. (C) During a February 3-5 visit to Guatemala, WHA 
Assistant Secretary Roger Noriega met with President Oscar 
Berger and senior members of his government to discuss the 
full range of bilateral issues.  A/S Noriega highlighted the 
importance the Bush Administration places on CAFTA as a means 
of generating economic growth and job creation in Central 
America.  He secured commitments from President Berger to 
restart Mayan Jaguar counter-drug joint exercises, to give 
prompt consideration to an Article 98 Agreement, and to take 
concrete action on TIP and GSP concerns.  Berger said he 
would \"do the right thing\" in support of Cuban human rights 
at the UNCHR.  The senior GOG officials took on board USG 
concerns on adoptions, and said the Berger government will 
throw its weight behind the creation of CICIACS.  Berger and 
his ministers discussed addressing a growing fiscal deficit 
and their plans for a radical reduction in the military, and 
sought our help on the latter.  Berger also pressed for 
greater protection for illegal Guatemalan migrants in the 
U.S., TPS, concretely.  In meetings with Congressional 
leaders and a subsequent reception with government, 
opposition and civil society representatives, A/S Noriega 
said that the controversial decision by the Bush 
Administration to negotiate CAFTA and promote a major 
immigration reform during an election year was evidence of 
the importance we assign to our neighbors in the region.  The 
extremely cordial reception by Berger and his team, and the 
promises of concrete cooperation made it clear that the new 
government places a high value on its relationship with us. 
End summary. 
 
2.  (U) WHA Assistant Secretary Roger Noriega and Executive 
Assistant Bruce Friedman visited Guatemala February 3-5 for 
meetings with newly elected President Oscar Berger, Vice 
President Eduardo Stein, the Economic and Security Cabinets, 
President of Congress Rolando Morales and a broad range of 
opposition, private sector and civil society leaders.  A/S 
Noriega was accompanied by Ambassador Hamilton, DCM Wharton 
and Embassy officers to all meetings. 
 
Foreign Minister Briz on CAFTA, migrants, Article 98 and more 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
3. (C) At a breakfast at the Residence with Foreign Minister 
Jorge Briz, Vice Minister Marta Altoaguirre and Vice Minister 
Carlos Martinez, Assistant Secretary Noriega expressed our 
satisfaction with the conclusion of CAFTA negotiations and 
said that, while specific industries in both the U.S. and 
Guatemala had some reservations, the agreement has the 
potential for transforming Central America by attracting 
investment, generating economic growth and creating jobs. 
A/S Noriega and the Ambassador urged the Guatemalans (who 
remain disappointed over CAFTA\'s treatment of beer) to view 
the agreement in terms of its overall positive impact on both 
economies.  A/S Noriega noted that some \"adjustments\" had 
been made by the US to address the new government\'s concerns 
over beef, pork and sugar, but said that other concessions 
were politically unsaleable to US industries that would have 
influence over Congressional ratification.  Briz acknowledged 
the historic opportunity CAFTA represents and said the Berger 
government supports the agreement, despite lingering concerns 
that the Portillo government might have negotiated in bad 
faith. 
 
4. (C) Briz said that migrant issues would be very important 
to the Berger government, commenting that Berger met with 
Guatemalan migrants in the US during the campaign and that 
remittances from those migrants -- $2 billion in 2003 -- were 
underpinning the Guatemalan economy.  Briz asked that the US 
consider extending TPS benefits to Guatemalans, similar to 
those enjoyed by nationals of El Salvador, Honduras and 
Nicaragua.  A/S Noriega replied that President Bush shares 
the priority Berger attaches to migrant issues, and said that 
the President\'s new initiative on immigration is designed to 
address exactly the same problems affecting Guatemalan 
illegal migrants that the GOG wants to resolve.  He urged the 
GOG to participate in the public debate of this proposal in 
the United States, and to seek to use this mechanism -- not 
TPS -- to address the concerns of Guatemala migrants in the 
US. 
 
5. (C) A/S Noriega explained to Foreign Minister Briz the 
importance we attach to concluding an Article 98 Agreement 
with Guatemala, and urged the new government to make this a 
high priority.  Briz said that the GOG is reviewing the 
proposed texts the Ambassador had given him in January, and 
said the GOG \"has the will to move this forward\" in the short 
term. 
 
6. (C) On the Cuba human rights resolution at the upcoming 
UNCHR session, A/S Noriega detailed the significant 
deterioration of human rights in Cuba during 2003, and said 
that as a matter of moral principle it was important that the 
countries of the hemisphere take the lead along with the EU 
in sponsoring a resolution.  Briz acknowledged that the 
arrest of dissidents and the execution of the \"hijackers\" 
represented a significant provocation.  He said that 
President Berger had told the Cuban Ambassador that he is 
committed to supporting \"freedom\" everywhere, and implied to 
us that Guatemala would be helpful to the United States on 
the Cuba resolution at the UNCHR. 
 
7. (C) A/S Noriega told Briz that it is important that the 
new government take concrete action to address our GSP and 
TIP concerns early in its administration.  Briz said that the 
Foreign Ministry was already coordinating with the Embassy to 
convoke the inter-agency working groups on these matters.  On 
CICIACS, A/S Noriega said the USG is prepared to provide 
support, and inquired into the status of setting up the UN 
Mission.  Briz said that Congress had sent the proposal for 
an opinion to the Constitutional Court, and said that 
President Berger firmly supports CICIACS.  Briz noted that 
some \"conservative sectors\" of the country were beginning to 
express opposition to the Mission, but said Berger is 
convinced there is no better mechanism for taking on 
organized crime. 
 
Security Cabinet on Reducing the Military and Article 98 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
8. (C) A/S Noriega met with Commissioner for National 
Security Otto Perez Molina, Minister of Defense Cesar Augusto 
Mendez Pinelo and Minister of Government Arturo Soto at the 
\"Casa Presidencial.\" Perez Molina outlined the Berger 
government\'s security priorities, which are: 1) restructuring 
the military: reducing the force by 10,000-14,000 officers 
and troops, increasing budget transparency, closing bases and 
professionalization; 2) strengthening police: increasing 
budget, improving training and discipline, cleaning up 
corruption; and 3) creating a civilian intelligence 
capability: managed by the SAE, gradually taking over from 
the military D-2, leaving the D-2 with solely military 
missions.  Berger has temporarily ordered army troops to 
support police units in areas where gangs have intimidated 
the local police, but their role will be one strictly of 
support. 
 
9. (C) A/S Noriega commented that the rule of law is the 
foundation of democratic society, and that Guatemala is 
facing some serious challenges in that regard. The United 
States is prepared to help, but we will need new authorities 
before we can engage in assistance to the military.  A/S 
Noriega told the security team that conclusion of an Article 
98 Agreement is a crucial step to maintaining even the 
limited military-to-military engagement we have now, and 
urged them to weigh-in in favor of this agreement.  The 
Ambassador told the MOG that USAID is contracting a company 
to help ministries conduct internal audits to detect possible 
areas of inefficiency and corruption, and offered to provide 
this support to the MOG (the Minister enthusiastically 
accepting).  He also noted that the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) has approved a $20 million support 
program for security reform (non-military), and urged the 
Minister of Government to take advantage of this program. 
 
10. (C) The security ministers complained of inheriting 
ministries that had no resources.  The Minister of Government 
said that the previous administration had left only 30 cents 
in the checking account of the Immigration Department.  The 
Minister of Defense said that at least one budget 
supplemental authorized by Congress in 2003 for 225 million 
quetzales (roughly $28 million) never reached the military 
and was probably stolen (Note: President Berger later told us 
that he heard from a source in the Military that the money 
was taken in cash by President Portillo, and changed into 
dollars with the complicity of someone from the Central Bank. 
End note). 
 
Economic Cabinet on CAFTA and the Looming Fiscal Deficit 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
11. (C) A/S Noriega met with members of the Economic Cabinet, 
including Presidential Coordinator for the Plan of Government 
Richard Aitkenhead, Presidential Coordinator for Investment 
and Competitiveness Miguel Fernandez, Finance Minister Maria 
Antonieta Del Cid de Bonilla, Central Bank Vice President 
Mario Garcia Lara, and Secretary of Planning Hugo Eduardo 
Beteta Mendez-Ruiz.  Bonilla made a presentation on the GOG\'s 
economic policy priorities, which have as their foundation 
probity, transparency and austerity.  The priorities 
included: poverty reduction; decentralization and 
participation; political reform of the state to include 
respect for human rights, strengthening the rule of law, and 
improving efficiency in public administration; and an 
aggressive international strategy of trade, investment and 
tourism promotion.  \"Pillars\" of the plan include:  social 
investment in education, healthcare, nutrition and housing, 
with emphasis on the most vulnerable groups; \"integral 
security\" through restructuring national security 
institutions, better coordination among them, and weeding out 
unsuitable personnel; and creating conditions for improved 
production and competitiveness via conservative macroeconomic 
management, reviving the Fiscal Pact and complying with the 
Peace Accords, better tax administration, prioritization of 
the budget toward social investment and basic infrastructure, 
strengthening the banking system and moving forward as 
quickly as possible with the Central American Customs Union. 
 
12. (C) A/S Noriega congratulated the economic team for the 
scope and ambition of its plan, noting that it covered the 
areas needed for Guatemala to take advantage of the 
tremendous opportunity offered by CAFTA.  He commented that 
Mexico had lost a half million jobs, principally to China, 
and would have been far better off if it had prepared for 
free trade with a plan such as Guatemala\'s.  He said that the 
Guatemalan focus on transparency and good governance was 
essential if CAFTA was to work to Guatemala\'s benefit as 
President Bush intended.  It was also a prerequisite for 
participation in the Millennium Challenge Account.  He noted, 
however, that Guatemala had to bring its own resources to the 
efforts and that, while he was not known as a fan of taxes or 
big government, Guatemala was not doing enough to the raise 
revenues it needed. 
 
13. (C) Fernandez declared that, at heart, imposing the rule 
of law was the cornerstone of the government\'s plant for 
attracting trade and investment.  Aitkenhead agreed with A/S 
Noriega that more tax revenues, and not just austerity, were 
needed to meet social investment targets.  He observed that a 
culture of paying taxes was part of the rule of law.  He 
briefly described the history of the Fiscal Pact, which had 
been negotiated with 650 civil society groups, and recalled 
that the FRG Administration had deliberately abandoned it. 
He said that the Fiscal Pact target of current tax receipts 
equivalent to at least 12% of GDP remained the goal. 
President Berger would be convoking civil society the 
following week to resuscitate the Pact, amending it if 
needed.  Aitkenhead said that the reviving the Fiscal Pact 
would be the economic cabinet\'s top priority in the new 
Congress. 
 
14. (C) Fernandez added that establishment of a customs union 
was a \"must\" for President Berger.  Guatemala wanted to start 
with El Salvador and Honduras, which he believed were ready 
to join in moving quickly.  Aitkenhead said that he hoped 
CAFTA could be used to prod faster action on integration, but 
he said he worried that different schedules for phasing out 
tariffs on certain products could prevent the removal of 
internal border controls.  He wondered if the USG would be 
willing to reopen only those areas in the CAFTA where 
different treatment might cause problems for starting the 
customs union.  Econ Counselor said he thought USTR would 
probably be delighted if countries wanted to phase out 
tariffs more quickly in order to harmonize with their 
neighbors.  Aitkenhead, laughing, said that wasn\'t exactly 
what he was thinking.  He took the point, emphasized by the 
Ambassador, that the focus for now had to be on ratifying 
what was negotiated rather than identifying problems that may 
or may not arise down the road.  A/S Noriega added that 
Guatemala was the one country that had yet to be heard in 
Washington as delighted and excited about the treaty. 
Aitkenhead confirmed that Guatemala was all in favor of 
ratification and agreed to look at spreading the word more 
aggressively.  (Comment:  We suspect that beer is at the 
heart of the argument for allowing \"harmonization\" of tariff 
phase-outs to pave the way for a customs union.  We expected 
to hear more direct pleas for help on beer, which the former 
government is seen to have \"given away\" as a final act 
vengeance against political enemies.  Aitkenhead\'s more 
subtle approach is an encouraging sign that the GOG is 
realizing that it has done what it can and is preparing to 
move on. End comment.) 
 
15. (C) Bonilla described a difficult fiscal outlook for 
2004.  She outlined how Congress had failed to pass a budget, 
freezing spending at 2003 budget levels, while the 
Constitutional Court had taken away an important part of the 
tax base, the asset-based IEMA.  She said that 2003 central 
government budget as drafted would allow a deficit of 3.2% of 
GDP, but the loss of the IEMA tax would raise the deficit to 
4.7%, which was unacceptable.  She said that the deficit 
would need to be brought down through austerity and tax 
reform to about 2% of GDP, at the same time while meeting the 
Fiscal Pact\'s capital investment target of 4% of GDP.  She 
noted that the previous government had claimed to have 
exceeded the 4%, but it had done so only by improperly 
categorizing payments to former militias (ex-PACs) and 
deposit insurance contributions as \"investments.\" 
 
16. (C) A/S Noriega commented that the new government, with 
its focus on good governance and open markets, had come to 
office at an especially propitious moment.  CAFTA will give a 
boost to those who can make use of it, and the MCA was 
conceived for governments that were forward looking and 
welcomed trade and private investment.  He said it was hard 
to overstate how deeply ingrained Guatemala\'s negative 
international image had become, and he encouraged the GOG to 
get to Washington and let the world know that a new Guatemala 
had emerged. 
 
Berger Asks for Help with Military Reduction, Migrants and 
CAFTA 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
17. (U) President Oscar Berger hosted a lunch for A/S 
Noriega, the Ambassador, DCM, Executive Assistant Friedman 
and Polcouns at the \"Casa Presidencial\" on February 4.  Also 
in attendance were Vice President Stein, Foreign Minister 
Briz, Executive Secretary of the Presidency Eduardo Gonzalez, 
and the President\'s Private Secretary Alfredo Vila. 
 
18. (C) A/S Noriega opened the meeting by telling Berger that 
his election and the selection of his team had created great 
expectations in Guatemala and in Washington.  Guatemala has 
changed dramatically in the past twenty years, and again in 
the past two weeks (note: since Berger took office).  CAFTA, 
the rise in remittances from Guatemalans abroad, the Bush 
immigration initiative and the great interest of the White 
House in Latin America make this a auspicious time for a 
progressive government to be assuming power in Guatemala. 
A/S Noriega said the United States wants to work with the new 
government to take advantage of this unparalleled opportunity 
to foment economic growth and the strengthening of democratic 
institutions and human rights. 
 
19. (C) President Berger welcomed the Assistant Secretary\'s 
visit and said his government will make a priority of 
strengthening bilateral relations \"which suffered under 
Portillo.\"  He said he would soon be sending Vice President 
Stein to Washington to lobby Congress for funding for his 
bold proposal to greatly reduce the military (price tag: one 
billion quetzales or $125 million), to lift the prohibitions 
on US military assistance, to provide increased funds for 
counter-narcotics programs, and to ratify CAFTA.  Berger 
continued to express interest in securing better protections 
for Guatemalan beer in the CAFTA agreement, but acknowledged 
that the agreement, as it stands, will do a lot to generate 
economic growth in Guatemala.  Berger said that Stein would 
also use his visit to Washington to explore ways of securing 
TPS-like protections for Guatemalan illegal aliens, possibly 
in the context of President Bush\'s immigration initiative. 
A/S Noriega told Berger that reducing the military was a 
laudable goal not only for budgetary purposes, but also for 
modernizing the state.  He cautioned Berger to have low 
expectations of foreign financing for such a reduction, 
however, and urged him to explore financing it in part by 
selling off military properties.  The Ambassador offered to 
bring a team of experts to Guatemala to provide Berger with 
advice on divesting military properties. 
 
20. (C) President Berger asked about the status of US law 
enforcement investigations into possible money laundering by 
senior officials of the Portillo administration.  The 
Ambassador promised to arrange for Berger to meet with the 
investigators for a briefing (Comment: This is very important 
to Berger, who has asked about it twice earlier when the 
Ambassador had seen him at other events. End comment). 
 
21. (C) In response to the Assistant Secretary\'s pitch on 
Article 98, Berger said that he was awaiting a recommendation 
from the Foreign Ministry, but said he did not anticipate a 
problem.  Berger said he firmly supports the creation of 
CICIACS, and hopes it will be on the ground in coming months. 
 After discussing the important contribution 600 Cuban 
medical doctors make to rural medicine in Guatemala, Berger 
said that he had, nonetheless, already informed the Cuban 
Ambassador that he would not compromise his democratic values 
(i.e. support for the Cuba human rights resolution at the 
UNCHR) in exchange for the doctors.  He said, \"don\'t worry. 
We will be on the right side on this.\" 
 
22. (C) Over drinks at the Residence that evening, Vice 
President Stein told A/S Noriega and the Ambassador that 
Guatemala will ultimately be helpful on the Cuba resolution 
at the UNCHR, but that with the government just getting off 
the ground (and with opposition from the human rights NGO\'s 
to the Cuba resolution), it would be difficult for Guatemala 
to play a leadership role on a draft resolution.  The 
Ambassador asked that, notwithstanding their desire to keep a 
low profile for now, they give serious consideration to 
cosponsoring the resolution. 
 
President of Congress Supports Mayan Jaguar Legislation 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
23. (C) In a courtesy call on President of Congress Rolando 
Morales and members of the Congressional leadership board, 
A/S Noriega said that his time working in the US legislative 
branch had convinced him of the critical role Congress plays 
in guaranteeing governability.  He congratulated Morales for 
the governability pact reached between President Berger\'s 
GANA coalition, Morales\' UNE party and the PAN to ensure 
agreement on a basic legislative agenda.  A/S Noriega told 
Morales that he had just met with the Economic Cabinet, and 
that they had outlined a bold plan for jump-starting economic 
growth and reducing the fiscal deficit, and expressed hope 
that Congress would be able to support this important 
initiative. 
 
24. (C) Morales said that he was convinced that Guatemala 
would become a narco-state if it were not for foreign 
assistance to fight the war on drugs.  He said that he 
supports extension of legislation authorizing the Mayan 
Jaguar counter-drug joint exercises, and will take expedited 
action on the proposal once it is received from the 
Executive.  Other members of the leadership board similarly 
expressed support for renewing Mayan Jaguar.  Several of the 
legislators voiced concern about the potential negative 
effects of CAFTA on specific economic sectors, but all agreed 
that overall CAFTA will spur job creation and generate 
economic growth. 
 
25. (C) A/S Noriega urged the legislators to pass 
Hague-consistent adoption legislation, and noted that it is 
extremely important that language in the new law permit 
completing old cases under the old law during the transition, 
so that already begun cases don\'t fall into a legal limbo 
with the enacting of a new law.  The legislators took the 
point, and said that the new adoption law had gone through 
its first reading that very morning. 
 
Meeting Civil Society 
--------------------- 
26. (C) On the evening of February 4, A/S attended a 
reception at the Residence with a large cross-section of 
representatives of civil society organizations, opposition 
political parties, senior GOG officials and the private 
sector.  In private conversations and in brief public 
remarks, A/S Noriega urged the Guatemalans to work together 
to take advantage of the opportunities that CAFTA, the 
President\'s immigration initiative and CICIACS offer for 
generating real and lasting change in Guatemala. 
 
Comment 
------- 
27. (C) Assistant Secretary Noriega\'s visit was interpreted 
by President Berger and his team as a sign of our public 
embrace of the new government, and of a shared desire for a 
closer bilateral relationship.  It came at a time of great 
public expectations of the Berger government, and highlighted 
for Berger and his ministers the importance of seizing the 
day on CAFTA and other critical areas that can\'t be ignored. 
 
28. (U) This cable was cleared by A/S Roger Noriega. 
HAMILTON 
"
"13972","2/13/2004 17:03","04GUATEMALA355","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA317|04STATE20401","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPA, DRL, AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KDEM, CU, GT, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON CUBA UNCHR RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 20401 
     B. GUATEMALA 317 
 
Classified By: Poloff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador Carla Rodriguez, Director General for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry, called a 
meeting with Poloffs on February 11 to discuss the Cuba 
Resolution at the 60th CHR.  This is the first time in our 
collective memory that the GOG has reached out to us on the 
Cuba resolution.  Rodriguez wanted to know if other countries 
in the region, mentioning Costa Rica and Peru specifically, 
had made decisions about sponsoring the resolution.  We 
shared our understanding that numerous countries were 
considering sponsorship, and urged the GOG to cosponsor. 
Rodriguez implied that being able to place Guatemala in the 
middle of a broader regional consensus on the Cuba resolution 
would make it easier for the GOG to sell a favorable decision 
on cosponsorhip to its domestic critics. 
 
2. (C) A/S Noriega discussed the issue at the highest levels 
of the GOG during his February 3-5 visit (ref B).  As a 
result, President Berger committed to \"do the right thing.\" 
Rodriguez stressed that no policy decisions have been made 
yet and repeated her appeal for information on the decisions 
of regional neighbors.  PolCouns reminded Rodriguez that the 
resolution would be more effective coming from Latin America, 
and that the U.S. and others are prepared to use all of our 
influence to lobby on behalf of the resolution. 
 
3. (C) Turning to our non-paper (reftel), which we had 
relayed to Rodriguez in advance of A/S Noriega\'s visit, 
Rodriguez pointed out that the Commission had last year 
rejected Costa Rica\'s amendment which called attention to the 
plight of the 75 detained activists.  The problem with the 
Commission is its composition, Rodriguez said, adding that 
supporters of the resolution last year had ultimately decided 
that it would be counterproductive to insist on an strong 
(read accurate) resolution against Cuba that would fail, 
allowing Cuba to claim victory. 
 
4. (C) Comment and action request: The MFA appears to have 
instructions from the President to fulfill his commitment to 
\"do the right thing\" on the Cuba resolution, and is looking 
for any cover they can provide to respond to the inevitable 
critics of the decision, including some in the government. 
As cosponsors, especially within the region, begin to line 
up, please advise what information we can share with the GOG 
to bolster its case for cosponsorship. 
WHARTON 
"
"13974","2/13/2004 17:26","04GUATEMALA356","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE13279","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G, DRL, AND IO. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KDEM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SUPPORTS COMMUNITY OF DEMOCRACIES AT 
UNCHR 
 
REF: STATE 13279 
 
Polcouns and Poloff discussed reftel points with Ambassador 
Carla Rodriguez, Director General for Multilateral Affairs at 
the Foreign Ministry on February 11.  Rodriguez said 
Guatemala has participated in the Community of Democracies 
meetings since signing the June 2000 Warsaw Declaration, and 
would participate in democracy caucus efforts in Geneva. 
Rodriguez added that Guatemalan representatives in Geneva 
would support the Chilean government as chair of the 
convening group and would attend Community of Democracies 
events during the 60th UNCHR. 
WHARTON 
"
"13975","2/13/2004 18:25","04GUATEMALA360","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA317","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000360 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, SNAR, PREL, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA EXTENDS AUTHORIZATION FOR US MILITARY CD 
OPERATIONS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 317 
 
Classified By: PolMilOff Rob Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: With more than a two-thirds majority and 
as a matter of national urgency, on February 12 the 
Guatemalan Congress approved a two-year extension of Central 
Skies/Mayan Jaguar authority to conduct joint 
counternarcotics exercises.  Extensive lobbying on the part 
of WHA A/S Noriega, the Ambassador, and other members of the 
country team was crucial to the new administration\'s efforts 
to get the authorization through a divided congress.  This 
positive first step demonstrates that the Berger 
Administration takes its counter-narcotics obligations 
seriously.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Mayan Jaguar is the Guatemalan component of Central 
Skies, a joint regional counter drug (CD) military operation. 
 The renewed authorization, Decree 5-2004, will expire on 
December 31, 2005.  The bill passed with 120 votes in favor - 
15 more than necessary to form a two-thirds majority.  Only 
the far-left URNG and ANN parties opposed the measure. 
 
3. (C) A/S Noriega pressed President Berger and his security 
cabinet for renewed Mayan Jaguar authorization during his 
February 3-5 visit (reftel), and received a commitment from 
President of Congress Morales to give the measure \"emergency 
treatment.\" Ambassador Hamilton had previously met with key 
Ministers and with the new congressional leaders to explain 
the benefits of Mayan Jaguar.  The Embassy lobbied all 
political parties and counseled the new administration on the 
mechanics of preparing the bill and submitting it to the 
legislature. 
 
4. (C) Despite all the preparatory efforts, on the day of the 
vote the ANN and URNG parties twice attempted to scuttle the 
measure on procedural grounds, once it was clear that the GOG 
had the necessary votes to pass it.  They nearly succeeded in 
forcing a compromise that would have reduced the 
authorization to one year vice two, but close, last-minute 
Embassy coordination with key FRG members Zury Rios and 
Antonio Arenales, who sought and fed our arguments directly 
onto the floor of the Congress, saved the day and convinced 
the plenary to adopt approval for two years. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  Although the new administration\'s 
inexperience in processing legislative proposals required 
extra time and some effort on our part to identify logjams, 
the political will of the Berger Administration to secure 
this important legislation was never in doubt.  Passage of 
this important tool in the fight against narcotics, through 
the divided Congress, is a concrete indication that the 
Berger government places a high value on counternarcotics 
cooperation with us. 
WHARTON 
"
"13976","2/13/2004 18:55","04GUATEMALA362","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE14279","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2014 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM ACTION GROUP -- GUATEMALAN 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 14279 
 
Classified By: PolMilOff Rob Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (c). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Few of the G-8 diplomatic missions to 
Guatemala have counter-terrorism (CT) programs, and we 
detected no overlap among them.  None of the other missions 
have conducted formal assessments of Guatemala\'s CT needs. 
However, there is a consensus that Guatemala\'s greatest CT 
weakness is a lack of coordination within the government that 
results in lack of control.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The embassies of Great Britain, Japan, Italy, Germany, 
and Switzerland in Guatemala are not currently engaged in any 
programs that enhance CT capabilities and have no CT programs 
planned for 2004.  Per reftel instructions, in addition to 
G-8 embassies, we included Spain, Australia, and Switzerland, 
and note that Russia and Australia do not have embassies in 
Guatemala.  Information on the limited Italian, French, 
Spanish and Canadian programs is provided below. 
 
Italy 
----- 
 
3. (C) Commercial Attache Pino Carabalona said his government 
has no bilateral CT programs in Guatemala but does provide 
one Italian official through the European Union to work with 
the Guatemalan Police. 
 
France 
------ 
 
4. (C) DCM Laurent Martin told us his government has no CT 
programs planned for 2004, nor does it have any current law 
enforcement programs that enhance Guatemalan CT capabilities. 
 Martin said that his government provides some training to 
the SAAS (Guatemalan Secret Service), but he does not 
consider the training CT related. 
 
Spain 
----- 
 
5. (C) Security Chief Gerardo Otero told us his government 
held a conference in Spain in 2003 to discuss a bilateral CT 
treaty and that in November, 2004 Spain would host a 
conference in Bolivia on the globalization of organized crime 
and terrorism.  Otero said Guatemalan officials would attend. 
 Spain has provided general assistance to the Police Academy 
in the past and has a pending GOG request to continue that 
assistance, but Otero had no information as to whether the 
request would be approved by his government.  In a slight 
difference of opinion on Guatemala\'s CT needs, Otero cited 
lack of awareness, saying that Guatemalan officials 
underestimate the global nature of the threat due to 
misperceptions based on the small role they play and the 
relatively low number of special interest aliens they believe 
transit Guatemalan territory. 
 
Canada 
------ 
 
6. (C) Political Counselor Ginette Martin told us that Canada 
channels its CT programs through multilateral organizations 
such as the OAS, and said that this support tends to focus on 
the softer side of security (Note: the German, Swiss, and 
Japanese representatives all said they work through 
multilateral organizations also, but none could provide 
details. End note).  Martin mentioned a Canadian fund for 
institutional reform that has not been tapped due to problems 
with Guatemala\'s Attorney General.  She said the fund could 
be redirected to strengthen capabilities in the security 
area, although not specifically to CT programs.  Martin added 
that her embassy was concluding the first phase of a 3-year, 
$400,000 initiative aimed at improving crime scene 
investigation by the Guatemalan police.  Martin also said 
that Canada has funded expert exchanges among security 
officials in support of the \"Framework Treaty on Democratic 
Security.\"  Martin further stated that Guatemalan authorities 
have been included in witness protection and money laundering 
programs conducted in Mexico by the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police, but she had no further details.  Martin felt that the 
Berger administration is too new, at this stage, for any 
realistic discussion of its unmet CT needs. 
 
Consensus on Needs 
------------------ 
 
7. (C) Aside from the Canadian and Spanish representatives, 
all of the other officials agreed that Guatemala\'s greatest 
CT need is to establish control over its territory.  Nearly 
everyone had examples of serious security problems at 
Guatemala\'s airports and borders. 
8. (C) Comment:  Most members of the CTAG represented in 
Guatemala are important donors to economic development and 
Peace Accord-related bilateral assistance programs.  While 
there has been growing interest in strengthening cooperation 
in fighting transnational crime, and terrorism specifically, 
assistance efforts remain focused largely on economic 
development issues. We will exploit the growing interest of 
CTAG embassies in Guatemala in increasing coordination on 
enhancing the rule of law and fighting transnational crime. 
WHARTON 
"
"14060","2/18/2004 18:24","04GUATEMALA387","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181824Z Feb 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000387 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: GT, AGR 
SUBJECT: AGREMENT REQUEST FOR GUATEMALAN AMBASSADOR TO THE 
U.S. 
 
 
1.  On February 2 the Embassy received from the MFA a 
written request for agrement for Jose Guillermo Castillo 
Villacorta as Guatemalan Ambassador to the U.S., dated 
January 30, 2004.  The original has been pouched to WHA/CEN 
under registry #306131.  Castillo Villacorta is known well 
and favorably to the Embassy, which requests the prompt 
attention by the Department to this request. 
 
Begin Text of Note (#DIGRIB-NV-008/2004) 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations of the Republic of 
Guatemala warmly greets the honorable Embassy of the United 
States of America, and wishes to convey that the Government 
of the Republic of Guatemala, wishing to strengthen and 
deepen the fraternal links between our peoples and 
governments, has decided to nominate Jose Guillermo 
Castillo Villacorta as the next Ambassador Plenipotentiary, 
for which purpose we kindly request the corresponding 
agrement. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations would greatly appreciate 
the assistance of the honorable Embassy of the United 
States of America to transmit this request to the high 
authorities of your refined country, to determine if Mr. 
Jose Guillermo Castillo Villacorta is considered welcome to 
perform the cited mission, and attaching 
for your consideration a copy of his Curriculum Vitae. 
 
Complimentary closing. 
 
End Text of Note. 
 
2.  Begin Text of CV 
 
Curriculum Vitae 
 
Jose Guillermo Castillo Villacorta 
 
A professional on Economics who obtained his BA \"Cum Laude\" 
from Universidad Francisco Marroquin in Guatemala, he was 
granted a Fulbright scholarship and obtained his Masters in 
Business Administration at J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of 
Management, Northwestern University, specializing in 
Finance, Marketing, Organizational Behavior and Accounting. 
 
His professional expertise has developed in the public 
sector as well as in the private sector.  From April 1, 
1998 through July 31, 1999, he held the office of Vice 
Minister of Economy in charge of Trade Issues, he was 
responsible for the Central American Integration Process, 
the international trade negotiations of Guatemala in 
bilateral and multilateral forums, the administration of 
the commitments derive from the International Trade 
Agreements and the project to create the National Quality 
System, among other issues. 
 
He was Minister of Economy from August 1, 1999 through 
January 14, 2000.  He worked on trade issues, regional 
integration, international trade negotiations, technical 
rules, promotion of investments, competitiveness programs, 
support to SME, and promotion of exports. 
 
During the first semester of the year 2000, as a delegate 
of the Ministry of Economy, he coordinated and concluded 
the negotiations of the Free Trade Agreement with Mexico, a 
process in which he participated from 1996 through its 
closing, playing different roles. 
 
Prior to his participation in the public sector, he was 
very active in the private sector, both in Guatemala and 
internationally.  He has worked in banking, insurance, 
bonds and the capital market, as well as in the industrial 
and commercial sectors.  In the organized private sector he 
has been Director and Treasurer of the Guatemalan Chamber 
of Industry, Coordinator of the Economic Commission of the 
business sector, delegate from the business sector in the 
Puebla  anama Plan, Director of the Business Council for 
the International Trade Negotiations and member of the 
Executive Committee of the National Competitiveness Program 
coordinated by the Guatemalan Ministry of Economy, among 
other duties. 
 
In activities of social responsibility, he participated as 
Director of FUNDESA, Director and President of Fundes 
Guatemala and Director of the Mariano and Rafael Castillo 
Cordova Foundation.  He has also been a professor in 
Business Strategy, World Political and Economical Order, 
International Trade and Marketing, both in undergraduate 
and graduate degrees, in the most prestigious private 
universities in Guatemala, such as Universidad Francisco 
Marroquin, Universidad Rafael Landivar and Universidad del 
Istmo. 
 
At the present time he is the Director of Strategic 
Planning of Cerveceria Centroamericana, S.A., and advisor 
of foreign trade issues to different companies, and is 
vice-president of the Guatemalan Chamber of Industry. 
 
End Text of CV. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"14065","2/18/2004 22:45","04GUATEMALA392","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, GT, AGR 
SUBJECT: AGREMENT REQUEST FOR GUATEMALAN AMBASSADOR TO THE 
U.S. 
 
1.  On February 2 the Embassy received from the MFA a 
written request for agrement for Jose Guillermo Castillo 
Villacorta as Guatemalan Ambassador to the U.S., dated 
January 30, 2004.  The original has been pouched to WHA/CEN 
under registry #306131.  Castillo Villacorta is known well 
and favorably to the Embassy, which requests the prompt 
attention by the Department to this request. 
 
Begin Text of Note (#DIGRIB-NV-008/2004) 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations of the Republic of 
Guatemala warmly greets the honorable Embassy of the United 
States of America, and wishes to convey that the Government 
of the Republic of Guatemala, wishing to strengthen and 
deepen the fraternal links between our peoples and 
governments, has decided to nominate Jose Guillermo 
Castillo Villacorta as the next Ambassador Plenipotentiary, 
for which purpose we kindly request the corresponding 
agrement. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations would greatly appreciate 
the assistance of the honorable Embassy of the United 
States of America to transmit this request to the high 
authorities of your refined country, to determine if Mr. 
Jose Guillermo Castillo Villacorta is considered welcome to 
perform the cited mission, and attaching 
for your consideration a copy of his Curriculum Vitae. 
 
Complimentary closing. 
 
End Text of Note. 
 
2.  Begin Text of CV 
 
Curriculum Vitae 
 
Jose Guillermo Castillo Villacorta 
 
A professional on Economics who obtained his BA \"Cum Laude\" 
from Universidad Francisco Marroquin in Guatemala, he was 
granted a Fulbright scholarship and obtained his Masters in 
Business Administration at J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of 
Management, Northwestern University, specializing in 
Finance, Marketing, Organizational Behavior and Accounting. 
 
His professional expertise has developed in the public 
sector as well as in the private sector.  From April 1, 
1998 through July 31, 1999, he held the office of Vice 
Minister of Economy in charge of Trade Issues, he was 
responsible for the Central American Integration Process, 
the international trade negotiations of Guatemala in 
bilateral and multilateral forums, the administration of 
the commitments derive from the International Trade 
Agreements and the project to create the National Quality 
System, among other issues. 
 
He was Minister of Economy from August 1, 1999 through 
January 14, 2000.  He worked on trade issues, regional 
integration, international trade negotiations, technical 
rules, promotion of investments, competitiveness programs, 
support to SME, and promotion of exports. 
 
During the first semester of the year 2000, as a delegate 
of the Ministry of Economy, he coordinated and concluded 
the negotiations of the Free Trade Agreement with Mexico, a 
process in which he participated from 1996 through its 
closing, playing different roles. 
 
Prior to his participation in the public sector, he was 
very active in the private sector, both in Guatemala and 
internationally.  He has worked in banking, insurance, 
bonds and the capital market, as well as in the industrial 
and commercial sectors.  In the organized private sector he 
has been Director and Treasurer of the Guatemalan Chamber 
of Industry, Coordinator of the Economic Commission of the 
business sector, delegate from the business sector in the 
Puebla - Panama Plan, Director of the Business Council for 
the International Trade Negotiations and member of the 
Executive Committee of the National Competitiveness Program 
coordinated by the Guatemalan Ministry of Economy, among 
other duties. 
 
In activities of social responsibility, he participated as 
Director of FUNDESA, Director and President of Fundes 
Guatemala and Director of the Mariano and Rafael Castillo 
Cordova Foundation.  He has also been a professor in 
Business Strategy, World Political and Economical Order, 
International Trade and Marketing, both in undergraduate 
and graduate degrees, in the most prestigious private 
universities in Guatemala, such as Universidad Francisco 
Marroquin, Universidad Rafael Landivar and Universidad del 
Istmo. 
 
At the present time he is the Director of Strategic 
Planning of Cerveceria Centroamericana, S.A., and advisor 
of foreign trade issues to different companies, and is 
vice-president of the Guatemalan Chamber of Industry. 
 
End Text of CV. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"14139","2/20/2004 16:47","04GUATEMALA406","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE27335","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S RESPONSE TO DEMARCHE ON WHO GLOBAL 
STRATEGY ON DIET, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND HEALTH 
 
REF: SECSTATE 27335 
 
Demarche was delivered to Silvia Corado, Director of the 
Office of Multilateral Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign 
Relations upon receipt.  A follow-up phone call elicited from 
Ms. Corado that the GRULAC had met to discuss the issue on 
the fringes of an FAO meeting in Rome to prepare a 
coordinated GRULAC response.  She did not know the outcome of 
that meeting. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14140","2/20/2004 16:47","04GUATEMALA407","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE30469","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201647Z Feb 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS OPIC FOR LOREN RODWIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, GT 
SUBJECT: BLUE ORCHARD MICROFINANCE: EMBASSY COMMENT ON OPIC 
APPLICATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 30469 
 
Banrural and Genesis Empresaria are well known and respected 
Guatemalan financial institutions.  USAID continues to work 
with both organizations and has separately provided detailed 
comments on the proposal.  Both institutions have 
micro-finance experience, and Banrural in particular has a 
wide reach, working in the more remote areas of Guatemala. 
Consultations with various private sector elements, NGOs and 
financial supervision officials revealed no serious concerns 
about either institution.  Post supports the intent of the 
project and the use of these organizations. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14146","2/20/2004 18:30","04GUATEMALA412","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE36977","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000412 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, VE, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SUPPORTS OAS PROCESS IN VENEZUELA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 36977 
 
Classified By: PolMiloff Rob Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador Hamilton raised reftel talking points with 
Foreign Minister Jorge Briz on February 19.  Briz responded 
that he has personally always been supportive of real 
democracy in Venezuela, adding that until recently, as a 
member of the private sector, he had maintained close contact 
with counterparts in Venezuela\'s business community.  Briz 
said the GOG would give serious consideration to making a 
statement either individually, or more likely, in concert 
with its Central American neighbors at the upcoming Central 
American Presidential Summit to be held in Guatemala next 
week (three days before the CNE announces its decision on 
February 28).  Briz took the Ambassador\'s suggestion that the 
MFA convoke the Venezuelan Charge to express the GOG\'s 
concern. 
 
2. (C) ADCM and PolOff backtracked the demarche with Vice 
Minister for Foreign Affairs Marta Altoaguirre and Director 
General for Multilateral Affairs Carla Rodriguez respectively 
on February 20.  Altoaguirre said the GOG will fully support 
the OAS and Carter Center process and said that the decision 
to annul signatures was \"a provocation.\"  She added that she 
believes a referendum is the only way to avoid civil war in 
Venezuela and said she would give serious thought to ways the 
GOG can support the effort either through a statement at the 
OAS Permanent Council or a joint declaration by the Central 
Americans.  Rodriguez was aware of our earlier interventions 
and expressed appreciation for the talking points which we 
left as a non-paper. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14199","2/23/2004 21:51","04GUATEMALA431","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE29549","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000431 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IPC WILSON, DEPT PLS PASS TO USTR BPECK, DOC 
KSCHLEGELMILCH, USPTO JURBAN/DLASHLEY-JOHNSON, AND LOC 
STEPP. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR, ETRD, ECON, WHA 
SUBJECT: SPECIAL 301 REVIEW 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 29549 
     B. NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE 
 
1.  Summary: Guatemala recently concluded negotiations of the 
US - Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), which 
includes a strong chapter on IPR.  The obligations undertaken 
in the agreement, along with commitments of the new 
government, should strengthen Guatemala\'s weak enforcement of 
IPR protections.  Renewed industry support for efforts should 
help to fend off further challenges to Guatemala\'s relatively 
strong legislative framework.  Post recommends that Guatemala 
not be placed on the Special 301 list.  End Summary. 
 
Updates to the National Trade Estimate 
-------------------------------------- 
 
2.  Legislation passed in 2003 improved IPR legislation to 
levels similar to those applied in the United States.  The 
new Berger administration, which took office in January 2004, 
has indicated its interest in further strengthening IPR 
protection. Pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical research 
laboratories, in cooperation with the U.S. and some European 
embassies, have worked effectively to counter efforts by 
domestic copiers of protected products to undermine 
Guatemala\'s legislation through legal and legislative 
challenges.  The Constitutional Court rejected in February 
2004 the outstanding legal challenge to the 2003 legislation. 
 Entry into force of the CAFTA will provide a strong legal 
obstacle to further efforts to degrade the protections 
provided by law. 
 
3.  Enforcement remains the weak link in Guatemala\'s IPR 
protection.  Pirated material, particularly software, optical 
media and trademark violating products are still widely and 
openly available.  Enforcement efforts have been hampered 
primarily by a lack of resources and a lack of will within 
the Public Ministry, which is responsible for the prosecution 
of criminal offenses.  The GOG reportedly still uses pirated 
software in many of its offices.  However, the new Minister 
of Economy, who oversees the national IPR registry, has 
committed to catalogue and properly license software within 
his ministry and to promote similar action by his cabinet 
colleagues.  The new government is also eager to root out the 
organized contraband and smuggling rings that have 
infiltrated the tax and customs administrations and that 
control much of the traffic in pirated goods. 
 
Recommendation 
-------------- 
 
4. Post recommends that Guatemala not be placed on the 
Special 301 list.  Nonetheless, we are aware that enforcement 
is weak and needs to be made a priority by the new 
administration.  There is substantial optimism in the local 
IPR community that enforcement efforts and capabilities will 
improve with the new government\'s interest in successful 
CAFTA implementation and tackling organized crime and 
corruption surrounding the contraband issue. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14238","2/24/2004 23:13","04GUATEMALA449","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE35954","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

242313Z Feb 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR FAA: KRISTA BERQUIST, TSA MIAMI: VICTOR GUARDIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, GT 
SUBJECT: ICAO\'S MEETING IN CAIRO, GUATEMALA\'S PARTICIPATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 35954 
 
Guatemalan Civil Aviation (DGAC) authorities will not 
participate in ICAO\'s meeting in Cairo, nor have they taken 
any positions on key agenda items.  The new Director for 
Civil Aviation, Juan Antonio Presa, came to the job in late 
January with the change in government.  The new 
administration, at our urging, has made improving airport 
security a priority, and Presa\'s efforts are focused on 
securing the additional resources needed.  Presa seems 
sincere in his efforts to address serious weaknesses 
highlighted by a recent TSA team visit and with the amount 
and urgency of the work to be done, it is unlikely he will be 
prepared to focus in the short-term, on broader ICAO issues. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14327","2/26/2004 16:59","04GUATEMALA466","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT BERGER FIRES ATTORNEY GENERAL, 
CONSTITUTIONAL COURT TO RULE 
 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) 
 
1. (U) Summary:  President Berger announced on February 24 
that he had fired Attorney General Carlos De Leon.  The 
Constitutional Court has twice issued temporary rulings 
upholding Berger, but its final rulings could yet reinstate 
De Leon and deal a severe blow to Berger\'s legal reform 
efforts.  Media coverage and civil society strongly favor the 
President\'s action.  GANA Congressman Juan Luis FLORIDO Solis 
has replaced De Leon under some criticism that he lacks 
independence from the President.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
2. (U) Attorney General Carlos De Leon was chosen by former 
President Portillo from a list of six names chosen through a 
consultative process.  Note: Florido\'s name was also on the 
list.  Rumors at the time linked De Leon to a number of 
corrupt business deals with the municipality of Mixco (a 
Guatemala City suburb) and rigged bids for government 
construction contracts that he subsequently subcontracted. 
Throughout his tenure, it became increasingly clear that De 
Leon was more interested in promoting his image than in 
pursuing prosecutions.  High profile cases stalled, a series 
of prosecutors resigned citing interference by De Leon, and 
in early February 2004, De Leon used two million Quetzales 
(about $250,000) in scarce resources to host a World Summit 
of Attorneys General (which we and most developed countries 
did not attend).  Tensions between Berger and De Leon have 
been building since Berger took office on January 14, 2004. 
On February 23, President Berger publicly gave De Leon a 
deadline of 24 hours to explain his actions in three cases. 
De Leon refused in an equally public manner to comply, citing 
his constitutional autonomy within the Executive.  Hours 
before the deadline, De Leon sought a ruling from the 
Constitutional Court vacating Berger\'s order and reaffirming 
the independence of the Attorney General.  In record time, 
the court refused to issue a stay and Berger announced to the 
media that he had fired De Leon.  De Leon promptly filed a 
new lawsuit claiming his dismissal, which was signed by 
Berger and 13 Ministers and was published as a government 
accord in the official gazette on February 25, was illegal. 
Late February 25, the court again issued a temporary ruling 
in favor of Berger, this time unanimously.  A third suit by 
De Leon was not accepted.  Based on these rulings, a judicial 
order was issued to prevent De Leon from leaving the country. 
 
But the rulings are not final 
----------------------------- 
3.  (C) The Constitutional Court\'s rulings are only 
temporary, however.  Final rulings are expected in about two 
weeks.  Juan Fransisco Flores Juares, Constitutional Court 
Magistrate, told us that he fears the Court could easily 
backpedal.  If the court rules in De Leon\'s favor in either 
case, (there is a legal precedent for upholding his 
autonomy-see comment) De Leon would have to be reinstated and 
Berger\'s legal reform efforts would suffer a major early 
defeat. 
 
Staff Implications 
------------------ 
4. (C) Alejandro Paiz, head of Criminal Investigations, 
announced he will resign.  Special Prosecutor for Human 
Rights, Thelma de Lam, with whom we have had a productive 
relationship, told HROff on February 24 that, even though she 
has a contract with the new administration, she would leave 
if De Leon\'s firing is upheld.  She added that 15 people in 
her office have only temporary contracts and would also 
probably be let go.  Shortly after the meeting, police 
officers and representatives from MINUGUA and the Human 
Rights Ombudsman\'s office surrounded the building due to 
complaints that De Leon\'s employees were removing computers 
and shredding documents.  According to press reports, police 
seized computers that these employees were loading into two 
pickup trucks. 
 
Replacement Sworn In 
-------------------- 
5. (U) De Leon\'s dismissal (Acuerdo Goberantivo 84-2004) also 
nominated lawyer Juan Luis Florido Solis to fill out the 
remainder of De Leon\'s original four-year term that began in 
May, 2002.  Florido\'s name, along with De Leon\'s, was among 
six produced by a consultative process.  In case of the 
resignation or removal of an Attorney General, the President 
is required to nominate a replacement from the same short 
list.  Florido was serving in the Congress as a member of 
Berger\'s GANA coalition.  The Mack Foundation and Supreme 
Court Justice Alfonso Alvarez-Lobos have already criticized 
Florido as not independent enough to be Attorney General.  In 
response, Florido has pointed out that he was a candidate for 
Attorney General long before he became a candidate for 
Congress.  He has resigned from the Reform Movement party, 
part of the GANA coalition.  Others have criticized Florido\'s 
lack of penal experience.  As a lawyer, Florido represented 
corporate interests, including Caterpillar and Hewlett 
Packard (though not currently).  Note: Hewlett Packard has a 
multi-million dollar contractual dispute with De Leon\'s 
Public Ministry.  End Note.  Florido has served as President 
and Vice President of the Chamber of Tourism as well as 
President of Banco Inmobilario. 
 
Comment 
------- 
6. (C) In early 1996, then-President Arzu gave his Attorney 
General, Ramses Cuestas, a 48-hour deadline to file a similar 
report.  In that case, the Constitutional Court upheld 
Cuestas\' assertion that complying with the deadline would 
strip his office of its constitutional autonomy within the 
Executive.  The current court, however, is the same court 
that overturned numerous precedents when it allowed Rios 
Montt to run for President.  It is tempting to read into the 
court\'s temporary ruling against De Leon that the FRG has 
decided to dump the Attorney General (the President of the 
Constitutional Court is an FRG hack), but FRG Congressional 
representatives left the floor in an unsuccessful attempt to 
deny Florido the quorum he needed to resign his seat in 
Congress. 
 
7. (U) Firing the Attorney General without final rulings from 
the Constitutional Court is a bold move by President Berger, 
one that has been widely applauded by civil society.  There 
is no doubt in the public mind that De Leon has largely 
failed to carry out his duties--the official reason for his 
dismissal according to Berger--but it remains to be seen what 
standard the Constitutional Court will use.  The unanimous 
second ruling against De Leon is a very positive sign, but 
until these rulings are finalized they cannot be taken for 
granted. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14339","2/26/2004 23:55","04GUATEMALA479","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA HUMAN RIGHTS UPDATE #2-2004 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The following is an update of significant 
recent developments in human rights. Topics include: 
 
-- GOG to Re-dedicate Peace Accords (para 2) 
 
-- President Supports Gang Rehabilitation (3-4) 
 
-- Bruce Harris Acquitted on Slander Charges (5) 
 
-- Escape of convicted Mack murderer (6) 
 
-- SOUTHCOM Promotes Human Rights (7) 
 
-- UN Envoy Highlights Violence Against Women (8) 
 
GOG To Re-Dedicate Peace Accords 
-------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Presidential Commissioner for Human Rights Frank 
LaRue told PolOff on February 12 that he had presented, and 
the Cabinet had approved, a February 25 public rededication 
ceremony to full implementation of the 1996 Peace Accords. 
LaRue shared a copy of the presentation, which includes:  the 
reduction and modernization of the military, the 
restructuring and strengthening of the National Civil Police, 
a federal budget focused on social spending, and the creation 
of a national monument commemorating victims of conflict, and 
a meeting of CA governments on peace issues.  LaRue said that 
President Berger would announce the re-dedication on February 
25, the National Day for the Dignity of Victims of Violence. 
In a February 10 meeting with Ambassador Hamilton, Peace 
Secretary Victor Montejo, also confirmed the February 25 
 
SIPDIS 
event, said payments to former civil self defense patrols 
(ex-PACs) would no longer be handled by his secretariat, and 
emphasized his priority of creating a new indigenous unit. 
 
President Supports Rehabilitation; Gangs Mock Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3.  (U) On February 16, with AID support and with the 
Ambassador in attendance, President Berger inaugurated the 
\"Casa de Jovenes,\" a rehabilitation facility for ex-gang 
members.  The center will provide shelter and vocational 
training to over 100, and will be administered by APREDE, the 
Alliance for the Prevention of Crime, a coalition of civil 
society organizations funded under USAID\'s Civil Society 
Program.  At the event, Berger pledged the support of his 
administration towards combating gang violence and the 
reintegration of ex-members into society.  In public remarks, 
the Ambassador praised the project as an example of 
successful cooperation between communities, civil society, 
government, and the private sector. 
 
4.  (U) The event was marred by the discovery, in another 
part of the capital, of the murder of a re-habilitated 
ex-gang member with a note attached which mocked Berger\'s 
commitment to rehabilitate gang members and combat gang 
violence.  Another murdered ex-gang member was discovered in 
January with a note to the President signed \"Mara 
Salvatrucha\" (one of the largest gangs), stating, \"if you 
continue to persecute the gang members, we will continue 
killing people.\" 
 
Bruce Harris Acquitted on Slander Charges 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) On January 30, Casa Alianza (Covenant House) Regional 
Director for Latin America, Bruce Harris, was acquitted by a 
Guatemalan criminal court of slander, libel and defamation 
charges, concluding a case based on allegations stemming from 
Mr. Harris\' statements at a press conference on September 11, 
1997.  The charges were pressed by Susana Luarca de Umana, an 
adoption attorney Harris named among others involved in 
irregular adoptions from Guatemala.  The court also denied 
her request for $123,000 in damages.  She vowed to appeal the 
decision.  EmbOff attended all phases o the trial and the 
Ambassador attended the three hour sentencing.  After the 
verdict was announced, he told the press that the court\'s 
decision \"sends a clear and unequivocal message that 
Guatemala\'s jurisprudence supports the freedom expression of 
human rights defenders.\"  Harris told the press he felt 
vindicated by the verdict and said the true beneficiaries 
were Guatemala\'s exploited children.  He vowed to continue 
Casa Alianza\'s efforts to protect children from illegal 
adoptions. 
 
Army Role in Escape of Convicted Mack Murderer? 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
6.  (U) The Public Ministry is currently investigating claims 
that Army officials aided in the escape of Juan Valencia 
Osorio, whose prior conviction and 30-year sentence for the 
murder of Myrna Mack Chang were reinstated on January 19, 
2004.  According to major daily \"El Periodico,\" an army 
vehicle was observed parked in front of Valencia\'s home on 
January 22, blocking the view of the security forces who were 
assigned to monitor the accused.  When the car left, Valencia 
had disappeared.  On February 16, the Public Ministry 
reportedly issued a court order giving the Ministry of 
Defense three days to release information regarding the 
identity of the army personnel driving the vehicle and the 
individual who ordered the action.  Valencia remains 
at-large. 
 
SOUTHCOM Promotes Human Rights In Military 
------------------------------------------ 
 
7.  (U) Leana Bresnahan, SOUTHCOM Human Rights Division, and 
Daniel Baldizon, Director of the Center for the Study, 
Analysis and Training of Human Rights (CECADH), a Costa Rican 
NGO, visited Guatemala February 11-13 to promote GOG 
implementation of its prior commitments to a 
SOUTHCOM-sponsored human rights initiative consensus 
document.  The consensus document details an approach to 
improving human rights observation in the national military 
in the areas of doctrine, education and training, 
international control systems and cooperation with civil 
authorities.   SOUTHCOM categorized Guatemala as one of four 
\"Tier I\" countries, based on the national security interests 
of the USG and interest expressed by the GOG in the project, 
and will prioritize the Guatemalan implementation of the 
initiative.  During this visit, Bresnahan and Baldizon met 
with key military leadership and human rights leaders, 
including Presidential Human Rights Commissioner Frank LaRue, 
to discuss next steps for implementation of the proposal. 
GOG leaders and human rights groups were uniformly supportive 
of the initiative. 
 
UN Envoy Highlights Violence Against Women 
------------------------------------------ 
 
8.  (U) On February 8-15, UN Rapporteur for Violence Against 
Women, Karin Erturk, visited Guatemala and met with President 
Berger, VP Stein, and women\'s NGOs around the country to 
evaluate the severity of crimes against women in Guatemala. 
In numerous public statements, Erturk highlighted the 
widespread failure to investigate and/or successfully 
prosecute crimes in Guatemala, as the key problem here.  She 
also found that although few incidents of domestic violence 
or incest are reported and even fewer are prosecuted, both 
are severe problems in the nation.  Her visit to Guatemala 
followed visits to El Salvador and Mexico, where she noted 
analogous problems.  Erturk will release a study of her 
findings in Guatemala and a comparative study of violence 
against women in Mexico, El Salvador, and Guatemala to the UN 
Human Rights Commission, in April 2005. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14375","2/27/2004 18:01","04GUATEMALA496","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE39091","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AC/ISN, USUN FOR POL, AND GENEVA FOR CD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, GT, UNDC 
SUBJECT: UNDC DEMARCHE RESULTS: GUATEMALA TO FOLLOW NAM 
POSITION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 39091 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Silvia Corado, Director 
for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on February 
25.  Corado said Guatemala would not oppose efforts to 
dedicate this year\'s session of the UN Disarmament Commission 
(UNDC) to an appraisal of the UNDC itself, but would consider 
the position of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) before 
deciding to support such efforts.  Corado doubted any that 
issues related to the UNDC would be important enough to 
Guatemala to justify its opposing a NAM position on the 
subject. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14419","3/1/2004 21:04","04GUATEMALA504","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 GUATEMALA 000504 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PGOV, SNAR, CVIS, MASS, KCOR, OVIP, PBTS, GT 
SUBJECT: SCENE SETTER FOR MARCH 5 PCC ON GUATEMALA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton, for reason 1.4 (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary and introduction: After only six weeks in 
office, the Berger government has generated high expectations 
among Guatemalans that it will spur economic growth, reduce 
violent crime and investigate and prosecute official 
corruption and organized crime.  Berger has also told us 
privately that he wants to greatly reduce the military and 
professionalize what is left.  He told the Belizeans he is 
committed to resolving the border demarcation with Belize, 
and will not send the dispute to the ICJ.  Recognizing the 
growing economic importance of remittances by Guatemalans in 
the US, Berger is also seeking greater protections for the 
large community of Guatemalans living out of status in the US. 
 
2. (C) To a large extent, Berger\'s priorities fit 
hand-in-glove with our own, and it is in our interest to take 
advantage of his political will and the energy of his capable 
team to ensure that our shared goals succeed.  The PCC offers 
a timely opportunity to review USG engagement in Guatemala. 
This cable outlines our thoughts on issues the PCC might wish 
to consider. Specifically, we propose: 
 
Short term actions: 
-- Supporting quick IDB disbursement of sector adjustment 
funds while the new GOG undertakes substantial fiscal reform; 
-- Ensuring a high-level reception, ideally with the 
President, when Berger visits Washington in May; and 
-- Using visa policy actively against corrupt Guatemalans; 
 
Medium term and continuing actions: 
-- Reversing planned cuts in AID funding (DA) to help the GOG 
build democratic, democratic and accountable institutions and 
crack down on corruption; 
-- Providing robust support to initiatives against organized 
crime and violence (CICIACS and community policing); 
-- Encouraging realistic GOG initiatives for dealing with 
Guatemalan immigrants in the US; and 
-- Including Guatemala early in post-Monterrey initiatives on 
facilitating remittances; 
 
Longer term commitments: 
-- Providing technical assistance for an ambitious military 
downsizing and FMF and IMET support (in FY-06) to those who 
remain once the reductions are irreversibly underway; and 
-- Restoring momentum to resolving the Belize border dispute, 
perhaps beginning with a visit of OAS A/SG Einaudi. 
 
End summary and introduction. 
 
Tackling the Budget Crisis 
-------------------------- 
3. (SBU) Guatemala is strapped for cash.  The Berger 
administration came to office with backlogs of unpaid 
salaries and bills and a court ruling that eliminated the 
\"IEMA\" asset-based tax that had provided ten percent of total 
revenues.  Tax reform is necessary and will be a Berger 
priority.  The administration has begun the process by 
resuscitating the Fiscal Pact that had been negotiated after 
the Peace Accords with some 650 civil society groups but was 
discarded by the Portillo government.  The administration 
calculates that a renewed Fiscal Pact will provide the 
mandate and legitimacy needed to push a 2004 budget and tax 
reform plan through an unfocused and politicized Congress. 
Until that happens, the government is choosing not to 
approach international debt markets or negotiate a new 
program with the IMF in order not to be seen as prejudicing 
the outcome of the Fiscal Pact discussions.  This leaves the 
government solely dependent upon austerity measures and a 
depleted tax base until the new Fiscal Pact can be agreed and 
implemented. 
 
4. (C) In the interim, $80 million of fast-disbursing funds 
are potentially available from the IDB under the Financial 
Sector Adjustment program.  Disbursement is contingent, 
however, upon IMF concurrence or compliance with an IMF 
program.  Guatemala currently is not fully compliant with its 
IMF stand-by, for two reasons that are relatively minor: 1) a 
law exempting the sale of bank asset portfolios from the 
value added tax is still stuck in Congress, and 2) outside 
auditors have not been brought in to look into the failed 
national mortgage bank (CHN).  The IMF stand-by agreement 
will likely lapse in mid-March without Guatemala\'s full 
compliance, and the government does not expect to seek 
another Fund program until later in the year.  Members of the 
Berger economic team will be in Washington at the same time 
as the PCC seeking the concurrence of the Fund and Treasury 
to release the $80 million from the IDB.  They will say that 
there has been abundant good faith in pursuing banking reform 
and that they need funds to stay afloat as they undertake 
more fundamental fiscal and governance reforms.  We believe 
strongly that we should accommodate this request. 
 
Matching USG Assistance to Improved Opportunities 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
5. (SBU) The climate for promoting change in Guatemala 
improved across the board with the inauguration of the Berger 
government, but AID has planned a 60% cut in DA levels 
between FY03 and FY05.  We understand that the cut is being 
reconsidered and it could be restored.  We would use restored 
DA levels to support rural economic growth through trade 
capacity building, improved competitiveness, and 
decentralization.  ESF as well as DA are needed to support 
the GOG\'s national anti-corruption campaign and to respond to 
its specific request for internal vulnerability assessments 
of major GOG institutions.  ESF and INL funding is needed for 
a community policing program and to support the UN-sponsored 
CICIACS initiative against organized crime.  Guatemala 
received about $10 million of DA annually during the Portillo 
years, comparable to what was given less populous neighbors 
Honduras, Nicaragua, and Salvador.  We should be willing to 
invest that much and more now that we have a government 
attuned to our interests. 
 
Supporting A New, Greatly Reduced Guatemalan Military 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
6. (C) President Berger has made military reform a central 
part of his opening agenda. His plan, centered on a 50% cut 
in the size of the Army and the shedding of excess 
infrastructure, envisions a smaller, better trained, and more 
operationally capable Guatemalan Army.  His proposal would 
put an end once and for all to the war-time military that 
grew out of control during the internal conflict, and was 
poorly managed by post-conflict governments until now.  We 
have in hand a perhaps one-time opportunity to partner with 
the Berger administration to positively influence the future 
of one of hemisphere\'s most insular and stodgy militaries. 
Although pockets of high-level corruption and a culture 
resistant to reform still exist within the force, Berger\'s 
determination to dramatically downsize the institution 
appears to have finally galvanized serious planning efforts 
within the institution, including focusing on missions 
previously shunned by \"ground-centric\" forces such as 
maritime operations under our recently signed bilateral 
agreement.  Lack of local civil-military technical expertise 
on defense transformation, however, and unimaginative 
military planning mean we need move quickly to help sustain 
the momentum of the President\'s reform agenda.  We must also 
be alert for signs of resistance or even rebellion from the 
military, a concern that Berger raised with the Ambassador on 
February 25.  We should use opportunities such as the 
upcoming visit of the Commander, U.S. Army South, to remind 
Guatemala\'s military that we have no tolerance for 
insubordination to civilian command. 
 
7. (C) Under Portillo, progress was achieved on most 
benchmarks for military reform outlined in the 1996 Peace 
Accords, and some of our benchmarks for restoring a regular 
military assistance relationship.  The infamous Estado Mayor 
Presidencial (EMP) was finally disbanded.  Military support 
to national civil police and USG law enforcement on 
counter-narcotics operations has been excellent and was 
unquestionably pivotal in achieving 2004 narcotics 
certification benchmarks (military support was a contributing 
factor in nearly 90% of the nearly nine metric tons of 
cocaine seized). Navy assistance with operations aimed at 
containing ship-bound alien smuggling is pivotal to the 
repatriation of hundreds of illegal aliens each year who 
might otherwise reach the U.S. Human rights training and 
reporting systems were instituted throughout the Army, with 
reports of military human rights abuses falling to near zero. 
 The first Defense White Paper was published last year; it 
laid out unequivocal benchmarks on civilian control of the 
military, including the requirement to maintain a culture of 
respect for human rights within the armed forces, and defined 
roles and missions for the military in the 21st century. 
Work remains on other benchmarks, however, including seeking 
greater military budget oversight by congress, naming a 
civilian Minister of Defense, and accounting for abuses 
committed during the war.  We expect progress on the first 
two, but are frankly pessimistic on the third. 
 
8. (C) The Portillo government fell short in several other 
areas too, choosing not (or unable) to reign in corrupt 
high-level military officers or take costly and unpopular 
steps needed to rid the force of a hugely bloated officer 
corps. Portillo used the military budget, shielded by archaic 
wartime secrecy laws, to launder large amounts of \"off the 
books\" money, leaving the impression of large increases in 
military spending, when in fact the institution was 
progressively starved of resources. The unattended issue of 
the size and salaries of the senior officer ranks, and the 
high costs of retiring them under the current self-funded 
pension system, stymied the most urgent of all reforms -- 
downsizing the force.  Berger inherited the most expensive 
military in Central America, but one without any significant 
operational capability and no modernization plan -- an 
untenable situation for both the military and the incoming 
Berger government.  President Berger was recently briefed by 
the military that it would take $200 million to draw down the 
force by 16,000. 
 
9. (C) While we have stated unambiguously that USG funding 
for retiring excess officers is not possible, we believe 
targeted and phased assistance and advice designed to assist 
Guatemalan efforts to modernize and increase operational 
effectiveness would serve to shore up the military during 
this time of uncertainty and transformation -- including 
preparing a battalion-sized unit for international 
peacekeeping duty.  First, we propose providing Berger 
technical advice on how to best approach the defense 
transformation.  We already have E-IMET scheduled visits by 
the Center for Civil Military Relations and the Defense 
Resource Management Institute which we will use to lay 
groundwork, but dedicated expert assistance on executing a 
large personnel draw down and how to profitably dispose of 
resulting excess bases and facilities could conceivably save 
the GOG tens of millions of dollars. 
 
10.  (C) After consulting with various supporting 
institutions, we are confident we can effectively use more 
current year E-IMET funds to support this effort should 
additional funds due to ASPA reallocations become available. 
Starting in FY-06 and beyond )- and assuming that military 
reform proves real -- restoration of IMET and FMF eligibility 
would allow for the carefully targeted release of $3.2 
million in currently frozen MAP and FMF funds.  Also, the 
quick transfer of Excess Defense Articles (for which 
Guatemala is eligible) is an additional low-cost method to 
support Guatemalan military transformation. Excess equipment 
and parts could be targeted to improving Guatemalan Air Force 
rotary and fixed wing transportation and surveillance 
capabilities used in the war on drugs. Also, INCLE funds can 
and should be used to support fuel and limited parts support 
to bolster Guatemalan Military counter narcotics support to 
the national civil police. 
 
11.  (C) Spare parts and fuel are issues with a moral 
dimension as well.  Under the implicit threat of 
decertification, we are pushing the Guatemalans to a greatly 
increased tempo of counter narcotics operation, in helos and 
fixed wing aircraft where airworthiness is open to question. 
We understand the reluctance to violate the spirit of 
Congressional intent inherent in FMF and IMET prohibitions, 
but believe denial of funds for aircraft spare parts and fuel 
to be too purist. Similarly, visits by USCG Training Ship 
Gentian (Caribbean Support Tender) would serve to greatly 
improve Guatemalan Navy\'s abilities to patrol territorial 
waters.  Together, these targeted assistance initiatives 
would improve Berger\'s ability to plan for a historic defense 
transformation, boost Guatemala\'s capability to participate 
in international peacekeeping, enforce territorial 
sovereignty, and reclaim ungoverned spaces, which in turn 
improve regional stability and support U.S. Homeland defense. 
 
Helping Berger Reach Out to Guatemalan Immigrants 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
12. (SBU) The status of Guatemalans in the U.S. is a 
high-priority item for the new GOG, to which we need to be as 
responsive as possible, in the interest of keeping the 
bilateral dynamic as positive as it is right now.  We should 
look for ways to help the new government develop a realistic 
approach for this issue.  Berger traveled to the U.S. during 
his campaign to seek the support of expat Guatemalans and to 
express his government\'s commitment to address their 
concerns.  The legal and illegal Guatemalan community in the 
U.S. numbers about 1 million persons and sends an estimated 
$2 billion in remittances annually to Guatemala.  They have a 
growing, direct economic and indirect political effect on 
Guatemalan voters, particularly in economically depressed 
rural towns and cities, where they support large extended 
families.  A recent IOM survey concluded that nearly one of 
every three persons in Guatemala depends on remittances from 
the U.S. to meet their basic needs. 
 
13. (SBU) The GOG would like to help regularize the status of 
illegal Guatemalans.  The GOG perceives recent extensions of 
TPS for Salvadorans and Hondurans less as a function of the 
devastation caused by Hurricane Mitch in 1998 than as 
effective lobbying by their governments. We have told Berger 
that the President\'s immigration proposal clearly indicates 
that any new non-emergency TPS or other unilateral 
immigration remedies are not in the cards and have encouraged 
his government instead to work through its embassy and 
consulates to support the President\'s proposal.  We need to 
remind the GOG periodically that immigration reform is an 
enduring issue in the U.S. and that they need to follow and 
participate in the public debate.  Meanwhile, and as a 
palliative, we have suggested that the GOG might initiate a 
search for U.S. employers needing Guatemalan farm workers 
under the H2A visa program.  There would be no direct role 
for the USG in this effort.  We have pointed out that a 
number of workers have failed to return under our current H2B 
visa program for other unskilled workers. 
14.  (SBU) The GOG would also like to reduce, as possible, 
the cost of remittances and find ways to use them to help 
fund basic infrastructure and services in rural areas.  Vice 
President Eduardo Stein is particularly interested in this 
issue.  He was an IOM consultant before joining the Berger 
campaign, and he was personally involved in exploring with 
banks various mechanisms for facilitating remittances to 
individuals or community associations.  He is aware of the 
language on remittances from the Monterrey Summit, and we can 
expect that he will ask periodically if any progress has been 
made.  Guatemala would be an excellent target or test bed for 
any new initiatives Washington may be considering, and we 
would encourage that Guatemala be given priority attention as 
initiatives emerge. 
 
Depriving Corrupt Former Officials of Safehaven in the U.S. 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
15. (SBU) Growing press accounts of corruption during the 
Portillo administration have renewed calls for prosecuting 
corrupt officials.  Since 2001, consular officers have been 
working closely with other Embassy offices, primarily at 
monthly Visas Viper meetings, to gather information and 
review the continued visa eligibility of these individuals. 
These efforts have resulted in findings that many influential 
people were ineligible to retain their non-immigrant visas 
(NIVs), and the visas have been revoked. The Embassy\'s 
actions have attracted heavy media coverage and received 
widespread support from the Guatemalan public. 
 
16. (SBU) Since 2001, we have revoked the visas of 170 
high-profile individuals.  The majority of these 170 cases 
were revoked under Section 214(b), which prohibits visas for 
intending immigrants.  Our reasoning is that many of these 
individuals are flight risks because they are under 
investigation or indictment by Guatemalan authorities with 
judicial orders prohibiting departure (\"arraigos\"). 
 
17. (C) Press reports in the US and Guatemala about an 
ongoing US criminal investigation into money laundering 
activities of high-level Portillo administration persons and 
an associated Grand Jury in Miami are essentially accurate. 
Although the investigation is not all-inclusive of the fraud 
purportedly committed by GOG functionaries in recent years, 
it does focus on four main areas, consolidated in two cases. 
The first case deals with the National Mortgage Bank (CHN) 
fraud and Caso Panama issues; the second covers the looting 
of the Social Security Institute (IGSS) and the Military 
Retirement Fund (IPM).  There is some overlap among these 
cases as well as with other fraud and thefts reported in the 
press over the last few years; however, in these listed 
cases, the apparently ill-gotten gains have at least passed 
through the U.S., making it a violation of US law.  These 
cases involve private individuals, past GOG officials and 
institutions within and out of Guatemala.  Many of the 
persons investigating, including two assigned Assistant U.S. 
Attorneys, also were active in the U.S. case against former 
President Aleman of Nicaragua. 
 
18. (C) The targets of the US investigation include, on the 
high end, former President Alfonso Portillo, former VP Juan 
Francisco Reyes Lopez, former private secretary to Portillo 
Julio Giron, and some of their family members and associates. 
 Evidence and statements are still being collected, but the 
indicators are strong for substantial fraud and money 
laundering activities having been committed by those under 
investigation.  As the cases have progressed, persons 
knowledgeable in the criminal actions of the targets, many 
due to participation, have come forward to offer testimony in 
place of prosecution.  Regrettably, the current lack of 
confidence and trust in the GOG Public Ministry (prosecutor) 
has not allowed US investigators to cooperate with local 
judicial authorities to share information.  This element of 
the investigation makes providing an anticipated time-line 
for action in the US cases difficult to do; however, the 
rising public pressure on both the Public Ministry and the 
targets  (including the revocation of US visas when doing so 
is appropriate) is anticipated to create investigative 
opportunities. 
 
19. (C) The ongoing investigation by a South Florida grand 
jury and new local revelations of Portillo-era corruption are 
contributing to a case for revoking the visas of these former 
officials, some of whom have already fled the country.  The 
Embassy has now forwarded a recommendation.  Visa revocations 
would not only appropriately apply US law, but would also 
send a strong message to officials of the new government that 
corrupt officials will never again be welcome in the United 
States, whether or not they escape prosecution in Guatemala. 
 
Combating Organized Crime and the Growth of Violent Common 
Crime 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
20. (SBU) The power of organized crime and clandestine groups 
in Guatemala has risen to the point where local police and 
prosecutors are overwhelmed.  Narco-traffickers and corrupt 
officials have operated with virtual impunity; combined with 
the gang violence spawned by street level drug distribution 
organizations, this has created the public perception that 
crime has grown beyond the capacity of democratic government 
to control.  This problem has to be attacked at both the 
organized crime and the street level if democracy and the 
rule of law are to be sustained in Guatemala. 
 
21. (SBU) CICIACS -- the proposal for a U.N. investigative 
and (possibly) prosecutorial mission -- presents an 
innovative plan to marshal international assistance against 
organized criminal enterprises in Guatemala. A two- to 
three-year mission, CICIACS will empower experienced 
international investigators and prosecutors to work (at least 
initially) independently of the police and Public Ministry, 
but under Guatemalan law.  By pursuing emblematic cases 
through the Guatemalan courts, CICIACS will strengthen, not 
supplant, national institutions while remaining insulated 
from their weaknesses.  A competent, credible, and 
incorruptible international investigative capability is 
perhaps the only way to successfully prosecute the heads of 
Guatemala\'s entrenched criminal organizations.  A U.S. 
contribution of relatively modest resources (several hundred 
thousand in FY-04, $2 to 3 million in FY-05 and $5 million in 
FY-06 an 07) could well avoid the necessity of a \"Plan 
Colombia\" for Guatemala five years hence.  We submit this as 
an instance of seeing around the corner and acting 
accordingly. 
 
22. (SBU) Community policing offers a proven method to break 
the stranglehold that street gangs have gained over poor 
neighborhoods in urban and semi-urban areas throughout 
Guatemala.  These gangs are the street level distribution 
network for the cocaine that remains in Guatemala after local 
narco-traffickers are paid for assisting the transit of 
cocaine on its way to the U.S.   A survey sponsored in 2002 
by NAS Guatemala indicates that there are between 68,000 and 
97,000 Guatemalan youths (ages 12 to 20) who have belonged to 
or were then participating in street gangs.  With a 
population of only 12 million, this is a shocking statistic, 
and indicative of a problem that is on the verge of spinning 
out of control.  Community policing has worked effectively to 
control gang crime throughout the U.S. and has had great 
results in El Salvador.  New ESF (with requisite legal 
authority) or INCLE funding of $2 million in FY-05 and $3 
million in FY-06 and 07 to support community policing could 
have a significant impact on helping the Berger government 
control crime. 
 
23. (SBU) Fully funding the original NAS budget request of $5 
million for FY-05 (currently, we are funded for only $2.82 
million) would allow us to assist efforts of the narcotics 
police and special task forces to implement better systems 
for tracking, investigating and prosecuting major drug and 
corruption cases.  It would also enable us to implement 
Culture of Lawfulness and precursor chemical control programs. 
 
Getting to \"Yes\" on Belize 
--------------------------- 
24. (C) The Berger government has been cautious on its public 
statements as to how it proposes to address the border 
demarcation dispute with Belize, cognizant that there is no 
popular groundswell of support in Guatemala for any solution. 
 However, Berger told reporters on inauguration day that he 
intends to resolve the border dispute through a national 
referendum, and told representatives of the Belizean 
Government that the OAS facilitators\' process remains the 
GOG\'s preference for reaching an agreement.  He categorically 
ruled out sending the matter to the ICJ, and has since said 
that (for fiscal reasons) the GOG will close its Embassy in 
The Hague. 
25. (C) The next step in resolving this 135-year old dispute 
is getting both sides (especially Guatemala) to renew the 
OAS-sponsored confidence building measures, which are 
scheduled to expire soon.  Following that, it will be 
important to get the momentum of the facilitators\' process 
back on track.  With the need to impose unpopular fiscal 
measures increasingly inevitable, and with the growing cost 
in political capital for establishing CICIACS, the Berger 
government will not have an excess of political good will to 
spend on persuading Guatemalans to approve a referendum on 
Belize in the short term.  However, it is important that the 
momentum be restored.  A visit to Guatemala by OAS A/SG 
Einaudi, who is widely respected in Guatemala, could go a 
long way to reminding the Berger government of the priority 
the international community places on resolving once and for 
all its disagreements with Belize. 
 
High-level GOG Visits to Washington 
---------------------------------------- 
26. (C) President Berger has accepted a Council of the 
Americas invitation to speak at an event in Washington on May 
3.  This visit offers an opportunity for him to meet with 
President Bush at a time when such a meeting would convey to 
Guatemalans, especially in the military and the opposition, 
our support for his program for profound reforms.  Greatly 
reducing the military, getting CICIACS approved by Congress, 
concluding an Article 98 Agreement with us, raising taxes and 
addressing the Belize border dispute will all require a 
substantial amount of political capital and the good will of 
the opposition.  A highly publicized meeting in the Oval 
Office would give Berger a lift that would strengthen his 
hand in carrying out these unpopular measures.  It would also 
greatly strengthen our ability to secure his support for 
issues of importance to us.  Berger has conveyed to us his 
willingness to stay through May 4 in order to meet with the 
President if the May 3 date itself is not convenient for the 
White House.  We believe this visit would pay dividends for 
advancing our bilateral interests throughout the Berger 
presidency. 
 
27. (C) Berger wants to send Vice President Eduardo Stein to 
Washington in mid-March to meet with senior USG officials and 
members of Congress to explain Berger\'s program of government 
and to seek support for specific initiatives.  Stein knows us 
well and can be a good interpreter for Berger and his team of 
US perspectives on Guatemala.  We would hope that he could be 
received at the highest levels; more on this septel. 
 
Carpe diem 
---------- 
28. (C) With the inauguration of President Oscar Berger we 
have the best chance for significant change in Guatemala 
since the restoration of democracy in 1985, and an 
unparalleled opportunity to advance a large number of our 
highest priority goals in this country that forms the border 
with NAFTA.  It is important that we be prepared to respond 
to these opportunities with the resources -- political and 
financial to ensure their success. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14424","3/1/2004 22:43","04GUATEMALA508","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE7869","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 GUATEMALA 000508 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC, DRL/IL AND WHA/CEN 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FOR OPDAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ANTI-TIP REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 7869 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The new Government of Guatemala took 
office on January 14, 2004, is giving TIP priority attention, 
and is building on initial progress by the outgoing 
government.  The Ambassador and Embassy TIP Working Group met 
with the GOG Inter-Institutional Group to Combat TIP on 
February 25.  The GOG Anti-TIP Group, hosted by Vice Minister 
of Foreign Affairs for Migration and Human Rights Marta 
Altolaguirre, conveyed the Berger Government\'s commitment to 
combat TIP, including through law enforcement actions, which 
we have incorporated in this report.  The most notable GOG 
efforts over the past year included the signing and 
Congressional approval of the Trafficking Protocol of the 
Palermo Convention, the creation of a new anti-TIP 
prosecution unit in the Public Ministry, and the use of the 
Inter-Institutional Group to coordinate prospective GOG 
efforts in public education, law enforcement cooperation, and 
capacity building.  While not yet fully meeting minimum 
standards in U.S. law, we are convinced that the new GOG has 
made and will continue to make serious and sustained efforts 
to eliminate TIP.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) The following are responses to questions in Ref A. 
 
3.  (SBU) Country Overview: 
 
A.  According to reports by ECPAT, the International 
Organization on Migration (IOM), the ILO, Casa Alianza, and 
an October 2002 report from the DePaul University 
International Human Rights Law Institute, Guatemala is a 
country of origin and transit for international trafficking 
of persons and, in some instances, is also a destination. 
The trafficking is by land, air, and sea, and it does occur 
within Guatemala,s borders.  Reliable statistics do not 
exist on the magnitude of the problem, although a recent Casa 
Alianza report demonstrates that one form of TIP, involving 
sexual exploitation of minors, involves hundreds of victims. 
Besides Guatemalans, other Central Americans are being 
trafficked in Guatemala.  Victims trafficked to Guatemala are 
usually young women or children who are often brought in for 
sexual exploitation.  Those trafficked from Guatemala for 
sexual exploitation are usually minors, both boys and girls, 
from poor families.  Trafficking is intimately related to 
international migration issues, as the promise of arrival in 
the U.S. is often used to attract desperate Latin Americans. 
 
-- ECPAT, in a report on TIP in Guatemala for the Regional 
TIP Workshop January 26-30, 2004, asserts (without producing 
supporting evidence) that Guatemala suffers from all forms of 
TIP:  networks of traffickers for sexual exploitation and 
sexual tourism operate in Guatemala (the latter principally 
for Asian clients in the capital).  It also cites isolated 
cases of child pornography, and the use of forced labor in 
agriculture, domestic service, manufacturing (less 
convincingly), street begging and as narco-trafficking mules. 
 
B.  Trafficked persons come mainly from other Central 
American countries and Guatemala.  Most are destined for the 
United States or Mexico.  Some are destined for Guatemala. 
In addition to the trafficking of Latin Americans, smuggling 
of Chinese, Afghans, Egyptians, Pakistanis and Syrians has 
been noted in the past, and probably includes some cases of 
trafficking. 
 
C.  Not to our knowledge. 
 
D.  A confidential report by Casa Alianza in February 2004 
indicates that trafficking of minors for prostitution 
involves hundreds of victims nationwide.  Between November 
2002 and August 2003 Casa Alianza visited 284 commercial 
establishments (bars, massage parlors, nightclubs, etc.) in 
13 provinces and 32 different municipalities in Guatemala 
where it suspected minors were being sexually exploited.  In 
197 of these establishments, Central American minors were 
present.  179 minors were confirmed and 423 others who 
appeared to be less than 18 years old were observed.  Many 
who appeared to be minors claimed to be over 18.  In 85 
establishments, minors were not observed.  However, 
informants claimed that minors are often hidden from view for 
exclusive clients.  In two of the establishments, Casa 
Alianza investigators were barred entry. 
 
-- Of the 668 minors observed by Casa Alianza, 288 were from 
Guatemala, 115 were of undetermined national origin, 100 from 
Honduras, 98 from El Salvador, 61 from Nicaragua, 3 from 
Belize and 3 from Costa Rica.  Within Guatemala, 411 of these 
minors were found in Guatemala province, 9 in Sacatepequez, 
50 in Escuintla, 15 in Chiquimula, 2 in Baja Verapaz, 8 in 
Huehuetenango, 46 in Izabal, 23 in Jutiapa, 55 in Peten, 20 
in Quetzaltenango, 5 in Retalhuleu, 25 in San Marcos, and 7 
in Suchitepequez.  (Note:  These numbers do not add up to 668 
-- it appears that the 9 minors reported in Antigua, 
Sacatepequez, were mistakenly counted in the 411 figure for 
Guatemala province.  That still leaves one minor unaccounted 
for.) 
 
-- A 2002 report by the UN Rapporteur for child sexual 
exploitation cited an estimate of 2,000 minors being sexually 
exploited in 600 bars and brothels in the capital city alone. 
 Of these, 1,200 were estimated to be Salvadorans, 500 
Hondurans and more than 300 Guatemalans. 
 
E.  Victims are subject to violence and threat, but lack 
funds to return to their home countries.  Victims are often 
young women or children, brought here for sexual exploitation 
and paid low salaries.  A study done by ECPAT in 2004 
suggests that fraud and threats are common forms of 
recruitment.  Usually traffickers choose pretty girls from 
poor families, and the most common \"contracting places\" are 
along the borders. 
 
F.  Victims trafficked from Guatemala are generally poor 
people looking for a better life for themselves and their 
families.  The traffickers quite often approach these 
individuals and offer them jobs that would allow them to make 
regular remittances back to the family in Guatemala.  The 
main target population for sexual exploitation is minors, 
both boys and girls, from poor families or orphans.  The 
methods of approach include promises of economic rewards, job 
in cafeterias or beauty parlors, or jobs in other countries. 
The means of promotion include flyers, newspaper 
advertisements, and verbal/personal recommendations.  The 
DePaul University study \"In Modern Bondage: Sex Trafficking 
in the Americas\" cites evidence of the following principal 
forms and agents of trafficking in Guatemala: 1) 
\"deceptions/false promise of employment\" by recruiters, 
intermediaries, and bar/brothel owners; 2) \"misadventure\" 
with alien smugglers and truck drivers; 3) abduction by 
common criminals; and 4) \"peer-influenced\" (primarily 
domestic) trafficking by friends and adolescents. 
 
G.  Yes.  We are convinced that the GOG has the political 
will at the highest levels to combat trafficking in persons 
and is making a good faith effort to seriously address 
trafficking.  That political will has repeatedly been 
expressed by President Berger, Vice President Stein, and 
Foreign Minister Briz in meetings with the Ambassador.  In 
his January 14 inaugural address, President Berger 
acknowledged the seriousness of the TIP problem in Guatemala, 
and pledged to eradicate it.  Most recently, the Ambassador 
met with the GOG anti-TIP interagency group on February 25, 
in which Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Altolaguirre 
explicitly recognized TIP as serious and high priority 
problem and committed the GOG to continue and redouble its 
efforts to apply national law and international instruments 
to do so, using the inter-ministerial group as a coordinating 
mechanism for an integrated approach.  She said that the GOG 
must give special attention to exploited minor victims of 
begging networks, in addition to victims of sexual 
exploitation.  She outlined the following actions the GOG 
will take in the short run to combat TIP, including: 
 
Prosecution 
 
-- the GOG is prosecuting several cases involving sexual 
exploitation of minors which have led to arrests (see below); 
 
-- the GOG in January 2004 created an anti-TIP unit in the 
Attorney General\'s Office under the Special Prosecutor for 
Women.  The unit consists of the Special Prosecutor, three 
auxiliary prosecutors, and one support official.  (Note:  we 
will request G/TIP material support for this unit SepTel. 
End Note.) 
 
-- the Provincial Government of the Department of Guatemala 
has formed a multi-sectoral group to combat TIP; 
 
-- the GOG will implement a \"zero tolerance\" policy against 
TIP by raiding brothels and bars included in the Casa Alianza 
report in March to rescue victims, and is willing to do the 
same against others it suspects involve TIP; 
 
-- the Migration Directorate will establish a unit specially 
dedicated to anti-TIP activities; 
 
Prevention/Education 
 
-- the GOG is willing to take action against TIP in the 
maquila sector to prevent labor exploitation of women and 
minors; 
 
-- the GOG Presidential Secretariat of Social Communication 
plans a massive anti-TIP education campaign targeted at 
high-impact areas; 
 
-- the Immigration Directorate will launch in March and April 
2004 a campaign to educate the public to the risks of TIP in 
all border crossings, including how to file a complaint; 
 
-- the Foreign Ministry, in coordination with the IOM, 
developed a training program on international instruments to 
combat alien smuggling and TIP on July 30-August 1, 2003, for 
public servants and staff of Guatemala\'s consulates general 
in Mexico and the U.S.; 
 
-- the Secretariat for Women has developed education 
campaigns to prevent violence against women, including TIP; 
 
-- the GOG has developed a public education campaign and 
requests that the USG consider supporting this effort with a 
financial contribution; 
 
-- the Police Academy will integrate anti-TIP training into 
its core curricula for new recruits and mid-level officers in 
2004 (with USG technical assistance); 
 
-- preventive education on violence toward women and child 
sexual exploitation has been integrated into primary and 
secondary curricula, and teachers received training in this 
area; 
 
Legislation 
 
-- the GOG has drafted legislation to reform the penal code 
to criminalize and stiffen sanctions for crimes related to 
TIP, and to meet its international commitments, which is in 
discussion in the Congress; 
 
Policy Coordination 
 
-- by continuing the Inter-Institutional Group for 
Cooperation to Combat TIP, which includes the Ministry of 
Foreign Relations, Government (Interior), Labor, Health, 
Education, the Presidential Secretariat for Social Welfare, 
the Presidential Secretariat for Women, the Secretariat for 
Social Communication, the Office of the Solicitor General, 
the Attorney General\'s Office, the Presidential Commission 
for Human Rights, the Guatemalan Tourism Institute, the 
Government of the Province of Guatemala, and the Judiciary 
(Supreme Court).   The objectives of the group include 
prevention, investigation and prosecution, and protection of 
victims; 
 
-- the Ministry of Government, Public Ministry Attorney 
General\'s Office) and the judiciary have signed an agreement 
to cooperate on prosecution of TIP cases; 
 
-- the GOG will design and implement a national policy 
against TIP within the next six months, with IOM assistance. 
 
Protection 
 
-- the Secretariat of Social Welfare provides shelter and 
integrated services for TIP victims (14 are currently 
sheltered) referred by Court order, and hopes to open a 
shelter for TIP victims in Coatepeque, San Marcos province. 
The GOG is seeking external assistance to renovate a building 
it owns there; 
 
-- the GOG cooperates with an NGO-based program Guardian 
Angels to help victims; 
 
Corruption 
 
-- the GOG will intensify its efforts against corruption 
linked to TIP.  The group will coordinate its efforts with 
the GOG\'s newly-named Transparency Commission. 
 
-- the Immigration Directorate has taken actions to combat 
corruption in its ranks; 
 
-- police training already includes US-supported transparency 
and anti-corruption training; 
 
Regional Cooperation 
 
--  The GOG participates in regional dialogue on this 
subject, including with its trading partners, through the 
Regional Conference on Migration, the Central American 
Commission of Immigration Directors (OCAM), and bilaterally, 
especially with Mexico; 
 
--  implementation in the short term of the Regional Work 
Plan To Combat Illegal Migration and TIP of the Regional 
Conference on Migration, including information sharing on 
traffickers, their operations and documentation used; 
 
-- implementation of harmonized procedures for the orderly 
return of minors of CA to fight TIP involving minors; 
 
-- a MOU with Mexico is in the process of approval for the 
protection of minor victims of TIP and smuggling on the 
Mexican border, to train public servants to prevent and 
support minor victims of TIP, promote family reunification 
and to develop media prevention and information campaigns in 
high-impact areas; 
 
-- TIP will be on the agenda for President Fox\'s visit to 
Guatemala in March 2004; 
 
-- the GOG,s Immigration Directorate and Mexico\'s Border 
Police have formed a High-Level Group to strengthen joint 
efforts top combat organized crime, including TIP; 
 
-- the GOG wishes to broaden the scope of the MOU to include 
all TIP victims, and include the provision of migratory 
status for these victims to provide protection; 
 
-- the VIII Guatemala-Mexico Bi-national meeting held in 
February gave special emphasis to the secure and dignified 
return program for Central American migrants at the border 
between Mexico and Guatemala, and Guatemala proposed the 
inclusion of providing adequate identification with the goal 
of reducing their vulnerability to becoming victims of TIP; 
 
-- the Council of Women,s Ministries has formed a working 
group on TIP, according to the Presidential Secretary for 
Women; 
 
-- Guatemala will continue to consider the inclusion of 
Mexico as observer in coordination meetings between the 
Foreign Ministry and the Immigration Directorate. 
 
-- To combat both smuggling and trafficking, an ambitious 
plan was designed by the Central American Commission of 
Migration Directors.  The plan includes assistance to 
Guatemalans in foreign nations, assistance to Guatemalan 
victims who return, reinsertion into society, local 
development to diminish migration problems, protection of 
human rights of immigrants, and educational and informational 
campaigns.  The new agreement was signed in March 2001.  In 
July 2001, the Cabinet approved a Plan of Action against 
Sexual Exploitation of Minors and Adolescents.  The Ministry 
of Foreign Relations has engaged in regular dialogue with 
Mexico on migration enforcement issues. 
 
-- The GOG is using the immigration service and the national 
police force, and the new anti-TIP prosecution in the 
Attorney General\'s Office to combat trafficking and has had 
some victories.  A computerized entry and exit system has 
yielded some positive results with respect to combating alien 
smuggling and should help fight trafficking as well. 
However, no statistics exist for cases involving trafficking 
per se.  Most deportations were of Ecuadorians in transit to 
the U.S. who were probably victims of smuggling, rather than 
of trafficking. 
 
H.  The involvement of government officials in trafficking 
has not been well documented.  However, credible press 
accounts allege that corruption in the Guatemalan immigration 
service is widespread and involves the acceptance of bribes 
to allow individuals and groups to enter the country without 
proper documentation.  Prostitution-related corruption is 
also alleged in the National Civilian Police. 
 
-- At least four government officials, including a leader of 
the immigration directorate\'s union, have been prosecuted for 
corruption (bribery and illegal transit of persons) in cases 
involving alien smuggling.  Eighty Immigration Directorate 
employees were fired for cause in 2003.  Disciplinary 
proceedings against officials in the Immigration Directorate 
involved 46 employees in 2003. 
 
I.  Lack of resources, both manpower and money, is a major 
limitation to combating this problem, as with 
narco-trafficking and other trans-border problems.  The new 
government faces a budgetary crisis due to low tax revenue 
which it is attempting to address through tax reform.  In the 
meantime, all government agencies are facing very austere 
budgets.  With unlimited social needs and acute demands on 
scarce resources, providing new resources to combat 
trafficking is very difficult.  Corruption has been pervasive 
throughout the GOG in the past. 
 
4. (SBU) Prevention: 
 
A.  Yes.  See para 3.G., above. 
 
-- The GOG has also acknowledged a related problem, the 
sexual exploitation of minors.  In July 2001, the Cabinet 
approved a National Plan of Action Against the Sexual and 
Commercial Exploitation of Children and Adolescents in 
Guatemala.  The Plan\'s strategic objectives include:  1) 
survey social, economic, political, and social conditions 
contributing to the problem, 2) assist and rehabilitate 
victims, 3) apply justice and eliminate corruption 
facilitating exploitation, and 4) increase awareness of the 
problem and advance the plan.  The Presidential Secretariat 
for Social Welfare developed the plan in cooperation with 
other government agencies. 
 
-- The Director General of Guatemalan Migration has 
acknowledged that trafficking in persons is a problem.  Every 
day Mexican authorities deport approximately 450 people from 
Central and South American through the border at El Carmen, 
Guatemala.  Many of these people claim they had been taken 
with the promise that they would be able to enter the U.S. 
In Mexico, some are obligated to work with no pay; others are 
prostituted.  The majority, however, are probably victims of 
alien smuggling rather than trafficking. 
 
B.  The following government agencies are involved in the 
anti-trafficking efforts:  The Director General of Migration, 
the Ministry of Foreign Relations; the Presidential 
Secretariat of Social Welfare; the National Civilian Police; 
 
SIPDIS 
the Labor Ministry; the Education Ministry; the Public 
Ministry (Attorney General\'s Office), including the 
Prosecutor for Women and its anti-TIP unit; the Presidential 
Secretariat for Women; the Presidential Human Rights 
 
SIPDIS 
Commission; the Presidential Secretariat for Social 
Communication; the National Tourism Institute; the Office of 
the Solicitor General; the judiciary (Child and Adolescent 
Courts); and the provincial government of Guatemala. 
 
C.   The Immigration Directorate will launch a campaign to 
educate the public to the risks of TIP in all border 
crossings, including how to file a complaint; 
 
-- the GOG,s Presidential Secretariat for Social 
Communication has developed (but not yet implemented) a 
massive public education campaign to increase public 
awareness and inform victims how to file a complaint, focused 
on high-impact areas (and requests that the USG consider 
supporting this effort financially); 
 
-- the Secretariat for Women has developed education 
campaigns to prevent violence against women; 
 
-- In 2003, the Embassy Public Affairs Office sponsored a 
press briefing on TIP involving G/TIP and Embassy anti-TIP 
officials, and EmbOffs participated in radio programs 
highlighting the risks of TIP.  In 2000-01 the Embassy Public 
Affairs Office, with $40,000 from INS, produced three radio 
and three television spots.  The announcements ran heavily 
during these two months.  In June 2000, Public Affairs 
sponsored visits by two Guatemalan journalists on an INS 
\"border tour\" to report on the dangers of trusting alien 
smugglers (\"coyotes\").  A 10-day training program for four 
radio journalists from the border province of Huehuetenango 
in January 2002 and a similar program in Quetzaltenango 
province in 2003 had a similar emphasis.  The journalists 
have helped to spread Embassy\'s message discouraging travel 
with smugglers. 
 
-- The UN Rapporteur for Violence Against Women visited 
Guatemala in February, 2004 and denounced all forms of 
violence against women, including TIP. 
 
D.  The Human Rights Ombudsman\'s office maintains an Office 
in Defense of Displaced and Migrant Populations, which 
investigates cases of trafficking.  The Ombudsman\'s Office 
also sponsored public information campaigns during 2002 
warning intending migrants of the risks of illegal 
immigration and trafficking.  Other governmental offices are 
dedicated to the Defense of Indigenous Women, which provides 
legal advice to indigenous women victims of domestic violence 
and abuse, children,s rights, and women,s issues; none 
reported involvement in cases of trafficking during the 
period of this report. 
 
-- The GOG,s Presidential Secretariat of Social Welfare 
coordinated GOG cooperation with civil society groups 
including religious, private, and international NGOs under 
the National Plan of Action to Combat Sexual Exploitation of 
Minors; 
 
-- With ILO/IPEC support the Presidential Secretariat of 
Social Welfare has provided education materials on child 
sexual exploitation to the primary and secondary school 
system. 
 
-- The GOG, with assistance from USDOL, will launch a program 
in 2004 to encourage school participation and reduce child 
labor.  The GOG cooperates with several ILO programs focused 
on reducing child labor by sector (e.g. for sexual 
exploitation, broccoli production, gravel production, 
fireworks production). 
 
E.  Government resources are severely strained and inadequate 
in many areas, including combating trafficking.  Prevention 
programs for TIP are still in the planning stages, although 
the GOG has announced several prevention programs set to 
start this year (see above).  The GOG has requested 
international assistance to help fund some of these efforts. 
 
F.  Many NGOs are working on gathering information, providing 
assistance, and preventing trafficking.  There are NGOs 
working at the Guatemala-Mexico border, and national and 
international human rights organizations working with women, 
children and migrants (e.g. UNICEF, Casa Alianza, ECPAT, 
PRONICE).  The ILO/IPEC project to prevent child sexual 
exploitation funds ECPAT to coordinate between the GOG 
Secretariat of Social Welfare programs and Casa Alliance\'s 
 
SIPDIS 
assistance programs for victims.  UNICEF provided training on 
the prevention of violence and handling child victims to 400 
justices of the peace between June and December 2003. 
 
-- The GOG (through its border consulates, the Human Rights 
Ombudsman\'s Office, the Supreme Court, INTERPOL, Presidential 
Human Rights Commission, Presidential Secretariat for Social 
Welfare, Labor Ministry, Presidential Secretariat for Women, 
Solicitor General\'s Office) has actively participated in two 
bi-national meetings with NGOs in Guatemala and Mexico to 
share experiences on child migrants and sexual exploitation 
of minors on the Guatemalan-Mexican border, in May 2003 in 
San Marcos province, Guatemala, and in December 2003 in 
Tapachula, Chiapas state, Mexico. 
 
G.  Guatemala,s borders are poorly policed and corruption is 
rampant on both sides.  The computerized entry-exit system is 
helping at the legal crossing points, but there are many 
illegal crossing points available.  Mexico deported more than 
170,000 Central Americans (including 81,361 Guatemalans) from 
Chiapas in 2003.  While Guatemalan deportees are left at the 
Mexico-Guatemalan border, other Central American deportees 
from Mexico are transported to the borders of El Salvador and 
Honduras under a cooperative program between U.S., Mexican 
and Guatemalan immigration authorities. 
 
H.  Yes.  The GOG created an Inter-Institutional Cooperation 
Group to Combat TIP.  The membership is listed in 3.G., above. 
 
-- The government has a de facto anti-TIP task force, 
organized in 2003 and continued by the new government, which 
is comprised of key law enforcement agencies including the 
Ministry of Government (Immigration Directorate and National 
Civilian Police), and the Public Ministry-Prosecutor for 
Women anti-TIP unit) which is committed to work jointly on 
anti-TIP operations.  The judiciary is also nominally 
involved in the task force. 
 
-- In February 2004, the Immigration Director announced the 
creation of a task force involving the Government Ministry 
(Immigration Directorate and the National Civilian Police), 
the Public Ministry, and the judiciary (see above). 
 
-- The National Association for Guatemalan Migrants 
represents NGOs involved in migrant issues, including TIP. 
This and other groups work together on human rights issues 
with the Presidential Coordinator of Human Rights in 
Guatemala. 
 
-- The new government formed a Transparency Commission to 
prevent corruption and investigate cases.  A Presidential 
Commissioner for Transparency is leading this effort. 
 
I.  Yes.  The Regional Commission of Central American 
Migration Directors (OCAM) meets regularly to discuss issues 
including trafficking.  The International Migration 
Organization (IOM) has a regional office in Guatemala, and 
cooperates with the government on several bilateral projects 
to combat trafficking.  Guatemala is a member of the 
11-member Regional Conference on Migration, which meets 
semi-annually. 
 
J.  No, but it has announced plans to develop one over the 
next six months (see 3.G., above).  It does have a National 
Action Plan to Combat the Sexual Exploitation of Children and 
Adolescents, as mentioned above. 
 
K.  As described above, various entities are coordinated by 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in an inter-institutional 
group to combat TIP. 
 
5. (SBU) Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers: 
 
A.  Guatemala has several laws that specifically prohibit the 
trafficking and smuggling of persons, including the Law of 
Immigration of 1998 (Legislative Decree 95-98), Article 194 
of the Criminal Code, the Integral Protection of Children law 
approved in 2003, and several articles of the migration code. 
 In addition, there are other laws in the penal code that 
could be applicable (for pimping, corruption of minors, and 
\"ruffianism\").  The migration law sanctions those contracting 
illegal aliens with prison terms of two to five years, 
increased by one third when the crime is committed by 
government officials.  The crime of transporting illegal 
aliens is punished by prison terms of from three to six 
years.  The penal code also regulates coercion and the sexual 
abuse of women against their will. 
 
-- Guatemala signed and the Congress approved the anti-TIP 
Protocol to the Palermo Convention in September 2003.  The 
GOG,s articles of adhesion have been approved by the Foreign 
Ministry and await Presidential signature. 
 
-- Congress passed a Law for Integral Protection of Children 
and Adolescents June 4, 2003, implementing Guatemala,s 
commitment under the UN Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, declaring in Article 50 that \"Children and adolescents 
have the right to protection against kidnapping, smuggling, 
sale and trafficking in persons for whatever reason or in 
whatever form.  The State must develop national, bilateral 
and multilateral activities and strategies sufficient to 
prevent these crimes.\" 
 
-- Forced Labor is prohibited in the Constitution. 
 
-- Legislative reforms to punish violence against women are 
pending in Congress. 
 
-- The GOG informed the Embassy in February that it intends 
to submit legislative reforms to the penal code to stiffen 
sanctions against TIP and is already in discussion with the 
Congress about this. 
 
-- The ILO\'s Program to Eliminate Child Labor has drafted 
penal code reforms stiffening the penalty for TIP to 5-10 
years imprisonment and will launch a lobbying effort in 
Congress March 4. 
 
-- The Embassy has shared the USG,s model anti-TIP 
legislation with the GOG, ILO/IPEC and interested NGOs. 
 
B.  The penalty for traffickers is 1-3 years in prison, plus 
a fine of 2,500-15,000 quetzals ($320-1,923 at current 
exchange rates).  Penalties are increased by 2/3 if the 
victim is under 12, if the act was done with the intention to 
make a profit, or if the act included use of deceit, violence 
or abuse of authority. 
 
C.  The penalty for rape is 2-6 years, and the penalty for 
forcible assault is 2-5 years. 
 
D.  Sandra Zayas, the Prosecutor for Women and head of the 
brand new anti-TIP Unit in the Public Ministry, has requested 
any existing cases from other provincial prosecutors offices, 
and provided information on several current cases under 
investigation/prosecution: 
 
-- Case No. 9023-03 and Case No. 10395-03, both in the 
Escuintla district, and both still under investigation. 
(Note:  She provided no further details about these cases. 
End Note.) 
 
--  A case under investigation by the Prosecutor for Women, 
involving three Russian women (not minors) involved in 
prostitution.  Luis Santiago Marroquin Jerez was arrested on 
November 21 and released on bail by a judge on November 26. 
The case is still in the preparatory phase. 
 
-- In addition, we are aware of two other cases involving 
minors in prostitution;  (Note:  the Embassy shared 
information about the cases with Prosecutor Zayas on February 
25.  End Note.); 
 
-- On Feb. 18, 2004, Luis Enrique Estrada Navas, 68 years 
old, was arrested in a bar he was managing called \"Sinaloa\" 
in Cuilapa, Santa Rosa province.  He was charged with 
aggravated pimping and held by order of the justice of the 
peace at the Cuilapa Maximum Security prison.  Vicky Marylin 
Corado Aparicio, a 13-year-old Salvadoran, was rescued from 
prostitution in that bar and sheltered by court order in a 
government shelter in Antigua run by the Secretariat for 
Social Welfare. 
 
-- On October 29, 2003, Pablo Alexander Hernandez Castillo, a 
28-year-old Nicaraguan, was arrested in the Bar \"Illusions\" 
in Villa Canales, Guatemala province, for his involvement in 
the prostitution of Maryln Karina Hernandez Monterroso, a 
17-year-old Guatemalan. 
 
E.  ECPAT, in a report on TIP in Guatemala for the Regional 
TIP Workshop January 26-30, 2004, asserts that organized 
crime networks of traffickers for sexual exploitation and 
sexual tourism operate in Guatemala (the latter principally 
for Asian clients in the capital). 
 
F.  The GOG investigates cases of trafficking, but the 
victims usually do not press charges.  Usually, the victims 
of these crimes are women or minors, poor, and uneducated. 
Access to the justice system for these people, while 
improving, is still low.  In addition, lack of resources, and 
lack of training limit the ability of the National Civilian 
Police and the prosecutors to perform investigations. 
Undercover agents are not allowed under current law, 
racketeering statutes do not exist, and the surveillance of 
communications has been determined by the courts to be 
unconstitutional.  This makes investigations of trafficking 
organizations more difficult.  There is some hope for reform 
in this area, however.  To implement a GOG-UN agreement to 
create a Commission to Investigate Clandestine Groups, 
legislation to strengthen law enforcement to permit more 
robust investigations will be promoted in Congress. 
 
G.  In February 2004, the chief of the police academy agreed 
to integrate anti-TIP training into the curricula for new 
police recruits and mid-level police training.  The USG will 
provide train-the-trainer assistance to implement this 
initiative in March 2004.  In addition, the USG will provide 
this anti-TIP training to GOG immigration, prosecutorial and 
judicial officials. 
 
H.  In the Regional Conference on Migration and in bilateral 
agreements with Mexico, the GOG has pledged to cooperate with 
neighboring governments in the investigation and prosecution 
of trafficking cases.  We are not aware of any such efforts 
to date.  The non-binding Central American Parliament has 
also promoted anti-TIP cooperation amongst Central American 
governments. 
 
I.  Extradition, including the extradition of Guatemalan 
nationals, is allowed under the Guatemalan constitution and 
in various treaties and conventions.  We are unaware, 
however, of any pending extradition requests for trafficking 
in persons. 
 
J.  There is no evidence to suggest that the Guatemalan 
Government is involved in trafficking, except through the 
acts of corruption of individual officials. 
 
K.  The GOG has attempted to curb large-scale corruption and 
collusion with prostitution rings along its western border 
with Mexico by rotating police there every three months, and 
by prosecuting corrupt immigration officials (four in 2003). 
 
L.  The ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for elimination of the worst forms of child 
labor was approved and ratified on August 21, 2001, and the 
instrument of ratification was deposited on October 5, 2001. 
It entered into effect internationally for Guatemala on 
October 11, 2002. 
 
The GOG has signed and ratified ILO Conventions 29 (1989) and 
105 (1959) on forced or compulsory labor. 
 
The \"Sale of Children Protocol\" supplementing the rights of 
the child convention, was approved by decree 76-2001 of the 
Congress of Guatemala on December 11, 2001. 
 
The \"Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, Especially Women and Children,\" supplementing the UN 
convention against transnational crime, was signed and 
ratified by the GOG in 2003, but its instruments of adhesion 
to the Protocol await Presidential signature. 
 
Guatemala signed (September 7, 2000) and ratified (April 30, 
2002) the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and 
Child Pornography. 
 
6.  (SBU) Protection and Assistance to Victims: 
 
A.  The GOG in 2003 announced plans to construct shelters for 
deportees along the Guatemala-Mexico border (and requested 
USG support), but those shelters are not functioning.  The 
Secretariat for Social Welfare runs a series of shelters for 
 
SIPDIS 
child victims, including TIP victims.  The Public Ministry 
assists victims of crime through offices in all provincial 
capitals and major cities.  Assistance to victims of sexual 
assault consists of medical, psychological, and social 
counseling and assistance.  The Criminal Investigative 
Division of the National Police also provides referral 
services to victims, and investigates sex crimes that may 
involve trafficking. 
 
In 2002-3, the USG provided support totaling $110,000 to the 
NGO \"Casa de la Mujer\" for occupational training to 
trafficked women along the Mexican-Guatemalan border.  USAID 
is in the process of planning a project to provide support to 
a regional network of NGOs providing assistance and 
vocational training to TIP victims. 
 
B. We are not aware of GOG funding to foreign or domestic 
NGOs for services to victims. 
 
C.  Undocumented foreigners are deported and given 72 hours 
to depart, but many stay in Guatemala.  Victims of 
trafficking are not prosecuted. 
 
D.  In the past, victims were not actively encouraged to file 
civil suits or to seek legal action against traffickers. 
However, in February the Immigration Directorate announced a 
campaign to encourage foreign victims to file a complaint. 
 
E.  The GOG does not normally provide protection to witnesses 
that come forward.  In exceptional cases involving threats 
against witnesses, the Public Ministry provides police 
protection during and for a period after trails. 
 
F.  The government provides specialized training for police 
and Public Ministry officials serving victims.  Training for 
embassies and consulates in foreign countries is also being 
contemplated, but is not yet in place.  The GOG encourages 
its embassies and consulates to work with NGOs that serve 
trafficked victims. 
 
G.  The Public Ministry, with assistance from USAID, opened 
pilot victims, assistance centers in the capital in 2000 and 
expanded the program to include all provincial capitals and 
major cities in 2001.  The centers are staffed by a social 
worker training in victim assistance, with access to medical 
care, rape test kits, evidence preservation, and follow-up 
legal and psychological counseling.  The centers are 
available to victims of trafficking as well as other crimes. 
The Criminal Investigative Division of the National Police 
also provides services to victims and investigates crimes of 
trafficking. 
 
H.  The major NGOs that work with trafficking victims are 
\"Pastoral del Migrante\" from the Catholic Archbishop,s 
office, \"Casa del Migrante\" in Tecun Uman and \"Casa Alianza\" 
in the capital.  The NGOs provide shelter and medical and 
legal assistance. 
 
7.  (U) Embassy POC for TIP-related issues is Political 
Officer Erik Hall, who can be reached at (502) 331-1541 ext. 
4635; fax: (502) 334-8474.  Number of hours spent preparing 
this report:  80.  Ambassador, DCM and various other Embassy 
officers also participated in numerous meetings with the GOG 
on this issue. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14478","3/2/2004 20:53","04GUATEMALA525","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000525 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA FOR DAS FISK AND DAS DERHAM 
EB FOR DAS GREENWOOD 
TREASURY FOR OASIA: BILL BLOCK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2009 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY SUPPORTS GUATEMALAN REQUEST FOR QUICK 
DISBURSEMENT OF IDB SAL FUNDS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
Summary and Action Request 
-------------------------- 
1.  (C) Guatemala\'s new government is strapped for cash.  It 
inherited a backlog of unpaid bills and lost 10% of its tax 
base to a court challenge.  It is proposing serious fiscal 
reform, including cutting the military by half and attacking 
the corruption that depletes or diverts revenues, but its 
longer-term plans will rely on resuscitating the Fiscal Pact 
so that it has the mandate and legitimacy to force enduring 
reform, including any tax increases, through a fractious 
Congress.  It is choosing not to borrow or negotiate with the 
IMF in the absence of Fiscal Pact legitimacy, and that leaves 
few short-term options other than crippling austerity.  To 
survive though the short term without abandoning all 
initiative, the GOG will shortly be asking for the release of 
$80 million in IDB sector adjustment loan resources.  We 
understand that they have the sympathy of the Fund and IDB, 
but they are not fully in compliance with the Fund program. 
We urge Washington agencies to support release of the $80 
million to help underwrite the new government\'s 
extraordinarily promising start. 
 
2.  (C)  We have just heard that Guatemala may request an 
additional $50 million of World Bank sector adjustment 
funding.  Our understanding is that those funds are not 
intended for budget support but instead for recapitalization 
of the banking system.  We would want to know more about 
compliance with the Bank\'s program and the mechanics of 
disbursement before recommending any action on this request. 
End Summary and Action Request. 
 
Bleak Short Term Outlook While Fiscal Pact Resuscitated 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
3. (SBU) Guatemala is strapped for cash.  The Berger 
administration came to office with empty coffers, backlogs of 
unpaid salaries and bills, and on the heels of a court ruling 
that eliminated the \"IEMA\" asset-based tax that had provided 
ten percent of total revenues.  Tax reform is necessary and 
will be a Berger priority.  The Berger administration 
proposes to begin the process by resuscitating the Fiscal 
Pact that was negotiated by the Arzu Administration in 1999, 
after the Peace Accords, with some 650 civil society groups. 
The Portillo government subsequently discarded the Pact.  The 
new administration calculates that a renewed Fiscal Pact will 
provide the mandate and legitimacy needed to push a 2004 
budget and tax reform plan through an unfocused and 
politicized Congress.  Until that happens, the government is 
choosing not to approach international debt markets or 
negotiate a new program with the IMF in order not to be seen 
as prejudicing the outcome of the Fiscal Pact discussions. 
This leaves the government dependent upon austerity measures 
and a depleted tax base until the new Fiscal Pact can be 
agreed and implemented. 
 
$80 Million from the BID Requires Flexibility 
--------------------------------------------- 
4. (C) In the interim, $80 million of fast-disbursing funds 
are potentially available from the IDB under the Financial 
Sector Adjustment program.  Disbursement is contingent, 
however, upon IMF concurrence or compliance with an IMF 
program.  Guatemala currently is not fully compliant with its 
IMF stand-by, and we understand that it is for two reasons 
that are relatively minor: 1) a law exempting the sale of 
bank asset portfolios from the value added tax is still stuck 
in Congress, and 2) outside auditors have not been brought in 
to look into the failed national mortgage bank (CHN).  The 
tax exemption is not particularly controversial, and we 
expect it will be passed in due course.  The CHN audit has 
been overcome by events, as the bank\'s failure is no longer 
just a bankruptcy but the centerpiece of high-profile 
criminal cases under investigation by Guatemalan prosecutors 
and the U.S. BICE.  The IMF stand-by agreement will likely 
lapse in mid-March without Guatemala\'s full compliance, and 
the government does not expect to seek another Fund program 
until later in the year. 
 
Fund and IDB Staffs Look to the USG 
----------------------------------- 
5.  (C)  We understand that both the IMF and IDB staffs are 
prepared to be flexible if their boards are prepared to 
concur.  We also hear that the staffs will be looking 
specifically to the U.S. executive directors for signs of our 
sentiments.  This filtered back to us following IDB President 
Iglesias\'s trip here a couple of weeks ago.  We note that it 
was the U.S., with this Embassy\'s strong urging, that 
abstained on the 2002 stand-by agreement because supposed 
prior conditions on financial reform legislation had not been 
fully met.  We heard at the time that it wasn\'t a pleasant 
experience for Fund staff, and we\'re not surprised at their 
caution this time.  Times have changed, however.  In 2002 we 
were concerned about giving the benefit of the doubt to a 
government that had veered seriously off course.  This time, 
we have a government that knows where it\'s going and whose 
aims we support. 
 
Economic Team to Visit Washington 
--------------------------------- 
6.  (C)  A vice ministerial delegation from the Berger 
economic team arrived in Washington over the February 28-29 
weekend to seek concurrence of the Fund and Treasury to 
release the $80 million from the IDB.  We had been told that 
economic policy coordinator Aitkenhead and Finance Minister 
Bonilla would lead a team later in the week, but Aitkenhead 
changed his mind and dispatched a more junior mission in 
order to save time.  We believe strongly that we should 
accommodate the Guatemlan request.  The new government has, 
in six weeks, brought extraordinary pressure to bear on 
corrupt former officials (both the former President and his 
revenues chief abruptly left the country before court orders 
barring their travel took effect), and it has convoked the 
renewed fiscal pact dialogue and chosen its moderators.  It 
has changed management in the ports, where customs and tax 
evasion were largely centered, and is working on a plan to 
cut the military by half.  The early signals could not be 
more clear that the Berger Administration wants its fiscal 
house in order, with efficient revenue collection and 
refocused spending on education and health.  It has also made 
clear that it is prepared to raise tax rates if needed to 
finance what Guatemalans want from their Fiscal Pact, but 
that will take some time.  The quickest and most tangible 
action we can take in coming days to help the government keep 
its momentum would be help it access the IDB disbursement. 
 
World Bank Funds 
---------------- 
7.  (C)  The Guatemalans may also ask for disbursement of 
approximately $50 million in World Bank sector adjustment 
funds.  We are not yet ready to recommend how to deal with 
such a request and would want to consult further with our 
World Bank colleagues on Guatemala\'s compliance with some of 
the specific conditionalities in their program.  The World 
Bank program undewrites, at least in part, a specific 
mechanism of subordinated debt to help recapitalize the 
banking system and is not simply policy-linked budget 
support.  Our initial reaction is that the World Bank funds 
are a crucial element in bank restructing efforts spanning 
several years and are best left for their intended purpose. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14479","3/2/2004 20:53","04GUATEMALA526","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE30377","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000526 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: RESUMPTION OF FTAA TNC AND NEXT STEPS 
 
REF: STATE 30377 
 
With us on the Plurilateral Agreement 
------------------------------------- 
1.  (SBU)  EconCouns discussed resumption of FTAA Trade 
Negotiating Committee activities (reftel) with Vice Minister 
of Economy for Trade and Integration Eduardo Sperisen on 
March 1.  Sperisen fully agreed on the importance of moving 
ahead quickly and across the board on a high-quality 
plurilateral agreement among the G-14, and he looked forward 
to meeting in Puebla on March 17. 
 
But Not On Costa Rica as Representative 
--------------------------------------- 
2.  (SBU)  Sperisen raised the smaller group meeting with the 
five allies and Mercosur in Buenos Aires.  He said he 
understood the thinking behind keeping the meeting small but 
was annoyed that Costa Rica had been chosen as the Central 
American representative.  He noted that Costa Rica had been 
used by the U.S. as coordinator with the Central Americans in 
Puebla despite not being represented at the vice ministerial 
level.  He also noted that Guatemala was president 
pro-tempore of the Central American Integration System (SICA) 
for 2004 and, should, per normal protocol, speak for the 
sub-region.  He lamented the damage done to Guatemala\'s 
reputation by the recently departed Portillo Administration 
and hoped that the recovery would not take too long. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Comment:  The Guatemalans are still annoyed with 
Costa Rican behavior at the end of the \"final\" CAFTA round in 
Washington and their lack of enthusiasm for building a 
customs union.  It was particularly clear that Sperisen 
disliked being \"coordinated\" in Puebla by Costa Rica\'s 
Fernando Ocampo, whom the Guatemalans seem to hold in 
particular contempt. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14522","3/3/2004 15:22","04GUATEMALA529","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031522Z Mar 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 000529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, GT 
SUBJECT: GSP DELEGATION PROMOTES LABOR LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  An inter-agency USG delegation visited 
Guatemala on February 23-24 to review GOG compliance with GSP 
labor conditions and encourage the new government to take 
steps to protect fundamental worker rights.  The group met 
with GOG officials, union, and business leaders to discuss 
the issues raised in outstanding GSP petitions. The 
delegation also conducted a press roundtable which generated 
articles in all major dailies and AUSTR Clatanoff 
participated in a radio program to describe USG concerns 
about labor rights enforcement. 
 
2.  (SBU) The GOG reported advances in the investigation and 
prosecution of cases of past violence against union leaders, 
ongoing efforts to streamline the labor justice system, and 
resolution of some cases involving reinstatement of workers 
illegally fired for unionizing activities.  The 
Inter-Institutional Working Group professed a strong GOG 
commitment to enforce its labor laws as well as to promote 
reforms to address gender and union discrimination in the 
workplace.  The Embassy considers the recent advances to 
represent significant steps in compliance with GSP 
conditions, and recommends that the GSP petition review be 
closed.  The delegation emphasized to the GOG the need for 
further steps and progress on CAFTA Track Two in the area of 
labor law enforcement and labor law reform.  We will continue 
to encourage and report any further progress.  End Summary. 
 
3.  (U) The USG delegation was comprised of William \"Bud\" 
Clatanoff, Assistant USTR for Labor; Charlotte Roe, Senior 
Labor Advisor, WHA/PPC; Amy Holman, Trade Economist, EB; and 
Carlos Romero, International Economist, ILAB/USDOL.  In each 
meeting, the delegation explained the USG GSP review process 
and expressed concern about the core issues contained in open 
petitions submitted in December 2002, including: 
 
-- the investigation and prosecution of cases of past 
violence against trade unionists; 
-- the speed and agility of the labor justice system; 
-- reinstatement of workers illegally-fired for unionizing 
activities; 
-- efforts to combat employment discrimination, especially 
blacklisting of union members; and, 
-- the need to strengthen the labor inspection system. 
 
Minister of Labor Outlines Priorities 
------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) On February 23, the delegation met with Minister of 
Labor Jorge Gallardo, First Vice Minister of Labor Cesar 
Castillo, Second Vice Minister of Labor Mario Gordillo, 
ministerial advisor Alejandro Argueta, Ministry Inspector 
General Celeste Ayala, and other members of the ministry. 
Gallardo welcomed the delegation and pledged full GOG 
cooperation.  AUSTR Clatanoff presented the delegation and 
explained the background for the visit, including the 
specific areas of concern outlined above.  In addition to 
prompting the GSP petition review, the labor rights situation 
in Guatemala would feature prominently in U.S. Congressional 
debate over CAFTA approval, he said.  For the unilateral GSP 
review, the USG would review the GOG\'s steps taken to protect 
labor rights; those same steps, taken in advance of the U.S. 
Congressional debate over CAFTA, would also improve the 
prospects of CAFTA approval.  We refer to actions taken in 
advance of CAFTA to strengthen labor laws and their 
enforcement as CAFTA\'s \"Track Two.\"  CAFTA\'s \"Third Track\" 
involves USG support for capacity building measures, which 
include a new $6.7 million regional project to promote public 
awareness of labor rights and improve labor law 
administration including inspections, he said.  Ms. Roe 
emphasized the need for continued and visible GOG action to 
protect labor rights. 
 
5.  (SBU) Minister Gallardo, who took office five weeks 
earlier, told the delegation that he intends to request an 
increase of the MOL budget during this year and next, to 
address severe budget constraints and low salaries, 
especially in the inspection branch.  The minister said he 
would give the inspectorate priority attention, emphasizing 
the need to combat corruption in the ranks through training 
and oversight (which he referred to as \"systematization\"). 
He said the ministry was in discussions with the Central 
American Economic Integration System (SIECA), to provide 
re-training to inspectors, and plans to reorganize the 
inspections division in consultation with workers and 
employers.  He highlighted the creation of two new inspector 
units, one for the maquila sector and the other to combat 
child labor.  He said encouraging dialogue between social 
groups and building consensus was a high priority for this 
government, as was implementing a long-term vision for the 
ministry.  To do so, he has been meeting with employers and 
unions and hopes to create a unit to help resolve and prevent 
conflicts through dialogue.  Gallardo said the GOG was 
prepared to present a report to the delegation responding to 
issues raised in the GSP petitions the following day.  In 
response to a question from Mr. Romero about cooperation 
between the Ministries of Labor and Economy to enforce labor 
rights in the maquila sector, Gallardo said he believed this 
cooperation must continue, and the MOL must use all GOG 
institutions to convince employers of the government\'s 
intention to apply the law. 
6.  (SBU) Vice Minister Gordillo said the GOG is very 
concerned about resolving cases cited in the petitions, and 
wishes to take measures to address them.  The ministry is 
also concerned about cases of violence and maintains close 
communication with the Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Unionists who is investigating them.  Mr. Clatanoff said it 
is critical to prevent any future violence.  LabAtt noted 
that the UN-GOG agreement on formation of a Commission to 
Investigate Clandestine Groups includes a mandate to 
investigate attacks against trade unionists and other human 
rights defenders.  Gordillo added that the MOL hopes to 
strengthen its inspections and fines departments, as well as 
its Defense of Worker Rights Unit.  Defending worker rights 
in the maquila sector is another priority, and the ministry 
is coordinating with the Ministry of Economy (which controls 
export tax benefits) on this issue, through the maquila 
sub-commission of the GOG Inter-Institutional Labor Group. 
 
7.  (SBU) Asked about the prospects for pending labor 
reforms, Minister Gallardo said that the legislative package 
pending in the last Congress has been sent back to 
committees, which have 60 days to act on them.  The ministry 
has encouraged Congress to seek consensus from all sectors on 
the reforms as soon as possible, even if this takes 
additional time.  Vice Minister Gordillo pointed out that no 
one party has the majority in Congress.  Mr. Argueta said 
that in addition to responding to U.S. interest and concern, 
it is important for Guatemalan workers and employers to agree 
on their mutual interests.  Mr. Clatanoff agreed that efforts 
to build consensus and \"ownership\" are very important, 
especially given the historical context of labor relations in 
Guatemala.  He noted the strong differences between GSP 
review, which is unilateral, and CAFTA\'s labor chapter, which 
is not. 
 
Inter-Institutional Group Reports Progress 
------------------------------------------ 
 
8.  (SBU) On February 24, the Ambassador accompanied the 
delegation to a meeting of the GOG\'s Inter-Institutional 
Labor Group, hosted by Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Carlos Ramiro Martinez.  Also attending were Vice Ministers 
of Labor Castillo and Gordillo; Otto Marroquin, Supreme Court 
Magistrate; Beatriz de Barrera and Rolando Cabrera, Labor 
Court justices; Mariano Rayo, President of the Congressional 
Economic Commission; Marco Antonio Cortez Sis, Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes Against Trade Unionists; Ambassador 
Maritsa de Vielman of the MFA; Mario Lopez, the GOG CAFTA 
labor negotiator from the Ministry of Economy; and 
representatives from the Solicitor General\'s Office, the tax 
authority (SAT) and the Social Security Institute (IGSS). 
 
9.  (SBU) Vice Minister Martinez presented the GOG\'s latest 
report on the GSP petitions, which have been delivered to 
Washington agencies by the delegation.  The report included 
the following information on advances made in labor law 
enforcement and commitments by the Berger administration: 
 
-- a new vision: of permanent social dialogue between 
employers, workers and political actors in compliance with 
international trade agreements and ILO commitments; 
 
-- advances in the administration of labor justice: 
administrative efforts to extend coverage and competence of 
labor court judges; 
 
-- labor law reform: including 2001 reforms and pending 
(2003) reforms that will address gender discrimination, 
strengthen child labor protections and protect the rights of 
domestic workers 
 
-- labor law enforcement and compliance: maquila sector 
efforts coordinated between MOL and Economy Ministry; efforts 
to strengthen the labor inspection function; formation of two 
new inspection units; resolution of the Choi 
Shin/Cimatextiles case; modernization of the MOL and case 
flow tracking system for inspection and fines divisions; 
renewed MOL efforts to support the National Commission for 
the Prevention and Eradication of Child Labor and Protection 
of Adolescent Workers; 
 
-- progress in cases of violence against trade unionists: 
arrest on February 20, 2004 of Mario Roberto Ortiz Barranco 
for the murder of Oswaldo Monzon Lima; February 12, 2004 
request to judge to call the prime suspect in the murder of 
Baldomero de Jesus Ramirez; February 17, 2004 request by 
District Attorney to reopen the investigation of the murder 
of Baudilio Amado Cermeno; request for a hearing on the 
intended homicide case against Julio Enrique de Jesus Salazar 
Pivaral for threats, slight injuries and illegal detention of 
a union member on his plantation. 
 
-- progress on labor cases cited in GSP petitions:  several 
cases are still in the courts; however, most (8 of 12), with 
the most notable exception being the Finca Maria Lourdes 
case, are reported resolved amicably. 
 
10.  (SBU) In response, AUSTR Clatanoff praised the formation 
and efforts of the Inter-Institutional Group, and said the 
progress reported would be favorably considered by the USG. 
In particular, he acknowledged the Special Prosecutor for his 
recent success in prosecuting cases of violence, urged him to 
follow arrests with prosecutions and investigations with 
further arrests; and the Ministries of Labor and Economy for 
their coordinated efforts to enforce labor law in the maquila 
sector.  These are concrete advances we hope will continue, 
he said, and expressed cautious optimism that Guatemala has 
ended a history of violence against labor leaders.  AUSTR 
Clatanoff then asked what progress had been made on the issue 
of effective enforcement of labor court decisions in favor of 
illegally-fired union members, and inquired about the 
prospect of further labor code reforms. 
 
11.  (SBU) Labor Court magistrate de Barrera said there had 
been advances in reinstatement of illegally-fired workers in 
the public (municipal government and national level) sector, 
citing a recent case in the municipality of Coban, Alta 
Verapaz province. Labor court judges, she remarked, are 
working very hard to eliminate backlogs, even resorting to 
mobile courts to augment the capacity of Guatemala\'s 
overcrowded courts. The problem that remains, she said, is 
employer resistance to court rulings in the agricultural 
plantation sector.  These employers resist by changing their 
corporate identity and using legal delaying tactics to 
prevent effective reinstatement of illegally-fired workers. 
Often, these cases turn into land disputes, as workers squat 
on land they demand as compensation for what they are owed by 
the landowner. 
 
12.  (SBU) Noting that the reform package had been sent back 
to Commission, AUSTR Clatanoff asked officials to comment on 
the prospects for Congressional action on a second generation 
of labor law reform.  Vice Minister Gordillo said this 
Administration wants to see the legislation passed, and is 
working to build consensus for the reforms.  Vice Minister 
Martinez added that independently from CAFTA, the government 
realizes it needs to harmonize its labor law with ILO 
recommendations. 
 
Business and Union Leaders Briefed 
---------------------------------- 
 
13.  (SBU) On February 24 the Ambassador hosted a lunch in 
honor of the delegation with union leaders which included 
Jose Pinzon, SecGen of the Union of Guatemalan Workers (UGT); 
Nery Barrios, SecGen of the Unity of Social and Popular 
Action confederation (UASP); and Reynaldo Gonzalez, SecGen of 
the Bank Workers union (FESEBS).  The union leaders expressed 
appreciation for USG GSP and CAFTA pressure on Guatemala. 
Barrios credited the Berger administration for taking steps 
to resolve some pending labor disputes.  Pinzon commented 
that in a recent meeting labor court judges had told him the 
government had asked the labor judges to clean out their case 
backlogs, \"because CAFTA is coming.\"  Gonzalez agreed, saying 
that some labor judges were \"pulling some old cases out of 
the drawers\" and almost always ordering the reinstatement of 
fired workers \"because CAFTA requires it.\" 
 
14.  (SBU) However, the union leaders expressed concern about 
newer, more subtle means of undermining unions by both 
employers and government.  What is most lacking, according to 
Gonzalez, is the political will to reverse these attitudes. 
Mr. Romero described in detail the contents of the CAFTA 
labor chapter, and AUSTR emphasized the benefits to workers 
of trade liberalization (increased employment opportunities 
and higher real wages resulting in part from cheaper 
imports).  He agreed that worker benefits under CAFTA require 
from each government the political will to enforce the \"rules 
of the game.\"  Although none of these unions support CAFTA, 
the conversation was respectful and helped dispel 
misconceptions held by union leaders about CAFTA labor 
provisions and enforcement mechanisms. 
 
15.  (SBU) A meeting with employer representatives also 
helped to dispel misconceptions about another CAFTA Track 
Three issue.   On February 23 the delegation met with Carlos 
Arias of the Chamber of Industries and Rolando Figueroa of 
the garment manufacturers export association (VESTEX).  Both 
men are members of the main employer group\'s (CACIF) labor 
commission, but requested a meeting outside CACIF because of 
lack of consensus in CACIF about whether to support the 
\"Export Success in Central America\" (ESCA) initiative.  After 
discussing the importance of effective labor law enforcement 
in the context of GSP review and CAFTA consideration by the 
U.S. Congress, the delegation addressed CACIF\'s concerns 
about the private-sector-led ESCA proposal.  Reassured that 
the ESCA, which calls for development of a unitary voluntary 
labor standard, would apply only to the textile sector; that 
those standards in each country would incorporate national 
labor law and (only) the ILO conventions each country had 
ratified; that only the ILO would be appropriate to monitor 
the standards; and after explaining that the phrase \"best 
practices\" referred only to labor monitoring procedures, not 
the uniform standard itself; Arias said that CACIF\'s concerns 
were fully met and he believed it would now fully support the 
initiative. 
 
Human Rights Commissioner Offers Help 
------------------------------------- 
 
16.  (SBU) The delegation met on February 23 with Frank 
LaRue, President of the Presidential Commission on Human 
Rights (COPREDH) and a former leader of a prominent NGO human 
rights organization.  LaRue said he was scheduled to attend a 
meeting with the President and Vice President with Bishop 
Ramazzini of San Marcos province.  The issue to be discussed 
was to be the land/labor conflict at the Finca Maria Lourdes 
in Quetzaltenango province (which is cited in the open 
AFL-CIO GSP petition), which is owned by a member of the 
First Lady\'s family.  LaRue said he would use that to try to 
encourage a resolution of the conflict in favor of the 
workers/squatters and, more generally, to ensure that court 
orders are applied more even-handedly.  LaRue described his 
commission\'s mandate as consisting of human (and labor) 
rights oversight of other GOG ministries.  He said that 
corruption was a barrier to effective enforcement, and 
suggested that in future COPREDH might conduct an audit of 
the Ministry of Labor\'s inspectorate division.  Learning of 
the CAFTA labor chapter provision for the establishment of a 
unit in each partner\'s labor ministry to process labor 
submissions, LaRue said this might be another area where 
COPREDH could help by conducting oversight of the 
establishment and functioning of that office, if CAFTA takes 
effect.  The delegation informed LaRue that a USDOL team to 
design future technical cooperation activities would be 
in-country beginning March 9, and encouraged him to meet with 
them. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
17.  (SBU) The delegation\'s visit advanced U.S. interests at 
several levels.  Most importantly, it emphasized the need for 
active enforcement of labor rights and concrete progress in 
the near-term.  The delegation also raised public, employer, 
and union awareness of the content of the CAFTA labor 
chapter, and effectively advocated for sustained GOG efforts 
to protect fundamental labor rights and effectively enforce 
its labor laws. 
 
18.  (SBU) While much remains to be done by the GOG to 
translate its commitments into further advances, the Embassy 
believes the efforts reported by the GOG to date constitute 
positive steps in the right direction.  Of particular 
significance was the arrest in the Monzon Lima case, the 
Labor Minister\'s commitment to strengthen the labor 
inspectorate, efforts to strengthen the labor justice system, 
the resolution of many of the labor cases mentioned in the 
petitions, and the GOG\'s commitment to continue 
inter-ministerial coordination to enforce labor rights in the 
maquila sector. 
19.  (SBU) We therefore strongly recommend that the Trade 
Policy Sub-Committee consider the closure of the GSP petition 
review for Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14532","3/3/2004 20:42","04GUATEMALA531","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000531 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/02/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, SNAR, ECON, ETRD, EAID, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: THE BERGER GOVERNMENT\'S FIRST FIFTY DAYS 
 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: In his first fifty days in office, President 
Oscar Berger increased his influence in Congress, removed the 
controversial Attorney General and the corrupt head of the 
Tax Authority, relaunched the fiscal pact, dealt effectively 
with his government\'s first protest demonstrations and 
increased military participation in support of the police in 
high crime zones.  Counterdrug efforts netted over 1,000 
kilos of cocaine.  In his first test of his relationship with 
Congress, Berger secured overwhelming support (with some help 
from us) for a two-year agreement covering U.S. 
counter-narcotics joint exercises (Mayan Jaguar). Berger has 
promised to investigate and prosecute official corruption, 
and the Constitutional Court removed the immunity of former 
President Portillo -- who traveled to Mexico just ahead of a 
court order not to leave the country.  The governability pact 
with the UNE and PAN in Congress suffered new strains as 
evidence emerged that the government\'s two coalition partners 
had received campaign financing indirectly from the FRG.  The 
media remains strongly supportive of Berger, and his early 
demonstrations of leadership on key issues have impressed 
former critics.  Some of his closest allies, however, are 
concerned that by taking on so many controversial issues at 
once -- including a major reduction of the armed forces -- 
Berger may be overextending himself and undercutting the 
institutional support he will need to implement other 
important reforms.  End summary. 
 
Building consensus 
------------------ 
2. (C) President Oscar Berger has gotten off to a strong 
start, using his first fifty days in office to broaden the 
consensus for his plan of government and take immediate 
actions against official corruption.  In the hours before 
being sworn in as President on January 14, Berger negotiated 
a governability pact with two other like-minded parties in 
Congress (the UNE and PAN).  This ensured that Berger\'s GANA 
coalition (which has less than a third of the seats) would 
have representation on the legislative governing board and 
gave presidencies of key Congressional committees (including 
the Budget and Finance Committee) to GANA legislators. 
Perhaps more importantly, the pact excluded the FRG from any 
leadership role in Congress, from which they could have 
undermined the new government. 
 
3. (C) Berger sought to deepen the relationship with major 
coalition partner UNE (which had 32 of the 158 seats in 
Congress; GANA has 54) by inviting former presidential 
candidate Alvaro Colom to the Palace in early February for a 
highly publicized meeting on social policy -- a high priority 
for UNE.  The alliance began to fray, however, when 
investigative journalists found that UNE and PAN received 
hundreds of thousands of dollars in campaign contributions 
from the FRG-controlled former head of the Tax Authority and 
the Comptroller General.  President of Congress Morales (from 
UNE) effectively suspended discussion in Congress of the 
matter, in what appeared to be an attempt to cover-up UNE\'s 
illegal acceptance of public funds for their presidential 
campaign.  The Public Ministry is investigating the case and 
may bring money laundering charges against UNE and PAN 
representatives that received the illegal donations -- 
including UNE leader Alvaro Colom.  Colom told the press that 
the media should investigate Berger for receiving funds from 
drug-traffickers, leading Berger to call Colom a liar and 
calling for him to present the facts (Note: Vice President 
Stein was scurrying to mend fences with Colom late March 2. 
End note). 
 
4. (C) The congressional alliance among the GANA, UNE and PAN 
has always been fragile, and the latest spat only reminds the 
government that it must seek a consensus issue by issue. 
Four UNE legislators, two from the PAN, two from the FRG and 
one from DIA have already declared their independence from 
their parties, and can be counted on to vote with the 
government.  Other defections to the government are expected, 
and the biggest incentive the UNE and PAN have for remaining 
within the governability pact is to keep the government from 
seducing their legislators into joining GANA. 
 
Getting rid of De Leon: Berger\'s trial by fire 
--------------------------------------------- - 
5. (C) During the presidential campaign, Berger had told us 
that complete inaction by Attorney General De Leon against 
official corruption, drugs, trafficking in persons, organized 
crime and increasing violent crime would make it difficult 
for the new government to enforce the law and control crime. 
Civil society, the media and representatives of all the major 
political parties (including the FRG) told us they would 
support De Leon\'s removal.  Berger reportedly gave the 
Attorney General warning that he either had to enforce the 
law or resign.  When De Leon responded that he was autonomous 
and did not serve at the pleasure of the President, Berger 
fired him.  The laws that regulate how the Attorney General 
can be removed are vague (though there is recent precedent 
for a President firing the Attorney General).  De Leon 
appealed to the Constitutional Court, which unanimously and 
immediately ruled against him.  Berger named a new Attorney 
General (loyal to him), and De Leon appears to have left the 
country.  While some in civil society have objected to Berger 
picking an Attorney General allied with the government, no 
one has yet objected to De Leon\'s removal. 
 
6. (C) Almost as important as removing De Leon was Berger\'s 
success in getting the Constitutional Court to support him. 
The unpredictable and mercurial Constitutional Court has 
often been a stumbling block to reform, and their unanimous 
decision to back Berger on the firing of De Leon was viewed 
as a sign that they are prepared to work with the new 
government (at least for now).  Prior to upholding the 
removal of De Leon, the Constitutional Court issued a ruling 
that non-elected members of the Central American Parliament 
(i.e. Former President Portillo and former Vice President 
Reyes Lopez) did not have any immunity from the law, as the 
Constitution only gave immunity to \"elected\" members. 
Recognizing that the ruling opened the door to numerous suits 
already pending against him in the courts, Portillo departed 
the country for Mexico. 
 
7. (SBU) Berger also fired the head of the semi-independent 
Tax Authority, only to find out that he had already fled the 
country after stealing at least Q53 million (roughly $7 
million) in public money.  The Comptroller General, charged 
with multiple acts of corruption and funneling public funds 
into the election campaign, departed Guatemala hastily on 
March 3 rather than face an impeachment hearing by Congress. 
 
Mending the budget 
------------------ 
8. (C) Berger\'s experience in the private sector and as Mayor 
of Guatemala City made him a firm believer in fiscal 
discipline.  Having inherited a government short on funds, 
Berger is reaching out to the opposition parties, civil 
society and the private sector in an attempt to revive the 
fiscal pact derived from the 1996 Peace Accords.  His ordered 
reductions in government expenditures have given him 
credibility on this issue, as well as the massive planned 
military reductions.  Symbolically significant, he traveled 
economy class to a meeting of Central American presidents in 
Spain during the week of March 1.  His interest in a broad 
consensus on fiscal policy have deprived would-be critics of 
traction.  Berger realizes he must raise taxes, and his 
allies in the private sector, long opponents of increased 
taxes, reluctantly agree. 
 
Managing public protests 
------------------------ 
9. (SBU) Berger\'s next challenge came when striking teachers 
protested in front of numerous public buildings and truck 
drivers (angered by a new municipal law restricting the hours 
they can circulate through the city) closed down two major 
highways into the city.  Berger met with the teachers and 
promised to look into their demands, but ordered the police 
to open up the highways closed by the truckers.  The police, 
which had sat idly by in July, 2003 when pro-FRG mobs closed 
down parts of the city, this time used tear gas to disperse 
the truckers and open up the roads.  The population, tired of 
Portillo\'s tolerance for protests shutting down the city, 
applauded Berger\'s response to the truckers\' strike, and the 
protesters decided to seek other ways to bring attention to 
their demands. 
 
Taking on crime 
--------------- 
10. (SBU) Recognizing that most Guatemalans list rising crime 
as their principal concern, Berger began his presidency by 
increasing military support for police operations in 
gang-infested neighborhoods.  While the military presence 
remains limited to a few particularly dangerous communities, 
the public perception is that this government is getting 
serious with crime.  On a similar note, within two weeks of 
Berger taking office, the counternarcotics police seized over 
1,000 kilos of cocaine in operations around the country. 
 
Improving relations with us 
--------------------------- 
11. (C) Berger\'s efforts to bring about high-impact changes 
in Guatemala during his first fifty days in office have not 
distracted from his determination to improve the bilateral 
relationship with us.  In his first test of getting a law 
through Congress, Berger sent a decree authorizing a two year 
extension for joint military counter-drug operations (called 
\"Mayan Jaguar\" locally) in early February.  He sent his 
Ministers of Defense and Government to lobby members of 
Congress, and to push the law through a new Congressional 
leadership that was still learning the ropes.  He also is 
sending his Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs to Washington to 
negotiate an Article 98 Agreement with us. 
 
Honeymoon with the press and civil society 
------------------------------------------ 
12. (SBU) The written press (which strongly supported Berger 
during the election campaign) and civil society continue to 
give him virtually uncritical support.  Even some op-ed 
writers, who questioned his intelligence and disparaged him 
during the campaign as being a stand-in for the private 
sector confederation, have lauded him recently for seeking 
compromises with his political opposition and for taking bold 
action against the Attorney General and Portillo-era 
corruption.  Guatemalans appear generally hopeful that the 
new government will address the economic and security issues 
long neglected by its predecessors. 
 
Overextending himself? 
---------------------- 
13. (C) Berger believes he has a mandate for radical change 
and wants to use his honeymoon to take on the most difficult 
tasks.  He is determined to reduce the military 
substantially, and has been frustrated by foot-dragging on 
the part of the military itself to produce a viable plan. 
Vice President Stein told us that Berger wants to announce 
publicly on March 9 that he is reducing the military budget 
to Q500 million (roughly $63 million) (Note: In 2003 the 
military received Q1.4 billion, or $180 million. End note). 
He has tasked Stein and the Minister of Finance with coming 
up with a plan that would meet that goal, though Stein 
expressed doubt that this was truly viable.  Stein told us 
March 2 that Berger also wants to announce that he is 
suspending contracts at the ports that were given out with 
little transparency in the waning hours of the Portillo 
government.  Stein says that organized crime benefited from 
those contracts, and that canceling them could provoke a 
violent reaction from that sector.  Stein is worried that 
taking on the military and organized crime at the same time, 
at a time when the police remains ineffective, could lead to 
security problems.  He has counseled Berger to undertake a 
more gradual pace of change, but has so far not managed to 
change Berger\'s mind. 
 
Comment 
------- 
14. (C) The challenges before the Berger government remain 
daunting, but Berger is convinced that he must use the good 
will of his first months in office (and the total disarray of 
the political opposition) to begin implementing the changes 
he was elected to make.  His first fifty days in office show 
that he wants quick results, and that he is prepared to find 
creative, if somewhat unorthodox, ways to address Guatemala\'s 
pressing problems and pending issues in our bilateral 
relationship. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14569","3/4/2004 15:06","04GUATEMALA538","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE22983","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000538 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS NASA/ID - 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, TSPA, GT 
SUBJECT: SUCCESSFUL VISIT OF NASA ADMINISTRATOR SEAN 
O\'KEEFE FEBRUARY 28-29 TO GUATEMALA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 22983 
 
1.  Summary.  NASA Administrator Sean O,Keefe had a very 
successful visit to Guatemala during his brief six-country 
trip to Latin America.  In Guatemala he met with GOG 
officials in the Peten where NASA briefed on 
environmental/climate change and archeological programs 
carried out through a Memorandum of Understanding with the 
Central American Commission on Environment and Development 
(CCAD), toured Tikal, hosted a dinner for GOG officials, and 
departed early Sunday, 2/29, for Manaus, Brazil.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Administrator Sean O,Keefe of NASA, met by the Hamilton, 
stopped February 28 in Guatemala,s Peten department, which 
includes the entire Maya Biosphere, during his brief 
six-country visit to the Mesoamerica Biological Corridor. 
The NASA party gave presentations to the new Guatemalan 
government on the work they are doing under an MOU with the 
Central American Commission on Environment and Development 
(CCAD)(Spanish acronym).  Minister of Environment Mario Dary, 
who is also the President Pro Tempore of the CCAD; Minister 
of Agriculture Alvaro Aguilar; Executive Secretary to the 
President Eduardo Gonzalez; head of CONAP (the protected 
areas council that oversees the Maya Biosphere) Ana Luisa 
Noguera; Governor of Peten Manuel Barquin; Vice Minister of 
Agriculture for Peten Erasmo Sanchez; head of the National 
Commission on Science and Technology Hector Centeno, among 
others, participated in the briefing, held in the Jungle 
Lodge at the Tikal archeological site. 
 
3.  The NASA briefings covered the NASA/CCAD SERVIR project 
(partially funded by USAID and the World Bank), that will 
help policy makers, scientists, educators, etc., through data 
and computer models monitor and forecast ecological changes, 
respond to natural disasters, and better understand both 
natural and human induced effects on the regional climate. 
The briefing also reviewed the use of satellite imaging to 
locate probable Mayan archeological sites and reveal facts 
about the Mayan civilization,s land use that could be 
applicable to today,s climate change issues.  They explained 
the aerial survey mission (AirSAR), which is taking place 
March 2-9 over selected environmentally important areas of 
Mexico through Panama.  Its data will have higher resolution 
than the current satellite images. 
 
4.  Presentation highlights:  (1) The announcement that a 
website with SERVIR data will be online within a few months. 
The website will offer real-time satellite images of Central 
America for use by government decision makers, scientists, 
schools, etc.  (2) Project imagery also revealed a close 
correlation between a particular color variation and 
archaeological sites that were previously undiscovered, 
suggesting that there are probably many Mayan archeological 
sites still to be located and studied.  The data suggests the 
Mayans sustained a high density of population in what are 
currently inhospitable areas.  (3) Perhaps most stunning was 
the discovery by American archeologist Bill Saturno of the 
first Mayan mural found since 1946 and one which pre-dates by 
800 years the previous best estimates of the height of Mayan 
civilization and art, moving the estimates from 800 A.D. to 0 
A.D. 
 
5.  After the briefing, the NASA party and some GOG officials 
toured Tikal led by Guatemalan Archeologist Roxy Ortiz, who 
works at the San Bartolo site.  The President\'s Executive 
Secretary Eduardo Gonzalez left with his party.  They 
 
SIPDIS 
scheduled NASA\'s briefing into a fact-finding day trip to 
Peten to learn more about competing plans for managing the 
area of the Mirador archeological site (Cuenca Mirador or 
Mirador Basin), which hosts the largest Mayan pyramid yet 
discovered and an extensive area of archeological interest. 
 
6.  The visit was rounded off by a dinner at the Camino Real 
Tikal Hotel hosted by Administrator O,Keefe and attended by 
the Hamilton, the Ministers of Agriculture and Environment, 
head of CONAP, Vice Minister of Agriculture, Executive 
Secretary of CCAD, and others.  Administrator O\'Keefe left 
 
SIPDIS 
Sunday morning for Manaus, Brazil. 
 
7.  Comment:  The visit was very productive and deeply 
impressed the GOG.  It was a superb opportunity for the new 
government to see what cooperation with the USG on science 
and environmental issues can offer.  The briefings, dinner 
and informal chats at Tikal and at breakfast helped clarify a 
number of key issues for both the GOG and USG.  For instance, 
the Minister of Agriculture wanted to know why his ministry 
was financing part of AirSAR (funds approved by the 
discredited Portillo administration).  NASA officials 
explained the project\'s agricultural applications and also 
allayed GOG concerns that data to be provided on the SERVIR 
website would help the illegal antiquities trade find sites. 
Embassy and AID staff were able to get valuable information 
on the Cuenca Mirador project, which is a highly visible, 
highly controversial project for both the U.S. and Guatemala. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"14747","3/9/2004 15:48","04GUATEMALA583","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE41252","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/07/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT, UNHRC-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON 60TH UNCHR 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 41252 
 
     B. SECSTATE 44603 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Per instructions ref A, PolOff jointly delivered 
reftel demarches to Carla Rodriguez, Director General for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on March 11. 
Rodriguez said Guatemala\'s interests at 60 UNCHR largely 
coincide with ours and that this overlap had improved with 
the arrival of the Berger administration.  She applauded our 
efforts at outreach, especially to members of GRULAC, and, in 
response, said that Guatemala would greatly appreciate any 
flexibility we could show toward its positions on the rights 
of indigenous peoples and migrants.  Rodriguez said 
Guatemala\'s new Ambassador to Geneva, Lars Pira, has little 
experience with UN commissions.  He served as Ambassador to 
Sweden and Norway and has been retired for several years.  In 
response to our points, which were left as non-papers, 
Rodriguez provided the following feedback: 
 
Thematic Issues 
--------------- 
Unqualified calls to sign and ratify treaties - Rodriguez 
said Guatemala prefers to call states to ratify, but 
understands our concerns and will support our \"consider 
ratifying\" formula. 
 
Juvenile Death Penalty/Rights of the Child Resolution - 
Guatemala will support the GRULAC position on these issues. 
Rodriguez agreed that referring to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (CROC) as \"the\" standard excludes some 
important international standards on the rights of children, 
but she stated that 190 countries see the CROC as \"the most 
important\" standard and repeated that Guatemala could not go 
against the GRULAC consensus on this. 
 
ICC - According to Rodriguez, Guatemala views the ICC as an 
important human rights tool.  However, she agrees that 
inserting ICC references in unrelated resolutions is 
counterproductive.  Rodriguez said our real enemy on this 
issue is the EU and added that Guatemala would continue to be 
helpful \"in the corridors.\" 
 
Democratic values - Rodriguez confirmed that Guatemala will 
co-sponsor Brazil\'s resolution on Democracy and Racism, 
Romania\'s resolution on Consolidation of Democracy and 
Australia\'s resolution on Human Rights and Good Governance. 
She added that Guatemala also shares our negative view of 
resolutions sponsored by Cuba.  In that vein, she said 
Guatemala will vote against the resolution on Human Rights 
and Responsibilities.  On the other two - Strengthening of 
Popular Participation and Promotion of a Democratic and 
Equitable International Order - Rodriguez said Guatemala had 
switched its vote to \"yes\" last year in response to a 
combination of a \"real effort\" by Cuba to tone down the texts 
and the personal input of Guatemala\'s previous Foreign 
Minister.  Guatemala\'s position this year will depend on what 
the resolutions actually say.  Rodriguez added that support 
for these resolutions would be seen as a ensuring balance, 
especially if Guatemala decides to vote against it on the 
country-specific resolution. 
 
Development - both of the Cuba-sponsored resolutions that 
Guatemala may support touch on the issue of development, 
where, Rodriguez said, we have slightly different views. 
Guatemala agrees with using language developed at Doha and 
Monterrey as the basis for development resolutions, but not 
to the exclusion of all other formulas.  Rodriguez agrees 
that consistency is desirable, but argued that in order to be 
consistent, previous resolutions on development cannot be 
ignored. 
 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights - Rodriguez appreciated 
our expression of interest in finding ways to support more 
resolutions that address these rights while avoiding language 
that raises sovereignty and legal concerns.  Pressed for 
ideas about working together, Rodriguez thought the best way 
forward is for the U.S. to find some way to accept the 
concept of \"indirect rights\" as not legally binding. 
 
Anti-Semitism - Rodriguez said Guatemala will support 
resolutions that condemn it. 
 
Country Resolutions 
------------------- 
China - Rodriguez said that Guatemala would have to review 
the text of any China resolution before forming a position, 
but added Guatemala opposes no action motions as a matter of 
principle and would vote against them regardless of the 
country involved. 
 
Cuba - Rodriguez said Guatemala has not finalized its 
position.  The issue is still being debated within the 
Foreign Ministry and at higher levels, she said. 
 
Belarus - Rodriguez said Guatemala is likely to support the 
resolution.  She said that last year\'s abstention was the 
result of a last-minute Russian intervention, and added that 
Guatemala is less sensitive on the issue this year. 
 
North Korea - Guatemala will continue to support us. 
 
Iran - Guatemala\'s traditional support for the Iran 
resolution ended two years ago when Iran appeared to be 
opening up.  Although Rodriguez agrees there has been no 
improvement on the ground, she blamed the combination of Arab 
pressure and our lack of presence on the Commission for last 
year\'s abstention.  Rodriguez said Guatemala would likely 
support the resolution this year, but she could only say with 
certainty that Guatemala would not oppose. 
 
Middle East - Guatemala agrees with the need to consolidate 
Middle East resolutions, and pointed out that Guatemala 
routinely uses its explanation of vote to call for 
consolidation.  However, Rodriguez said Guatemala would not 
vote against all of the resolutions, adding that decisions 
would be made case-by-case, depending on the text. 
 
2. (C) Guatemalan Ambassadors in Geneva have traditionally 
had significant autonomy on determining Guatemala\'s positions 
on many of the less visible votes at the Human Rights 
Commission.  It will be important for the US Mission to get 
to know Ambassador Lars Pira on his arrival.  Pira is a 
career diplomat who has been retired for several years.  We 
have been told that his ideological sympathies are from the 
left of the political spectrum.  On highly sensitive votes 
(i.e. the Cuba resolution) he will doubtless get clear 
instructions from Guatemala City, but his vote on other 
issues of importance to us will depend to a large extent on 
his instincts and lobbying by US Mission Geneva. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14751","3/9/2004 17:02","04GUATEMALA584","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000584 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER ASKS FOR U.S. ASSISTANCE TO PLAN RADICAL 
REDUCTION OF GUATEMALAN MILITARY 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Frustrated by military foot-dragging, 
President Oscar Berger has formally requested US assistance 
with developing a plan to shrink his military.  We have 
mapped out a process of engagement using E-IMET funds to 
contract specialized expertise at the Center for Civil 
Military Relations (CCMR), and the Defense Resource 
Management Institute (DRMI), but urgently need our 2004 
E-IMET funding released, as well as an additional $150,000, 
to seize this opportunity.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The Ambassador, PolCouns, DATT, and MilGroup Commander 
met with Vice President Stein, at his request, on March 2 to 
discuss ways we can assist.  Stein told the Ambassador that 
Berger has concluded that his military command is 
unable/unwilling to come up with a workable plan to 
rationally downsize.  Berger was impressed, according to 
Stein, that we had predicted (in a memo to Stein two weeks 
earlier) almost precisely the response he received from the 
military to his orders to plan a drawdown.  Berger is 
determined to make the most of his new government\'s honeymoon 
with the press and civil society by taking on the most 
difficult tasks upfront.  Reducing the military\'s drain on 
the budget holds the greatest potential to free up resources 
for Berger\'s cash-strapped administration. 
 
3. (C) Stein also told us Berger has tasked him, along with 
Minister of Finance Maria Antonietta Bonilla, to engage with 
the Defense Ministry to find a legal way to cut the 
military\'s budget to Q500 million (roughly $63 million). 
This would be down from a formal budget of twice that and an 
effective budget nearly three times as large, due to 
transfers (although much of this extra money probably does 
not reach the military).  Berger wants to reduce the 
military\'s troop levels drastically, by up to 16,000 (out of 
approximately 27,000). 
 
What we are currently doing to help 
----------------------------------- 
4. (C) The Ambassador and MilGroup Commander outlined 
upcoming seminars for Stein--DRMI, 15-26 March and CCMR, 
19-21 April--that will provide civilian decision-makers with 
quantitative tools to build and manage defense budgets and to 
plan force reductions.  Stein was interested and appreciative 
but stressed that the Berger administration also needs 
objective assessments of the military\'s current situation, 
adding that his government lacks the resources to hire an 
outside contractor.  To address this need, Dr. Tom Bruneau 
and MG (r) Dick Goetze, both from CCMR, met with the 
Ambassador and Mil Group Commander on March 6.  As a result 
of that meeting, we have set up a meeting for these CCMR 
officials with Berger on March 24.  CCMR will then modify its 
19-12 April seminar to take the President\'s views on roles, 
missions and the like into account.  We have continuing 
resolution funds to cover the CCMR and DRMI seminars. 
However, we urgently need our \'04 E-IMET funding released in 
order to pay for the March 24 executive session and to 
sustain the momentum we have behind this important initiative. 
 
What we could do with a little more money 
----------------------------------------- 
5. (C) Following the DRMI and CCMR seminars, we will need to 
deploy a series of functionally focused mobile education 
teams to design specific transformation/downsizing plans for 
implementing Berger\'s directives.  We have identified, in 
consultations with CCMR, an immediate requirement for 
additional E-IMET funds in the amount of approximately 
$150,000 to fund one iteration of the \"Civil-Military 
Relations Pre-Survey\" - MASL P309073 (approximately $30K), 
and three tailored iterations of the \"Civilian Control of the 
Armed Forces in a Democracy: Methods, Techniques, and 
Application\" mobile education team - MASL #309152 
(approximately $40K each).  We are already looking for 
programs that could be put off until next year in an effort 
to cobble together funding.  Ideally, extra E-IMET funding 
could be made available to Guatemala as a consequence of 
redistribution of funds under the American Servicemember\'s 
Protection Act.  If additional funding is unavailable, we 
could probably pull already programmed money from our current 
year E-IMET budget, but cancellation penalties would limit 
what we can accomplish. 
 
Political Concerns 
------------------ 
6. (C) Stein is a little worried that Berger\'s timeframe is 
too aggressive and that such a drastic cut could cause the 
military to balk, or worse.  He also expressed concern that, 
at the same time Berger is challenging the military, he is 
confronting organized crime by suspending dubious contracts 
at the ports.  As yet, we detect no reaction in the military 
that would be cause for concern, but will remain alert. 
Comment 
------- 
7. (C) In addition to taking on organized crime, Berger has 
apparently decided to challenge the military (and all others 
who benefit from its large and non-transparent budget). 
Cutting the military budget in half amounts to throwing down 
the gauntlet and is a gusty move.  It is in our interest that 
Berger not only prevail, but that he manages to produce a 
modern, professional force--not just a smaller version of the 
current military.  We have an opportunity to help out and 
would appreciate a positive response to our resource needs. 
HAMILTON 
"
"14915","3/12/2004 16:55","04GUATEMALA624","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE52611","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/SHA JOSEPH BRACKEN 
PLEASE PASS TO USAID FOR JEFF BORNS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, EAID, HA, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA CURRENTLY UNABLE TO CONTRIBUTE FUNDS FOR 
HAITI 
 
REF: SECSTATE 52611 
 
PolOff discussed reftel request with Carla Rodriguez, 
Director General for Multilateral Affairs, at the Foreign 
Ministry on March 11.  Rodriguez said the current fiscal 
crisis facing the Guatemalan government (President Beger has 
ordered an austerity plan with most Ministries facing 30% 
budget cuts) prevents Guatemala from contributing funds to 
either the UN or International Committee of the Red Cross at 
this point. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15012","3/16/2004 22:18","04GUATEMALA655","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, GT, CAVO, PROV 
SUBJECT: GOG REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE ON ALLEGED RACIAL 
TARGETING OF GUATEMALANS IN ATLANTA 
 
 
1. This is an action request for the Department--See Para 4. 
 
2.  During a March 9 meeting with Human Rights Officer, 
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs Marta Altolaguirre expressed 
concern regarding the possible racial motive in a recent 
attack against two Guatemalans in Atlanta.  The two men, 
Carlos Perez, 22, and Domingo Lopez, 54, were approached by 
an unidentified man in a car, who offered them work.  After 
the men entered the vehicle, they were driven to an isolated 
area, severely beaten and robbed.  The men were taken to a 
local emergency room where they were interviewed by the State 
Police. 
 
3. According to Altolaguirre, the Guatemalan Consul in 
Atlanta told her that this incident followed a series of 
similar-pattern attacks on Latinos in the area and the 
victims seemed to be selected based on racial targeting. 
Since many Guatemalans are illegally resident in the US, she 
said, they are therefore less likely to report crimes and at 
higher risk for violence. 
 
4. ACTION REQUEST. To be responsive to GOG concerns, Embassy 
requests that the Department inquire about the facts in this 
case or information on similar crimes targeting Latins with 
Georgia law enforcement authorities and share the results 
with us and the Guatemalan Embassy. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15073","3/17/2004 22:41","04GUATEMALA673","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000673 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: GT, AGR 
SUBJECT: Notification of Agrement 
 
Ref:  SecState 56283 
 
1.  Per reftel request, on March 13, the Embassy 
notified the MFA by diplomatic note (#56) of USG 
approval of the nomination of Jose Guillermo Castillo 
Villacorta as Ambassador to the United States. 
 
2.  MFA Bilateral Affairs Director Ana Maria Dieguez 
informed us that she expects Ambassador Castillo to 
depart Guatemala for the U.S. around March 24-25, and 
to present his credentials on March 31. 
"
"15159","3/19/2004 17:57","04GUATEMALA691","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 000691 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT OF STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, KCRM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: LABOR/TIP UPDATE #2-2004 
 
 
1. (SBU) The following is an update of significant recent 
developments in the labor sector and trafficking in persons 
(TIP). Topics include: 
 
-- TIP: GOG Stepping Up Enforcement Efforts (para 2) 
 
-- TIP: ILO Introduces Reforms to Congress (3-4) 
 
-- Labor:  Successful USDOL Project Design Visit (5) 
 
-- Labor:  Minister Finds \"Irregularities\" in MOL (6) 
 
-- Labor:  Education Minister Sanguine about Possible Strike 
(7-9) 
 
-- Labor:  Trucker Terror (10) 
 
-- Labor:  Gallery Apparel Case Update (11) 
 
-- Labor:  Public Sector Worries (12) 
 
-- Labor Dialogue Restarts: CACIF and UGT (13) 
 
TIP:  GOG Stepping Up Enforcement Efforts 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The new GOG is starting to take actions against TIP 
and to work in coordinated law enforcement actions, as they 
have pledged to do. 
 
-- On March 10, the Minors Section of the National Civilian 
Police\'s (PNC) Criminal Investigative Service (SIC) arrested 
Oscar Emerito Cabeza Garcia, a 24 year-old Salvadoran running 
the \"Cocoloco International\" club in Zone 19 of the capital, 
and rescued three Salvadoran minors being held for 
prostitution and 5 Salvadoran adult prostitutes.  The adults 
were deported and the minors were turned over to the courts 
for protection. 
 
-- Immigration, Public Ministry (Office of the Prosecutor for 
Women) and 150 PNC conducted a coordinated operation 
targeting gang members near the Mexican border in Tecun Uman, 
and San Marcos province on March 5.  A total of 31 illegal 
migrants (20 Honduran, 10 Salvadorans, and 1 Mexican) were 
taken into custody for deportation; 8 reportedly fit the 
profile of gang members. 
 
-- Fiscal for Women Sandra Zayas told LabAtt on March 12 that 
recent stakeouts of bars listed in the Casa Alianza report in 
Mixco, a municipality adjacent to the capital, did not 
confirm the presence of minors in prostitution.  Instead, 
other bars in the capital listed in the report will be 
surveiled early in the week of March 15, and a rescue 
operation will be mounted on March 19.  On March 18, Zayas 
confirmed that her 4-person unit is working with a new 
6-person anti-TIP unit in the PNC and six immigration agents 
in a task force operation, and have confirmed their targets 
for the  March 19 operation. 
 
-- DHS will provide anti-TIP training to PNC, MP, judiciary 
and Immigration officials during the week of March 22. 
 
TIP: ILO Introduces Reforms to Congress 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) On March 3 the ILO Project to Eliminate Child Labor 
(IPEC) briefed interested Congress members on a series of 
proposed reforms to the penal code designed to strengthen 
anti-TIP legislation.  Ten Congressional deputies attended 
the briefing, hosted by the President of the Child and Family 
Commission.  In a signal of Executive branch support, an 
official from the Presidential Secretariat on Social Welfare 
attended the briefing and spoke in support of the proposed 
reforms  (Note: the ILO/IPEC presented the same reforms to 
the Executive branch, which is considering them but has not 
yet formally submitted them to Congress). 
 
4.  (U) The reforms would increase jail terms for TIP from 
the current 1-3 years with fines to 5-8 years (6-10 years if 
minors are involved).  TIP would no longer need to involve 
the crossing of an international border.  The reforms would 
also stiffen sanctions for kidnapping for sexual purposes 
(increased from 2-5 years to 3-6 years, 4-10 years for minors 
under 13 years), corruption of minors (increased from 2-6 
years to 4-8 years).  All these sanctions would continue to 
be increased by 2/3 if coercion, trickery, violence or threat 
are used against the victim; if a parent or guardian is 
involved; or if the victim is especially vulnerable in terms 
of economic standing, ethnicity, handicapped status; or if 
they are migrants or displaced persons.  The initiative would 
add new crimes of sexual trafficking, sexual tourism, and 
paid sexual relations of minors (all with 6-10 years 
imprisonment), and child pornography (6-8 years).  Penalties 
for pimping and \"ruffianism\" (living off the earnings of a 
prostitute) would be increased from the current fines to 5-8 
years and 3-6 years imprisonment, respectively.  The reforms 
also outlawed sexual harassment (punished by 2-6 years 
imprisonment; 4-6 years if the accused is a parent or 
guardian).  One legislator warned the inclusion of sexual 
harassment would make the proposal controversial and 
suggested dropping it. 
Labor:  USDOL Project Design Visit 
---------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) A design team from USDOL and its contractors 
(FUNPADEM and Abt Associates) visited Guatemala March 8-11 to 
meet with stakeholders in the new $6.75 m regional project 
\"Cumple y Gana.\"  They met with the GOG (Minister of Labor 
and chief of the Labor Inspectorate), union leaders, employer 
groups, other international donors, and NGOs active in labor 
rights promotion.  The four-year project, which will focus on 
labor rights promotion and strengthening of labor law 
enforcement capacity, was welcomed by all sectors, which 
pledged to cooperate.  The group also met with the Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes Against Trade Unionists, who agreed to 
provide information useful to the public about how to file 
complaints about threats or anti-union violence on the 
interactive Website contemplated under the project. 
 
Labor Minister Finds \"Irregularities\" in MOL 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Labor Minister Jorge Gallardo told the press on March 
10 that he had discovered evidence of corruption in the 
Ministry of Labor including bribery of inspectors by 
employers in some cases, payments to more than 25 \"ghost\" 
workers in the Ministry, and the hiring of 50 political 
appointees which are considered unnecessary and will not be 
replaced.  (Note:  the Ministry has a total personnel of 480, 
including more than 300 inspectors nationwide.)  Gallardo\'s 
plan to restructure the Ministry will involve 
\"belt-tightening, without reducing our attention to our 
duties.\"  Among his first steps to get the Ministry in order, 
he said, will be to move (to reduce current inflated rental 
costs of $22,000/month). 
 
Education Minister Sanguine About Teacher Strike 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
7.  (SBU) On March 11 LabAtt met with Education Minister 
Maria del Carmen Acena and Vice Minister Chaclan to discuss 
labor relations in the Ministry.  Acena said the Ministry was 
currently struggling with the issue of the 13,000 teachers 
incorrectly hired by the Portillo administration.  The 
Ministry has been given 3 months by the President to sort 
that issue out;  the new hires have been suspended during 
this period.  (Note:  suspended new hires began a hunger 
strike on the steps of the Presidential offices on March 12, 
demanding dialogue, and blocked rush-hour traffic near the 
Ministry on March 16.)  The main problem, according to Acena, 
is that there is no money in the budget to pay the new 
employees.  An internal Ministry report states that 79% of 
the 13,000 are technically qualified, and found procedural 
irregularities in the passage of the Government Accord 
creating the new positions. 
 
8.  (SBU) Acena said she does not think the potential exists 
for a more general labor conflict with the various teachers\' 
unions, which do not represent the new hires.  Such strikes 
occur only every 10 years, she said, and the teachers are 
still weary from the last strike which took place in 2003. 
Furthermore, the unions are exaggerating their membership\'s 
hardships.  Teachers received a 90% pay boost over the past 
four years, and are now overpaid if anything, she said. 
Acena said she hopes to blunt any possibility of a 
teacher-parent protest by opening channels of communication 
with parents to inform them of the increases in teacher pay 
(and lack of any increases in quality or productivity) and to 
discredit unreasonable union demands, such as their recent 
request that the Ministry of Labor authorize collective 
bargaining. 
 
9.  (SBU) LabAtt urged the Ministry to view labor relations 
as a permanent dialogue, and briefed the Minister on the 
obligations of collective bargaining (mandatory with the 
support of 25% or more of the teachers -- she admitted union 
membership was around 50%), a fundamental labor right.  Acena 
complained that the unions were asking for a 50% pay hike and 
for the Ministry to pay their union dues, neither of which 
the Ministry could afford.  LabAtt urged her to view the 
bargaining (which does not have a time limit) as an 
opportunity to achieve a result which increases the quality 
and productivity of the workforce.  The Minister seemed to 
take these recommendations under consideration, and asked the 
Vice Minister to invite the unions to the table in early 
April. 
 
Labor:  Trucker Terror 
---------------------- 
 
10.  (U) On February 25, truckers protested against the new 
Mayor of Guatemala City\'s rules prohibiting passage by heavy 
trucks through the city streets during weekday morning and 
evening rush-hour periods.  (Note:  Guatemala\'s major 
north-south and east-west highways cross in Guatemala City, 
which lacks a completed ring road, compounding the traffic 
problem in the capital.)  The protesters blocked those major 
arteries for 14 hours by parking their trucks and threatened 
to light gasoline spilled on the roads (near urban 
residential neighborhoods) from several tanker trucks. 
Police intervened using tear gas to dislodge the protesters 
and arrested approximately 30 protesters, including several 
union leaders (Victoriano Zacarias, a member of the executive 
board of the CGTG confederation, was the ranking union leader 
caught), who claim to have arrived on the scene to mediate 
between the truckers and the authorities and not to organize 
strike activities.  Those individuals remain in custody, 
charged with terrorism and other serious crimes.  The 
Secretary General of the Inter-American Organization of 
 
SIPDIS 
Workers (ORIT), Victor Baez Mosqueira, visited Guatemala 
March 16 to denounce the detentions of labor leaders 
Rigoberto Duenas (also a leader of the CGTG, and still being 
held in the Social Security Institute corruption scandal) and 
Zacarias. 
 
Labor:  Gallery Apparel Case Update 
----------------------------------- 
 
11.  (U) Representatives of workers from the closed Gallery 
Apparel factory informed LabAtt on March 9 that since 
exhausting the conciliation procedures offered by the 
Ministry of Labor, the aggrieved workers have filed legal 
complaints in the labor court system.  The workers seek 
severance, holiday, and bonus payments owed by the company. 
An insurance adjuster for the U.S.-based firm visited 
Guatemala March 15-16 and met with the Commercial Section 
about the company\'s million-dollar claim for losses generated 
after workers rioted and looted the plant after a payroll was 
missed in December. 
 
Labor:  Public Sector Layoffs 
----------------------------- 
 
12.  (U) Public sector union confederation (FENASTEG) bought 
a full-page add in the afternoon daily \"La Hora\" on March 11 
to denounce the cash-strapped new government\'s layoffs of 
public servants in several member unions (of immigration 
workers, a state-owned bank which may be closed, a 
municipality, workers in the Ministry of Energy and Mines, 
the state-owned telephone company, the state literacy agency, 
and other public institutions).  The unions allege that the 
layoffs violate ILO commitments to respect existing 
collective bargaining agreements.  Most public sector 
agreements include a \"labor stability\" clause which prohibits 
the government from laying off permanent staff unless they 
are offered a new an comparable job.  The add called on the 
new government to stop the layoffs and cease its unilateral 
approach by meeting with FENASTEG.  Nery Barrios, Secretary 
General of another major labor federation (UASP) which 
includes public sector members, told a visiting GSP 
delegation in February that his union was similarly concerned 
for its membership, and planned to meet with the President 
and Vice President to discuss the issue. 
 
Labor Dialogue:  CACIF and UGT Meet Again 
----------------------------------------- 
 
13.  (U) A major labor confederation (UGT) met on March 3 
with the Labor Commission of the major employer association 
(CACIF), in response to CACIF\'s public call for dialogue. 
Carlos Arias, CACIF\'s Labor Coordinator, tells us he is 
seeking union support for possible labor code reforms to 
promote mediation/conciliation alternatives to the labor 
court system.  Union leaders insist that employers address 
alleged violations of the right to organize and bargain 
collectively before employer proposals are considered. 
Employer-union dialogue had begun shortly after the new 
government took office but was broken when the Constitutional 
Court accepted a CACIF request to suspend the previous 
government minimum wage hike. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15256","3/23/2004 14:23","04GUATEMALA717","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE62119","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

231423Z Mar 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000717 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
EB/MST FOR NISSEN 
USTR FOR BOHLING 
USMISSION GENEVA FOR KEHOE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, GT, UNCTAD, WTRO 
SUBJECT: ENGAGING TRADE MINISTERS IN UNCTAD XI 
 
REF: A. STATE 62119 
 
     B. STATE 51412 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary:  UNCTAD is a traditional preserve of the 
MFA, which is prone to G-77 views and rhetoric.  The new Vice 
Minister of Trade understands our concerns and plans to work 
with the pro-trade Minister of Foreign Affairs to align 
Guatemala\'s positions in UNCTAD with its Cairns Group agenda. 
 He has asked for a chance to work this internally, and we 
will be following up.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU)  EconCouns discussed preparations for UNCTAD XI 
with Vice Minister of Economy for Integration and Trade 
Eduardo Sperisen the evening of March 18.  Sperisen, recently 
returned to government with the inauguration of the Berger 
Administration in January, had not followed developments in 
UNCTAD for a number of years but was familiar and sympathetic 
with the USG\'s general concerns.  Sperisen said that the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs was traditionally responsible for 
UNCTAD issues, noting that he had regularly sparred over 
UNCTAD with MFA officials when he was Guatemala\'s PermRep to 
the WTO.  He further noted that the MFA official with whom he 
had sparred in Geneva was the current Director General for 
Multilateral Affairs, Amb. Carla Rodriguez.  He confirmed 
that the views of MFA careerists were generally stuck in G-77 
and dependency school rhetoric whereas Guatemala\'s national 
policies were aligned with the Cairns Group\'s free trade 
agenda.  He said it was a mistake to let the MFA have control 
of any issues linked to trade policy. 
 
3.  (SBU)  EconCouns asked Sperisen\'s advice on how best to 
influence Rodriguez, whom Embassy knows quite well. 
EconCouns wondered whether a quiet approach to Foreign 
Minister Briz, former President of the Guatemalan Chamber of 
Commerce and a committed free-trade advocate, might not be 
the way to proceed.  Sperisen said he liked the idea but 
asked that we give him a chance to work through Briz before 
contacting the MFA directly.  Comment:  Sperisen evidently 
sees a chance to take control of the policy, not simply 
influence Rodriguez.  We believe that Briz will be a willing 
ally, and we will follow up over the coming days to see where 
matters stand.  End Comment. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15312","3/24/2004 22:54","04GUATEMALA737","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, GT, BH 
SUBJECT: GOG TO IMPROVE INFORMAL TIES WITH BELIZE 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: At our request, Foreign Minister Jorge Briz 
discussed the border dispute with Ambassador Hamilton and 
British Ambassador Richard Lavers on March 17.  Briz said 
that the Berger Administration wants to develop close, 
informal ties with its Belizean counterpart and to engage in 
as many joint initiatives, both public and private, as 
possible.  The goal is to demonstrate to both populations the 
benefits of a normal relationship, thereby garnering support 
for an eventual referendum on a settlement.  According to 
Briz, Guatemala does not/not want to take the border dispute 
to the International Court of Justice, and is prepared to 
extend the confidence building measures for a full year when 
the current 90-day extension expires in May.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) Briz began by stating that even if the Berger 
Administration were enthusiastic about the facilitators\' 
proposed solutions (which it is not), the required referendum 
has no chance of approval by the Guatemalan public at this 
time.  Thus the task, according to Briz, is to change public 
opinion.  The Berger Administration wants to develop the sort 
of close, informal ties with its Belizean counterpart that 
will allow the two governments to demonstrate the benefits of 
a more normal relationship to their respective populations. 
Guatemala\'s approach will be to pursue as many joint 
initiatives, both public and private, with Belize as 
possible.  Briz hopes that Belize can be sold on the 
advantages of developing this kind of relationship and will 
avoid what he called \"radical\" positions. 
 
3.  (C) Briz said Guatemala wants continued OAS involvement, 
but was vague as to how the OAS should engage.  Briz was 
emphatic that Guatemala does not/not want to take the dispute 
to the International Court of Justice at the Hague and said 
that Vice Minister Skinner-Klee\'s musings in Washington about 
the advantages of that route had been just that, not 
considered government opinion.  Briz also said that Guatemala 
had informed Belize that it is prepared to extend the 
confidence building measures for a full year when they expire 
in May. 
 
4.  (C) On the substance of the dispute itself, Briz was 
cautious but said Guatemala needs \"juridical certainty\" of 
its right to access to the sea.  Drawn out again by Lavers, 
he added that two processes, an OAS process working on the 
dispute itself, and an informal process creating the ambiance 
in both countries for a better relationship, could go forward 
in parallel.  Briz hopes to establish a mechanism for regular 
informal and friendly consultations with Belize and noted 
that, while Ambassador Martinez is a personal friend, that 
mechanism ought to be linked to some senior official in 
Belize. 
 
5.  (C) In a separate conversation with the Ambassador on 
March 19, Belizean Ambassador to Guatemala Alfredo Martinez 
said that Briz\'s proposal would be acceptable to Belize 
provided it leads to real progress toward eventual resolution 
of the border issue.  He suggested that patience for 
Guatemalan dilatory tactics is running thin in Belize. 
Nevertheless, Martinez said he had already developed a list 
of 11 practical measures (e.g. harmonizing the hours of 
border crossings) which would help normalize relations for 
shared benefit.  He said he had urged Briz to improve 
relations and communication by bypassing or diluting the 
power of the MFA\'s advisory Belize Commission. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  This was a positive meeting that shows the 
Berger Administration has been giving serious thought to the 
border dispute and recognizes the work it needs to do in 
leading public opinion toward accepting a negotiated 
solution.  We are encouraged by the GOG\'s new willingness to 
reach out to Belize on numerous levels in search of solutions 
to the many problems along the border.  Joint cross-border 
initiatives, whether public or private, will reduce 
opportunities for flare-ups, as will extending the confidence 
building measures.  The British government is already 
involved in many such projects, and we will look for 
opportunities to pitch in. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15357","3/25/2004 23:30","04GUATEMALA747","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE62815|04SECSTATE65652","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000747 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT, UNHRC-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SUPPORT LIKELY ON CUBA AND CHINA IN UNCHR 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 65652 
     B. SECSTATE 62815 
 
Classified By: Acting PolChief Erik Hall for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) On March 25, in response to reftel demarches, MFA Vice 
Minister Jorge Skinner-Klee told DCM and PolOff that the GOG 
will support the Honduran resolution on Cuba, but is 
undecided on whether to co-sponsor.  DCM forcefully argued 
for co-sponsorship and co-tabling on the merits, using reftel 
talking points.  Skinner-Klee expressed personal agreement, 
but said GOG co-tabling has never been in the cards.  He said 
a final decision on co-sponsorship is likely only after 
President Berger and FM Briz return from a regional summit in 
Managua, where it will likely be discussed between Berger and 
Honduran President Maduro. 
 
2.  (C) According to Skinner-Klee, the GOG will oppose any 
no-action motions on principle.  He said he will recommend to 
FM Briz that the GOG vote in favor of the China resolution, 
saying he personally believes the resolution is justified. 
Skinner-Klee applauded USG efforts to raise Chinese human 
rights violations in the UNCHR. 
 
3.  (C) Comment:  The GOG receives substantial aid from the 
ROC and none from China.  We believe a Guatemalan vote 
against any no-action motion is assured and a GOG vote in 
favor of the China resolution is likely, as is a GOG vote in 
favor of the Cuba resolution.  We will continue to encourage 
co-sponsorship of the Cuba resolution, despite possible GOG 
misgivings. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15490","3/30/2004 13:29","04GUATEMALA771","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA584","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000771 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, GT 
SUBJECT: GOG ACCORD ON DEEP MILITARY REDUCTIONS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 584 
 
Classified By: Acting PolChief Erik Hall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  President Oscar Berger told the Ambassador 
on March 27 that he had achieved a \"political understanding\" 
with his Minister of Defense to reduce military strength to 
15,500 officers and men, and to sharply reduce the military 
budget to .33 % of GDP (down from the Peace Accords limit of 
.66% of GDP).  Some details of the deal, to be announced 
April 1, are still being worked out.  At Berger\'s request the 
Ambassador publicly supported the idea of reductions at the 
inauguration of the New Horizons joint humanitarian military 
exercise on March 27.  We are tailoring an April 19-20 
Seminar to help facilitate implementation.  Berger\'s April 30 
meeting with the President will provide a good opportunity to 
give political support from the highest level.  We also need 
to be prepared to provide more concrete support, within 
existing restrictions under U.S. law.  End Summary. 
 
GOG Moved Quickly Toward Accord 
------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) Following up on the GOG\'s request for US assistance 
with developing a plan to shrink the military (reftel), the 
Ambassador, MilGroup Commander, visiting Center for Civil 
Military Relations (CCMR) Director Tom Bruneau and CCMR 
Senior Fellow MG (Ret.) Goetze met with President Berger, 
Vice President Stein, Foreign Minister Briz and Presidential 
Private Secretary Vila on March 24.  The purpose of the 
meeting was get Berger\'s thinking as to how a planned April 
19-20 seminar on military reform could best be tailored to 
support his initiatives.  By way of bringing us up to date, 
Berger said he had asked the military to live within a 500 
million quetzal budget ($62.5 million, versus $155 million 
spent in 2003).  The Defense Minister had resisted, however, 
and threatened to resign.  Berger said he had then requested 
the assistance of an unnamed friend (and retired General), 
who had produced a study calling for troop strength of 14,869 
soldiers, closure of eight major bases, and a budget limited 
to .33% of GDP, or roughly 3% of current government revenue. 
 
3.  (C) The Berger-ordered study also called for cuts in 
administrative expenses of 20-25%, budget transparency, and 
investigation of past corruption in the Military Pension 
Institute (IPM), which Berger believes (with reason) previous 
military leaders have ransacked.  Cutting off funding for the 
IPM and paying retired military salaries would cost 100 
million quetzals annually, according to Finance Ministry 
estimates.  To prevent further corruption, Berger said he 
would also rescind the Army\'s contracting authority and 
oversee contracts through the Controller General\'s Office. 
Asked what roles a reduced Army should have as priorities, 
Berger cited peacekeeping, border patrol, counter-narcotics 
support, and supporting the civilian police fighting crime 
(for two years, until reforms to the police force and 
strengthening of civilian intelligence is complete).  The 
goal is to achieve a smaller Army which is well-trained and 
equipped, and more effective. 
 
Army Counter-Offer 
------------------ 
 
4.  (C) In the March 24 meetings, Berger further described 
military resistance to his plans and requested USG political 
support.  Presidential Security Commissioner (and retired 
General) Otto Perez Molina might resign over the final budget 
figures, he said.  Finance Minister Bonilla\'s efforts to work 
out the technical details of a budget reduction had met with 
stonewalling from the Army.  Berger had therefore turned to 
Presidential Commissioner for Finance Richard Aitkenhead to 
develop a workable plan for reductions in consultation with 
the Army.  In a separate March 24 meeting, which took place 
at Berger\'s request, Aitkenhead shared with us the Army\'s 
response to Berger\'s demands.  It provided for a total troop 
strength of 16,000 (from current levels of 27,209) and a 
budget totaling 871.8 million quetzals ($108 million). 
Aitkenhead thus expressed confidence that the differences 
between the two plans could be overcome. 
 
Accord Reached March 26 
----------------------- 
 
5.  (C) On March 27, at the New Horizons public launch, 
Berger told the Ambassador that he (and Aitkenhead) had in 
fact reached an accord with the Defense Minister during a 
three-hour meeting the day before (the Minister of Defense 
confirmed the agreement to the MilGroup Commander).  At 
Berger\'s request, the Ambassador supported the need for 
downsizing cum modernization in his public remarks at the New 
Horizons inaugural ceremony.  The accord, which will be made 
public April 1, includes the following elements: 
 
-- troop strength reduction to 15,500 by June 30 
 
-- a 2004 budget ceiling of 700 million quetzals (approx. 
$87.5 million) 
 
-- 2005 budget ceiling of .33% of GDP 
 
(Note:  According to Aitkenhead\'s figures, military spending 
in 2003 amounted to .64 of GDP.  However, .33% of projected 
2004 GDP totals approximately $108 million.  It is unclear to 
us if Berger intends the military budget to increase in 2005 
to this extent.  The increase may be intended to cover needed 
equipment modernization, after reductions are complete.  End 
Note.) 
 
Next Steps; How We Are Helping, Could Help Further 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6.  (C) In light of these developments, the CCMR seminar of 
April 19-20 will shift its focus slightly to help facilitate 
development of an action plan to implement the political 
understanding.  With respect to officer demobilization, 
Aitkenhead said the older ones are no problem, as they are 
ready to get out with a financial bonus.  Aitkenhead wants 
help on retraining/re-education of younger officers who will 
have to leave; he had no specific request regarding 
middle-ranked officers, who are the biggest problem due to 
their numbers and years of service.  Aitkenhead also 
requested support for equipment modernization, to the degree 
that we are able given Congressional restrictions.  We expect 
VP Stein, in an upcoming (mid-April) visit to Washington, 
will have specific requests.  One of the most important ways 
we could support this initiative would be a public statement 
by President Bush during Berger\'s April 30 visit. 
 
7.  (C) Comment:  Downsizing the Guatemalan military has been 
a long-term USG interest.  The evolution of this presidential 
initiative has been remarkably swift and the accord with the 
military is a tribute to Berger\'s determination and 
pragmatism.  Though Berger overcame predictable resistance 
from the MOD and his top staff, he may yet face opposition 
from within the officer corps.  For example, both the MOD and 
his Chief of Staff thanked the Ambassador for his March 27 
remarks, noting that \"the Commanders need to hear what you 
said.\"  U.S. political support for Berger\'s gutsy gambit will 
continue to be crucial, as will be any other incentives we 
can offer to support modernization as downsizing is completed. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15507","3/30/2004 20:41","04GUATEMALA779","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE28738","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000779 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC, DRL/IL AND WHA/CEN 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FOR OPDAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA TIP PROJECT PROPOSALS 
 
REF: A. STATE 28738 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 508 
 
1. Summary:  The new Government of Guatemala is giving TIP 
priority attention.  A major step forward has been the 
creation of an anti-TIP unit in the Public Ministry\'s Office 
of the Special Prosecutor for Women, which is taking the lead 
on TIP investigations and has launched a series of operations 
to rescue victims and arrest traffickers.  We believe that 
providing material support for this new unit has the 
strongest potential benefit for USG TIP interests.  The GOG 
has also requested USG support for victim assistance programs 
for a planned shelter for TIP victims, which we include as a 
possible future project.  We also note that OPDAT anti-TIP 
training is already planned for August 2004.  End Summary. 
 
2. A. Title:  Strengthening Law Enforcement Project 
We request G/TIP support of $86,000 in 2004 to purchase 
equipment (vehicles and computer equipment) and supplies for 
the new GOG anti-TIP unit. 
 
B.  Background:  Of greatest immediate priority under the 
Embassy\'s anti-TIP strategy is the support we can provide to 
GOG law enforcement efforts to combat TIP.  The GOG has 
demonstrated the political will to combat TIP by forming the 
new anti-TIP unit within the Prosecutor for Women\'s Office. 
The unit is staffed by the Prosecutor for Women, an auxiliary 
prosecutor, and two agents.  The unit has already launched a 
series of operations in coordination with the national 
civilian police and the Immigration Directorate to rescue 
victims (six minors engaged in prostitution have been rescued 
thus far) and arrest traffickers (five are in custody). 
Members of the unit received DHS TIP training during the week 
of March 22 (with approximately 400 government law 
enforcement and judicial officials).  The new unit is led by 
an energetic and committed individual, but lacks resources to 
perform effectively.  To achieve results, transportation and 
information system upgrades will give the unit greater 
mobility (it has national responsibility, but is forced to 
depend on the Public Ministry\'s inadequate motor pool 
resources to travel outside the capital). 
 
C.  Project Description: 
 
--1)  Goal: Provide support which gives the anti-TIP unit the 
means to effectively combat TIP by rescuing victims and 
arresting traffickers. 
 
--2)  Objectives:  Double the rate of rescues/arrests of TIP 
victims and traffickers. 
 
--3)  Activities:  Purchase two 4WD vehicle at $40,000 each. 
Purchase three computers at $2000 each. 
 
--4)  Timeline:  One year. 
 
--5) Sustainability:  The Public Ministry will maintain the 
equipment after purchase.  Embassy will monitor the use of 
the equipment and report on the productivity of the unit\'s 
anti-TIP efforts. 
 
--6)  Performance Indicators:  Number of arrests/rescues of 
TIP victims before and after USG material support. 
 
--7)  Evaluation Plan: Embassy will collect data on arrests 
and rescues at the time equipment is provided, and monthly 
until the end of March 2005, when they will be reported to 
G/TIP. 
 
--8) Cost estimates: 
 
2x4WD vehicles (at $40,000 each):  $80,000 
3xcomputers (at $2,000 each):      $ 6,000 
 
Total:                             $86,000 
 
3. A. Title:  Victim\'s Assistance Project 
 
We request G/TIP consideration of future support to a new 
Government shelter for TIP victims, to be created by the 
Government Secretariat for Social Welfare and run by an NGO. 
Program and equipment support of $71,250 for the first year 
of operation would commence once the shelter is established 
(planned for later this year).  The GOG shelter would 
complement the network of NGO-based shelters proposed by 
USAID. 
 
B.  Background:  The GOG plans to create a new shelter for 
adolescent TIP victims, to implement its commitments under 
the National Action Plan Against Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation of Children and Adolescents, approved by the 
Cabinet in 2001.  The Government Secretariat for Social 
Welfare is charged with providing integrated protection and 
services to victims under the Plan. 
 
C.  Project Description: 
 
--1)  Goal: Provide support to a new government shelter for 
TIP victims.  The shelter is located in Coatepeque, an urban 
center near the Mexican border and on the main coastal 
highway to the Guatemalan-Mexican border. 
 
--2)  Objectives:  Provide integrated assistance and 
rehabilitation to up to 60 child and adolescent TIP victims 
of sexual exploitation between ages 11-17. 
 
--3)  Activities:  A multi-disciplinary team would provide 
the following services to victims:  mental health (emergency, 
individual and group therapy, detox) 
          health services (treatment, exams, prevention) 
          education and vocational training 
          legal counsel (in coordination with prosecutors to 
charge TIP traffickers) 
          social support (case planning, domestic visits, 
re-insertion in family and community, follow-up once victim 
leaves shelter) 
          prevention (participation in network of shelters) 
 
--4)  Timeline:  one year, renewable if funding permits 
 
--5) Sustainability:  The Presidential Secretariat for Social 
Welfare will assume any ongoing program costs. 
 
--6)  Performance Indicators:  Number of shelter staff 
trained and TIP victims served. 
--7)  Evaluation Plan: Embassy will monitor monthly number of 
victims served and report results at the end of the project 
period. 
 
--8) Cost estimates: 
 
teaching materials:        1,875 
vehicles:                 20,625 
travel:                    2,500 
training workshops:       31,250 
microenterprise credits:  12,500 
staff training:            2,500 
 
Total:                   $73,250 
 
4.  Embassy POC for TIP-related issues is Political Officer 
Erik Hall, who can be reached at (502) 331-1541 ext. 4635; 
fax: (502) 334-8474. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15555","3/31/2004 22:21","04GUATEMALA798","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000798 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT OF STATE FOR G/TIP, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FOR OPDAT 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, KCRM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: SIGNIFICANT STEPS TO COMBAT TIP 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Berger Government has recently taken 
significant steps to combat trafficking in persons.  During 
President Fox\'s recent visit to Guatemala, Guatemalan 
authorities signed an MOU on anti-TIP cooperation with 
Mexico.  The GOG will deposit its articles of ratification of 
the UN Protocol to Combat TIP in New York on April 1, and 
President Berger has backed legislative reforms to increase 
sanctions for TIP and related crimes.  Since shortly after 
staffing a new anti-TIP unit in the Public Ministry, the GOG 
has conducted regular sweeps of bars and brothels seeking TIP 
victims and traffickers.  Casa Alianza has been accompanying 
law enforcement authorities on these operations. 
Approximately 400 GOG law enforcement officials received DHS 
anti-TIP training during the week of March 22.  We remain 
convinced that the GOG is making significant efforts to 
combat TIP.  End Summary. 
 
Mexico anti-TIP MOU 
------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) During the visit by Mexican President Vincente Fox 
to Guatemala on March 23, the Guatemalan and Mexican Foreign 
Ministers signed an MOU to protect female and minor TIP 
victims in both countries.  The MOU promotes actions leading 
to cooperation in the protection of women and minor victims 
of trafficking in persons in the border area between 
Guatemala and Mexico.  Both nations pledge to respect the 
human rights of victims while they are in custody, and 
promise not to incarcerate victims of TIP.  They also agree 
to form a joint Technical Commission comprised of, from 
Mexico: the General Directorate of Protection and Consular 
Affairs of the Foreign Relations Secretariat, the Coordinator 
of International and Inter-institutional Relations of the 
Immigration National Institute of the Secretariat of Interior 
and the Attorney General\'s Office; and from Guatemala: the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Government, the 
Attorney General\'s Office and the General Directorate of 
Immigration. 
3.  (SBU) The Technical Commission is charged with: 
 
-- developing an action plan to train public officials in 
both countries to prevent and support female and minor 
victims of TIP, 
 
-- produce a study about TIP and the areas in Mexico and 
Guatemala where trafficking occurs, 
 
-- establish mechanisms for the voluntary return of women and 
minors to reunite them with their families, 
 
-- exchange information regarding female and underage victims 
of TIP, and, 
 
-- develop information and prevention campaigns in the areas 
where trafficking occurs. 
4.  (SBU) The Technical Commission may accept the support of 
international, civilian and or academic organizations.  The 
MOU also provides for joint enforcement activities in 
compliance with existing regulations of the host country. 
(Note:  Because of the sovereignty issues this raises, the 
agreement will take effect only after the GOG notifies the 
Mexican Embassy that the agreement meets requirements of 
domestic law.  End Note.)  The agreement will last three 
years and can be extended with approval of both parties. 
 
Legislative Initiatives 
----------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) MFA Vice Minister for Human Rights and Migration 
Marta Altolaguirre told the Ambassador on March 26 that she 
will personally deposit Guatemala\'s articles of ratification 
of the UN Protocol (to the Palermo Convention Against 
Organized Crime) to Combat TIP at the UN on April 1, before 
visiting Washington to meet with Department officials on 
April 2.  Altolaguirre confirmed that President Berger 
supports the ILO\'s proposed reforms to the Guatemalan 
criminal code to increase penalties for TIP and to add new 
TIP-related crimes. 
 
Recent Law Enforcement Actions 
------------------------------ 
 
6.  (SBU) Sandra Zayas, the GOG Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Women, told PolOff that a raid on six brothels in 
Mazatenango, Suchitepequez province (located one province 
over from the Mexican border and a major transit center for 
migrants) resulted in the rescue of a minor engaged in 
prostitution on March 26.  Zayas told us that the minor has 
provided information which will be used to arrest a 
trafficker, who was not present in the brothel during the 
operation. 
 
7.  (SBU) The Mazatenango raid was the latest in a series of 
sweeps of bar/brothels cited in a report by Casa Alianza 
where minors in prostitution are present.  Four minors have 
been rescued from prostitution in recent weeks (several 
others were discovered and rescued prior to the establishment 
of the unit) and five traffickers are imprisoned awaiting 
trial on TIP-related charges (another is free on bail). 
Another such raid is planned for April 2. 
 
8.  (SBU) The raids are planned by Zayas, and involve a task 
force including police and immigration officials.  Zayas has 
also invited Casa Alianza to accompany the raids to provide 
immediate assistance to victims.  Asked why so few victims 
had been found so far, Casa Alianza director Arturo 
Echeverria told PolOff on March 25 that the information in 
the report was collected 5-10 months ago, and shifting 
patterns of prostitution could partially (but not fully) 
account for poor results.  He did not speculate further, and 
confirmed that Zayas was very careful not to divulge the 
location of the raids in advance. 
 
Anti-TIP Training 
----------------- 
 
9.  (U) DHS anti-TIP training was well-attended by GOG law 
enforcement officials (principally from the Public Ministry, 
National Civilian Police, judiciary, and Immigration 
Directorate) during the week of March 22.  Over 400 people 
attended 4-hour sessions to sensitize them to the differences 
of TIP from alien smuggling, how to recognize victims, the 
need to protect victims and use their testimony to convict 
traffickers, and to prevent TIP by educating the public about 
the crime. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  (SBU) We are encouraged by the Berger Government\'s 
strong signals of engagement on this issue on a variety of 
fronts.  While initial law enforcement efforts have produced 
limited results, we believe the GOG\'s efforts are sincere and 
will in time yield more significant results.  It is very 
encouraging to us that the GOG has requested Casa Alianza 
participation in its law enforcement efforts, which should 
help target those efforts where victims can be easily found. 
The upcoming visit by Vice Foreign Minister Marta 
Altolaguirre on April 2 and the April 30 Berger visit to 
Washington provide opportunities to encourage further efforts 
and collaboration to combat TIP. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15558","3/31/2004 23:16","04GUATEMALA801","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000801 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
FOR U/S DOBRIANSKY FROM AMBASSADOR HAMILTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
1.  Dear Paula, I would like to encourage you to accept a 
meeting request from WHA for an incredibly committed and 
impressive new Guatemalan Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs 
for Human Right and Migration, Marta Altolaguirre, who will 
be in Washington on April 2.  Marta is a recent President of 
the Inter-American Human Rights Commission and has tremendous 
standing and credibility with the human rights community here 
and throughout the hemisphere.  She is also the new GOG 
coordinator for anti-TIP efforts, and would like to meet with 
you to briefly explain the GOG\'s plans to tackle this 
important issue.  Marta has deeply impressed me and bears a 
message we welcome: of sincere commitment by a friendly 
government to do the right thing on an important global 
issue.  I hope you have the chance to meet with her.  With 
warm regards, John 
HAMILTON 
"
"15651","4/2/2004 17:01","04GUATEMALA821","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA548|04GUATEMALA771","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000821 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER PUBLICLY ANNOUNCES DEEP MILITARY CUTS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 548 
     B. GUATEMALA 771 
 
1. (U) In a public ceremony at the National Palace on April 
1, President Berger formally announced a reduction in troop 
levels, to be implemented by June 30, from 27,214 to 15,500 
(about 43%) and a 30% reduction in the military\'s budget for 
2004 (the budget cut for 2004 was even deeper if intra-budget 
transfers that plussed up the Defense budget beyond 
Congressionally approved levels are taken into account). 
Beginning in 2005, the military budget will be capped at 
0.33% of GDP, or exactly half the limit set by the 1996 Peace 
Accords.  The announcement, jointly made by Security 
Commissioner Otto Perez Molina, the Minister of Defense, and 
President Berger, was consistent with political agreements 
reported reftels and contained no surprises. 
 
2. (SBU) Comment: Vice President Stein and Presidential 
Advisor Eduardo Gonzales told the Ambassador that a March 30 
4-hour session with 60 senior officers to explain the 
decision was tense, but had ultimately gone well.  Military 
leaders have expressed concern to us as well that the 
drawdown will not be accompanied, as the GOG is promising, by 
real modernization.  Perez Molina\'s participation in the 
ceremony was significant after earlier indications he might 
distance himself from the reductions.  At the Ambassador\'s 
suggestion, the GOG will be briefing the diplomatic corps in 
greater detail early next week. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15652","4/2/2004 17:49","04GUATEMALA824","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: CICIACS GOES TO COURT 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The GOG-UN agreement to create a 
Commission to Investigate Clandestine Groups (CICIACS) is 
slowly moving toward implementation, if fitfully.  The 
CICIACS agreement underwent Congressional review in February 
and March and will shortly be sent to the Constitutional 
Court for its legal opinion.  President Berger publicly 
expressed his Administration\'s commitment to implement the 
CICIACS in a national address on February 25.  The Court will 
likely be swayed by President Berger\'s public support and a 
favorable ruling would make Congressional ratification more 
likely.  End Summary. 
 
Presidential Position Clear 
--------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) President Berger on February 25 declared his 
government\'s strong support for CICIACS in a high-profile 
ceremony \"re-launching\" the Peace Accords.  Berger told the 
Ambassador during a March 24 meeting with USAID A/A Franco 
that he remains committed to CICIACS implementation.  Vice 
President Stein has the lead within the Executive on CICIACS, 
supported by Frank LaRue, President of the Presidential 
Commission on Human Rights (COPREDH).  Stein plans to 
reaffirm the GOG\'s commitment during a visit to UN 
headquarters in New York later this month.  At the same time, 
he will explore UN willingness to adjust the agreement, 
should the Constitutional Court find any of its aspects 
unconstitutional. 
 
Court Ruling Could Resolve Congressional Qualms 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3.  (SBU)  A 60-day deadline for Congressional consideration 
of CICIACS began February 6, when the GOG-UN agreement was 
sent to the Congressional Government and Human Rights 
Commissions for review.  In a March 29 meeting with HROff, 
Nineth Montenegro Human Rights Commission President said the 
Human Rights Commission would recommend that Congress request 
an opinion from the Constitutional Court on the legality of 
the agreement.  The Government Commission will reportedly 
advise against ratification.  Public debate over CICIACS has 
centered on constitutional and sovereignty concerns.  FRG, 
UNE, and GANA coalition Congressional leaders we have 
consulted all agree a positive ruling by the Court would 
counter those doubts and make a favorable ruling from 
Congress likely. 
 
Donor Reaction Positive 
----------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) MINUGUA Human Rights Chief Patrick Gavigan now 
estimates the CICIACS budget at $8-10 million/year for three 
years.  The UN recently held a donor meeting in New York and 
anticipates positive reception from donors like the World 
Bank/IDB if the UN-GOG CICIACS agreement is ratified by 
Congress.  There is donor consensus that the GOG should 
contribute a portion of the CICIACS budget in order to 
demonstrate its commitment to the process.  In a February 26 
meeting with the Ambassador, Helen Mack said the \"Coalition 
for the Establishment of CICIACS,\" of which she is a member, 
would suggest the Public Ministry, Interior Ministry, and 
National Civil Police contribute to CICIACS from their 
respective budgets.  Frank LaRue has told us he believes the 
GOG would contribute funds as a symbolic gesture of GOG 
dedication to project, but would not be able to offer 
significant amounts. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5. (SBU) The highly politicized behavior of the 
Constitutional Court may actually work in favor of the 
implementation of CICIACS.  Our analysis of the 
constitutional issues involved in CICIACS is that there is 
enough gray area to permit Court rulings in favor (or 
against) on the merits.  Some prominent CICIACS supporters, 
including Helen Mack and other human rights activists, have 
long believed a Court ruling will be necessary.  Although 
this is the same court that ruled in favor of Gen. (ret.) 
Rios Montt\'s quixotic presidential candidacy last year, the 
Court has more recently ruled favorably on several Executive 
initiatives (including the replacement of the former Attorney 
General and the lifting of former President Portillo\'s 
parliamentary immunity) and seems highly attuned to changes 
in the political environment that accompanied the change in 
government.  Berger has made his support for CICIACS clear 
and we are hopeful the Court will follow his lead.  A 
favorable Court ruling would make Congressional passage more 
likely. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15768","4/6/2004 17:49","04GUATEMALA842","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE72432|04SECSTATE74060","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000842 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT, UNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA UNDECIDED ON CO-SPONSORSHIP, OPPOSES 
NO-ACTION ON CUBA 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 72432 
     B. SECSTATE 74060 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) The Ambassador discussed ref A points with Foreign 
Minister Briz on April 1, and followed up with Vice President 
Stein on April 2.  Both Officials told the Ambassador that 
the decision to co-sponsor was still being debated.  On April 
5, the Ambassador again pressed Briz for Guatemala\'s position 
on the Cuba resolution tabled by Honduras.  Briz told us he 
was meeting with Stein later that day to discuss the issue 
and that no decision had been reached.  PolOff also spoke 
with Carla Rodriguez, Director General for Multilateral 
Affairs at the Foreign Ministry.  Rodriguez pulled Vice 
Minister Skinner-Klee into the meeting and both promised to 
inform us as soon as a decision is made. 
 
2. (C) In response to ref B, Skinner-Klee restated 
Guatemala\'s objection on principle to the use of no-action 
motions.  Rodriguez stated flatly that the Guatemalan CHR 
delegation would vote against all such motions. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15813","4/7/2004 22:11","04GUATEMALA860","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000860 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA HUMAN RIGHTS UPDATE #3-2004 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The following is an update of significant 
recent developments in human rights. Topics include: 
 
-- Cutbacks in Special Prosecutor\'s Office for Human Rights 
(para 2 and 3) 
 
-- Rosalina Tuyuc to Head Presidential Reparations Committee 
(para 4) 
 
-- CALDH Kidnapping (para 6) 
 
-- Environmentalist Threatened (para 7) 
 
 
Cutbacks in Human Rights Office 
------------------------------- 
2. (SBU) In mid-March, New Attorney General Juan Florido 
Solis reportedly informed Thelma de Lam, Special Prosecutor 
for Human Rights, that the staff of her office would be cut 
from the 60 that were employed under De Leon to 4, two 
Attorneys and two assistants.  Although we have yet to see 
whether the reduction will be that dire, 37 employees have 
been let go thus far.  In comparison to other sections in the 
Public Ministry, the Human Rights Prosecutor\'s Office was 
overstaffed and Florido told the Ambassador that the 
reductions addressed an internal perception from the other 
prosecutors of preference for De Lam under the previous 
Attorney General.  More concerning, according to De Lam, 
security for all of the Attorneys was withdrawn March 11. 
Florido has also cut all funds for witness protection.  (NB: 
Every public institution is coping with a 30% budget 
reduction, part of a government-wide austerity program.) 
 
3. (SBU) The loss of funding for witness protection is 
already having an impact. Two witnesses in the murder of 
CONAVIGUA\'s Manuel Garcia refused to testify after rocks were 
thrown through their windshield amidst yelled threats as they 
traveled to the trial.  Without their testimony, the case was 
lost.  The witnesses in the murder of Padre Chemita also 
refused to testify without protection, stalling that case 
indefinitely. 
 
4. (SBU) Florido was vocally supportive of Human Rights in 
his first meeting with the Ambassador and we do not perceive 
these cutbacks as a deliberate attempt to slow the office,s 
investigations, but as a response to pressure from the 
Executive to scale back spending and a managerial attempt to 
address earlier in-house favoritism.  However, Florido,s 
cutbacks will likely be perceived as a step backwards by the 
human rights community.  De Lam, who is seven months 
pregnant, stated that she would likely resign in August, 
after her two months of permitted maternity leave. We will 
continue to engage Florido on the work of this office, the 
importance of employee and witness protection in effectively 
investigating and prosecuting cases, and the selection of a 
new Special Attorney for Human Rights if/when De Lam should 
leave. 
 
 
Rosalina Tuyuc to head Presidential Reparations Commission 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
4. (U) After a large protest on agrarian and reparations 
issues on March 30, Berger confirmed the nomination of 
Rosalina Tuyuc (an established indigenous leader, close to 
the URNG, who runs CONAVIGUA, a organization for widows of 
the civil conflict) as the leader for the Presidential 
Reparations Commission for the Victims of War. The 
Commission\'s principal objective will be to negotiate the 
amount and distribution of compensation for surviving family 
members of victims in the civil war.  Tuyuc\'s long-awaited 
appointment follows a bitter internal struggle between the 
two primary human rights coalitions in Guatemala and may 
result in further contention during Commission discussions. 
 
CALDH Driver Kidnapped 
---------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) On March 10, a driver from the Center for Legal 
Action on Human Rights (CALDH) was kidnapped outside the 
organization\'s building.  The driver was beaten and released 
after an hour of being questioned by disguised assailants 
about the organization.  CALDH reported the crime to the 
Public Ministry, but no progress has been made on the 
investigation.  The incident was followed by several 
break-ins at other human rights NGOs the same week, provoking 
suspicion among human rights defenders that the same 
individuals were responsible. 
 
Environmentalist Threatened 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Eloda Mejia, a leading environmentalist whose 
organization, Amigo de Izabal, works with indigenous 
villagers in El Estor, Izabal, has received an escalating 
number of death threats in the last two months.  On February 
21, Mejia organized a public forum on the environmental 
effects of nickel mining, a prominent industry in the area. 
The mayor of the town (who is allegedly determined to protect 
the mining company\'s interests) planned a large protest of 
the forum, during which threats were made against Mejia\'s 
life.  De Lam, Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, noted 
that the Public Ministry did not have the resources to travel 
to Izabal for an investigation.  However, Mejia reportedly is 
being accompanied by an American from the Peace Brigades. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15904","4/12/2004 17:30","04GUATEMALA874","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121730Z Apr 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, GT 
SUBJECT: CONGRESS HALF WAY TO ELECTORAL REFORM 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  In a last-minute shift by the ruling GANA 
coalition, the Congress approved the articles of a 
long-pending electoral reform law on March 31 by a two-thirds 
majority.  Final approval was deferred until after Congress 
returns from the Easter holiday break.  GANA Congressional 
leaders initially opposed the bill, but gave in to opposition 
demands to pass it in the face of growing internal 
dissension.  President Berger has said he will sign the law 
despite calls (including from the Supreme Electoral Tribunal) 
for its veto.  Political parties support the reforms in part 
due to the public financing they hope to receive based on 
results in the November 2003 election.  To achieve consensus 
on what everyone acknowledges as an imperfect reform, all 
major parties agreed to address weaknesses in the election 
bill through amendments within 90 days.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) The reforms have a tortured legislative history. 
They had their genesis in a Commission on Electoral Reform 
established in 1997 in compliance with the Peace Accords. 
The reforms were submitted to Congress in 1998, passed 
Congress in 2002 and were sent to the Constitutional Court, 
which mandated changes in 2003.  Electoral reform is an 
element of the National Shared Agenda agreed to by all major 
parties prior to the 2003 election, and by extension part of 
the Governability Pact negotiated at the outset of this 
Government among the GANA, UNE and PAN.  The reform contains 
147 articles, which were voted on individually on March 31, 
including, most significantly, public financing for political 
parties and decentralization of voting booths, which are 
currently limited to municipal centers. 
 
3.  (U) Prior to the vote, magistrates of the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal and others criticized several aspects of 
the reforms, including: 
 
-- unclear language on what institution would produce the new 
national identity and voting document 
 
-- weaknesses in oversight of campaign spending 
 
-- a requirement to locate voting booths in any towns of 500 
or more voters 
 
-- removal of a requirement for minority representation in 
party leadership 
 
-- increased requirements for forming new parties that favor 
current parties 
 
4.  (U) In response to these criticisms, party leaders (with 
the exception of the ANN and some independents) agreed to 
debate amendments to address these issues within the next 90 
days.  They also agreed to speed consideration of unrelated 
items on the legislative agenda, including reform of the 
Social Security Institute, authorization of a postal service 
contract, and a measure to arbitrate national electricity 
price increases. 
 
GANA Flip-Flop 
-------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) GANA Congressional Whip Ricardo Saravia told 
PolOffs on March 26 that the GANA opposed the measure as 
imperfect and would vote to kill it.  Later, the GANA agreed 
to vote in favor of the bill after facing the threat of a 
public split on the issue with the Patriotic Party, one of 
the three members of the GANA coalition, and concerted 
lobbying by the PAN and UNE, the GANA\'s Governability Pact 
partners.  Saravia added that GANA still needs the PAN and 
UNE as it can count only on 12 of the 20 independent 
votes--leaving it well short of a working majority.  PAN 
Congressional whip Mario Taracena told PolOff on April 2 
that, although there was no quorum for the final vote on 
April 1, he believed the inter-party accord would hold and 
the measure would pass with the required 2/3 majority after 
Congress returns from its Easter recess.  The measure is 
supported by all major parties except the tiny New Nation 
Alliance.  Taracena said the press portrayal of inter-party 
negotiations on this issue as acrimonious was not true, and 
said the electoral law\'s passage will signal a new atmosphere 
of cooperation in Congress. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The reforms are long overdue and generally 
positive.  While the primary incentive for passage by the 
opposition is financial, the GANA has a large stake in future 
inter-party cooperation on other national issues in a very 
divided Congress.  If passed, more tough negotiations can be 
expected on the amendments to the reforms. 
HAMILTON 
"
"15943","4/13/2004 22:21","04GUATEMALA909","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000909 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT, UNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ANNOUNCES SUPPORT BUT NOT CO-SPONSORSHIP 
FOR CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
Foreign Minister Jorge Briz publicly announced on April 13 
that Guatemala will vote for the Cuba resolution drafted by 
Honduras.  Briz added that he had issued precise instructions 
to the Guatemalan delegation in Geneva.  Most major dailies 
carried the story, with one paper reporting that the Cuban 
Ambassador to Guatemala had refused to comment.  The same 
article quotes opposition Congressman and former Guatemalan 
Ambassador to Geneva and the U.S., Antonio Arenales, pointing 
out that Cuba has no excuse for refusing a visit by the UN 
High Commissioner\'s Personal Representative--something that 
Guatemala has done. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16000","4/14/2004 20:37","04GUATEMALA921","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA909|04SECSTATE77769|04SECSTATE80437|04SECSTATE81762","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000921 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/13/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA SUPPORTS CHR-60 COUNTRY SPECIFIC 
RESOLUTIONS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 77769 
     B. SECSTATE 81762 
     C. SECSTATE 80437 
     D. GUATEMALA 909 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Guatemala will vote in support of all the 
country-specific resolutions listed reftels (Belarus, China, 
Cuba, Sudan, Turkmenistan and Zimbabwe) according to Carla 
Rodriguez, Director General for Multilateral Affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry.  Rodriguez also repeated Guatemala\'s 
principled position against no-action votes.  Regarding our 
resolution promoting democracy, Rodriguez said Guatemala 
plans to co-sponsor and would certainly vote for it. 
Rodriguez expressed appreciation for the text of the Sudan 
resolution. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16075","4/16/2004 16:50","04GUATEMALA941","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE52795","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161650Z Apr 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000941 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO OPIC FOR ELENA GONZALEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, GT 
SUBJECT: OPIC\'S REQUEST FOR GUIDANCE ON LOAN TO PEGGY SA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 52795 
 
 The Embassy has no negative information on the participants 
nor the project involving Peggy S.A.  In regards to the local 
real estate market, there is currently increased investor 
optimism following the January inauguration of President 
Oscar Berger, who is widely seen as \"business friendly.\" Zone 
10 where the project is proposed, is among Guatemala City\'s 
most choice areas and includes the upscale \"Zona Viva\" hotel 
and restaurant zone. Guatemala\'s weak judicial system, 
however, continues to add risk to local investment. 
Investors in real estate need to be especially cautious in 
ensuring that they receive clear title to land they purchase. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16078","4/16/2004 17:38","04GUATEMALA942","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE72748","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 5102/FOREIGN TRADE ZONES (ITA/IA) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN FREE TRADE ZONES 
 
REF: STATE 72748 
 
Below are Post\'s responses to questions regarding the Free 
Trade Zones (FTZs) Program in Guatemala.  Answers are keyed 
to match questions in reftel and are based on Decree 65-89, 
Law of Free Trade Zones. Post also consulted experts on 
FTZs issues at the Ministry of Economy and the Customs 
Administration for clarification. 
 
a. According to the Ministry of Economy, there are 20 
authorized FTZs currently, but only 14 with operations. 
FTZs may be established in any region of the country. 
 
b. Private FTZs are managed by private administrative 
agencies, which require authorization from the Ministry of 
Economy to install and develop FTZs. FTZs are provided 
special customs benefits under the supervision of the 
Guatemalan customs authorities. 
 
c. Businesses operating within FTZs require authorization 
from the Ministry of Economy to operate, but the process is 
done only once and not for each manufacturing activity. If 
all the requirements are met, the process of obtaining 
approval from the Ministry may take about three weeks. 
 
d. There are three types of Free Trade Zones\' users: 
industrial, commercial and service permit holders. 
Industrial permit holders can assemble or manufacture 
products in the zone for export or re-export, and they can 
use both foreign and domestic inputs. According to the Law 
of Free Trade Zones, industrial permit holders may sell to 
the domestic market a maximum of 20 percent of their total 
production, but require previous authorization from the 
Ministry of Economy. In such cases, the value of each sale 
should not be lower than US$5,000 and should have only one 
consignee in the national customs territory.  Commercial 
permit holders do not transform goods.  They often use FTZs 
for wholesale distribution of imported goods to the five 
economies of the Central American Common Market.  Service 
permit holders are often firms engaged in washing and 
treating fabric and apparel for the apparel maquila 
industry. 
 
e. Industrial permit holders, as well as service permit 
holders, authorized to operate in Free Trade Zones are 
exempted from duties and import taxes on equipment, 
machinery, tools, raw materials, inputs, semi-elaborated 
products, containers, packaging and are exempted from the 
value added tax in the transfer of merchandise within and 
between Free Trade Zones. Manufactured merchandise that 
leaves the zone to be sold in the domestic market must pay 
duties. According to the Customs Administration office 
responsible for FTZs issues, the manufacturer must pay 
duties at the rate that applies to the finished product, 
and duties are paid on the entire value of the product. 
 
f. There are no special provisions for small and medium 
businesses or for new foreign direct investment operating 
within Free Trade Zones. 
 
g. Industrial and service permit holders also enjoy a ten- 
year income tax exemption on income obtained exclusively 
from the activity as an industrial permit holder. 
Commercial permit holders enjoy a five-year income tax 
exemption on income obtained exclusively from the activity. 
 
h. There are no other financial incentives for business 
operating in Free Trade Zones 
 
i. There are no other exemptions contained in other laws or 
regulations. 
 
j. There are no other restrictions or requirements, such as 
export requirements (other than for industrial permit 
holders, as explained above), local content requirements, 
or ownership requirements for businesses operating within 
Free Trade Zones. 
"
"16079","4/16/2004 18:01","04GUATEMALA944","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PBTS, PHUM, BH, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA COOLS RHETORIC ON BELIZE SHOOTING 
INCIDENT 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: GOG officials are ratcheting down what had 
been a war of words over the April 7 shooting of a Guatemalan 
peasant by Belize Defense Forces.  On April 15, President 
Berger called the incident \"isolated\" and said he would not 
send troops to the border area.  Foreign Minister Briz 
confirmed publicly that May 4 bilateral meetings under OAS 
auspices would not be affected.  A bilateral border 
commission held its regularly scheduled meeting April 14. 
Privately, MFA officials tell us they need to stay ahead of 
public opinion and will continue to respond assertively to 
the shooting.  Briz repeated to the Ambassador on April 15 
that he is determined to use the unfortunate incident to move 
public opinion toward accepting a stronger OAS role in 
resolving the dispute.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Briz used photographs of the victim and his injuries 
to punctuate a press conference in which he strongly 
condemned the shooting and called for an OAS investigation. 
Briz blamed an \"attitude of xenophobia\" in Belize for 
\"excessive and inexcusable use of force\" resulting in injury 
or death for many Guatemalan peasants over the years at the 
hands of the Belizean military.  Briz announced he would 
refer the latest shooting to the InterAmerican Commission on 
Human Rights and that he would travel to the Peten to 
personally look into the matter.  Guatemalan media applauded 
his stance and the tensions appeared to escalate when 
Belizean Ambassador Martinez called Briz\'s accusations 
\"unfortunate and ridiculous\" in an April 14 press conference. 
 The following day, Berger and Briz responded with more 
measured comments that nevertheless do not retract 
Guatemala\'s claims of excessive use of force.  Briz continues 
to point to the lack of any mention of a fire-fight in the 
initial Belizean reports. 
 
3. (C) Briz told the Ambassador on April 12 that his comments 
at the press conference were intended to illustrate to the 
Guatemalan public the need for a more prominent role for the 
OAS in resolving the border dispute.  Briz repeated this goal 
to the Ambassador in an April 15 meeting adding that he is 
determined to use the incident to speed resolution of the 
border dispute.  Briz added that he would not allow the 
incident to affect informal bilateral communications and 
described the April 14 meeting of the bilateral border 
commission as \"cordial and productive.\" 
 
4. (C) Comment: Unlike the last shooting incident over two 
years ago, Guatemala does not dispute that the incident took 
place well inside Belize, away from the Adjacency Zone, and 
that at least one of the Guatemalans was armed.  However, 
Guatemalan Ambassador to Belize, Antonio Castellanos, 
strongly rejects the Belizean Defense Force claim that its 
soldiers fired in self defense, based on his interviews with 
the wounded man and his partner who is detained in Belize. 
Guatemala will argue that the wounded man\'s injuries prove he 
was shot from behind as he fled, while the man known to have 
been armed was arrested without injury--the opposite of what 
might be expected if the patrol was firing in self defense. 
The OAS investigation, which both sides have called for, will 
probably not be able to resolve the issue 
conclusively--certainly not before the May 4 OAS meeting to 
extend the confidence building measures.  Briz\'s initial 
tough talk seems to have inoculated him against public 
opinion, however, hardliners on the MFA\'s Belize Commission 
believe the 2001 shooting forced Belize to soften its 
position and will recommend using the latest incident in the 
same way at the May 4 meeting.  Briz will have to seriously 
consider this recommendation. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16166","4/20/2004 18:46","04GUATEMALA962","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE85231|04SECSTATE87283","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000962 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA TO VOTE AGAINST GITMO RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 87283 
     B. SECSTATE 85231 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) The Ambassador discussed ref B points with Foreign 
Minister Briz on April 16 and secured a commitment from Briz 
to vote against Cuba\'s resolution.  President Berger was 
subsequently quoted in several newspapers stating that 
Guatemala would \"support human rights no matter who it 
affects.\"  Director General for Multilateral Affairs, Carla 
Rodriguez told us on April 19 that the media had 
misinterpreted Berger\'s remarks as supporting Cuba\'s 
resolution. 
 
2. (C) On April 19 the Ambassador followed up with a note 
thanking Briz for his government\'s commitment to vote against 
the resolution.  On April 20, the Ambassador spoke again with 
Briz who confirmed Guatemala\'s position against the 
resolution. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16220","4/21/2004 22:54","04GUATEMALA973","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE87268","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

212254Z Apr 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000973 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KNNP, GT, UNSC 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: UNSC DRAFT NONPROLIFERATION 
RESOLUTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 87268 
 
PolOff delivered reftel points to Silvia Corado, Director for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry.  Corado 
expressed appreciation for the Spanish version of the 
non-paper and said she would forward it to her UN mission. 
Corado confirmed that Guatemala will not address the Open 
Council Meeting. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16269","4/22/2004 22:10","04GUATEMALA985","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04GUATEMALA8|04SECSTATE79091","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000985 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10 YEARS 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, PHSA, KTIA, MNUC, GT 
SUBJECT: ACTION PLAN FOR PSI AGREEMENT WITH GUATEMALA 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 79091 
     B. GUATEMALA 8 
 
Classified By: Robert Copley, Political-Military Officer. 
Reason: 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) We discussed the Proliferation Security Initiative 
(PSI) and proposed ship-boarding agreement with the MFA in 
December 2003 (Ref B).  We have been careful in following up 
to avoid distracting the Berger administration from our 
highest priority which is the achievement of an Article 98 
agreement with Guatemala.  We will be able to aggressively 
pursue the PSI after we have an Article 98 agreement with the 
GOG.  End Summary. 
 
----------- 
Action Plan 
----------- 
 
2.  (SBU) The first step is to get Guatemala to publicly 
endorse the proliferation statement of principles.  Our 
continuing informal discussions lead us to believe that the 
MFA has nearly wrapped up its internal consultations.  MFA 
officials have indicated that endorsement may be less than a 
month away.  We will then build on our recent successes under 
the Maritime counter-narcotics agreement (in force since 
February) to propose the ship-boarding agreement.  The 
required internal consultations over the terms of the 
ship-boarding agreement could be lengthy.  We note that such 
consultations for the maritime agreement took years, despite 
our regular engagement.  We expect that much of the 
underbrush has already been cleared due to the similarities 
with some of the terms of the maritime agreement and the 
consultations already underway for the statement of 
principles.  However, the military is necessarily a key 
player in these internal consultations, and is currently 
completely distracted by President Berger\'s far-reaching 
force reduction to be completed by June 30.  Our goal is to 
assist the MFA in rapidly reaching agreement with the terms 
of the ship-boarding agreement, or a viable GOG 
counter-proposal, as the basis for formal negotiations with 
Department participation.  Once a final text is achieved, we 
will need to cooperate with the MFA in lobbying the 
Guatemalan Congress for the 2/3 majority vote required for 
such an agreement to take effect. 
 
3.  (C) Comment:  We believe the GOG will be responsive to 
our request for a PSI, which is less politically sensitive to 
the GOG than an Article 98 agreement.  Rushing PSI now risks 
diverting the GOG from Article 98, or worse, tempting the GOG 
to postpone a hard decision in favor of an easier one. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16374","4/26/2004 21:48","04GUATEMALA1007","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

262148Z Apr 04
","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESS CRITICISM OF FM BRIZ COULD HURT 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Signaling the end of the honeymoon for at 
least one member of the Berger Administration, a major 
national daily has attacked the performance of Jorge Briz 
Abularach\'s Foreign Ministry.  While the motives for the 
attack are still unclear, Briz confided to the Ambassador he 
is sensitive to the criticism.  Briz\'s political sensitivity 
could indirectly affect U.S. interests.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Leading daily \"Prensa Libre,\" the most influential 
newspaper in Guatemala, is widely viewed as a partisan 
mouthpiece for elite economic interests, and was solidly 
pro-Berger and anti-FRG throughout the election campaign in 
2003.  Until now it has refrained from direct attacks on the 
performance of the new government, while featuring alleged 
corruption by the previous government involving other 
opposition parties. 
 
3.  (U) However, on April 19, \"Prensa Libre\" featured a lead 
editorial entitled \"A Do-nothing Foreign Ministry.\"  The 
editorial criticized the performance of the MFA under Foreign 
Minister Briz, and Briz himself for his lack of diplomatic 
experience, mastery of the English language and the foreign 
policy issues he now confronts.  It cites unnamed government 
officials and diplomats as saying \"international relations 
are totally blocked and nothing is happening in the Foreign 
Ministry, and blaming Briz.\"  The editorial ascribes to Briz 
a \"Cold War geo-strategic world view,\" and a marked 
preference for naming Ambassadors from business backgrounds 
rather than those with \"more progressive views.\"  It accuses 
him of ceding ground to the Economy Ministry on trade, to 
Rigoberta Menchu on the Peace Accords, and to Vice President 
Stein on relations with the U.S.  Stein\'s solo visit to 
Washington to prepare for the Berger visit is cited a proof 
of Briz\'s marginalization.  By the author\'s reckoning, Briz\'s 
uncertainty and indecision have resulted in a paralyzed MFA. 
The editorial ends by contrasting Briz\'s \"ideological and 
pro-business\" vision with VP Stein\'s emphasis on social 
inclusion.  On April 20, influential \"El Periodico\" columnist 
Jorge Palmieri also mounted an attack on Briz, citing the 
VP\'s leading role in foreign policy among other examples of 
the FM\'s marginalization.  Those included Berger\'s call for 
reform of the Central American Parliament, and Stein\'s public 
pronouncement in favor of the OAS SecGen candidacy of Miguel 
Angel Rodriguez, neither of which were cleared with Briz. 
 
Comment 
------- 
4.  (SBU) Briz, as a Presidential aspirant with a background 
in business, not diplomacy, is vulnerable to this kind of 
sniping.  Since the outset of his tenure as Foreign Minister 
we have noted Briz\'s sensitivity to criticism or perceived 
slights.  However, Briz has been willing to take political 
risks at our request (e.g., on Cuba resolutions in Geneva and 
on Article 98). 
 
5.  (SBU) The motives for the \"Prensa Libre\" editorial are 
still a subject of speculation.  We do not believe it comes 
from Stein, although he has dissented from the Briz-Berger 
position on Cuba and has not been enthusiastic about Article 
98.  It also strikes us as rather early for Briz\'s fellow 
presidential aspirants in the Berger government to launch 
such an attack against him.  Skinner-Klee has speculated that 
the attack may have come from within the Foreign Ministry, 
either from high-ranking MFA staff replaced by Briz or from 
rival aspirants for the Foreign Ministry job. 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment, continued.  Regardless of the motive, the 
editorial attacks on Briz have undermined his confidence and 
willingness to risk exposure on issues that are controversial 
in Guatemala, including accession to an Article 98 agreement 
with the U.S. 
WHARTON 
"
"16495","4/29/2004 22:07","04GUATEMALA1055","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SHANNON, DOD FOR OGC ALLEN. DEPARTMENT FOR PM/B, L, 
T, P,D,IO,S/WCI, S/P/PM/AT,OSD/ISP/NP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2104 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, MOPS, KTIA, GT 
SUBJECT: (C) GUATEMALA SIGNS ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Charge Bruce Wharton and Foreign Minister Jorge Briz 
signed an Article 98 agreement on April 28, 2004, bringing 
two years of negotiations to a successful conclusion.  The 
terms of the agreement require Congressional approval and a 
Presidential signature to enter into force. 
 
2.  (C) The GOG has requested that we keep the agreement 
confidential while it devises a strategy for Congressional 
 
SIPDIS 
approval, anticipating opposition from human rights groups 
once the agreement becomes public.  We will work closely with 
the Berger Administration to ensure Congressional approval of 
the agreement. 
WHARTON 
"
"16523","4/30/2004 17:07","04GUATEMALA1058","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE92528","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/29/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, IS, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON UNGA PALESTINIAN OBSERVER MISSION 
RESOLUTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 92528 
 
Classified By: PolOff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
(C) PolOff delivered reftel points to Carla Rodriguez, 
Director General for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign 
Ministry, on April 29.  Rodriguez said Guatemala has 
consistently opposed similar Palestinian efforts on the issue 
of Israeli credentials.  Rodriguez confided that the 
Guatemalan Mission to the UN believes the resolution is 
likely to be withdrawn due to perceived lack of support. 
WHARTON 
"
"16595","5/4/2004 14:42","04GUATEMALA1081","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/02/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER\'S FIRST 100 DAYS: HONEYMOON ENDING? 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  President Oscar Berger,s government is 
off to a strong start and retains strong public approval. 
Berger and his team have effectively conveyed new energy and 
direction, launching significant initiatives to reduce and 
modernize the military and to open borders to freer 
intra-regional trade.  However, the Berger government\'s 
honeymoon with the press and public may be waning.  To retain 
the support of hopeful Guatemalans, the government must 
overcome a fiscal deficit, a divided Congress, a legacy of 
government corruption and high levels of crime and start 
delivering more to a needy population.  An early test will be 
Congressional passage of a fiscal reform package.  End 
Summary. 
 
The Berger Style 
---------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Throughout his government\'s first 100 days Berger 
has sought to distinguish his government from its discredited 
predecessor.  He has done so by continuing to attack 
corruption of the past government, launching some bold 
initiatives and, perhaps most effectively, by conveying a 
change in governing style.  The result has been that Berger 
and his government benefited, with minor exceptions, from a 
\"honeymoon\" with the mainstream press which supported his 
candidacy.  Independent opinion polls still show Berger\'s 
popularity at over 80%, and faith in democracy reviving. 
However, in a sign that the honeymoon may be coming to an 
end, most media marked the 100-day milestone expressing 
public perceptions that the change in government had not yet 
affected them in their daily lives. 
 
3.  (SBU) Never a practiced public speaker, Berger,s public 
appeal stems instead from his genuine enjoyment of contact 
with a hopeful public and generally supportive press.  Berger 
has set an example of his government\'s transparency by 
inviting the press along at every opportunity and even 
opening some Cabinet meetings to the media.  He has also 
projected an image of austerity by reducing his entourage and 
security contingent, permitting closer contact with the 
public.  The contrast in style between the Portillo 
government in its last year, hunkered down against 
allegations of systematic corruption from a hostile print 
media, could not be more striking. 
 
4.  (SBU) Behind the scenes, Berger has fostered a sense 
urgency and pragmatism in policy debates, and seems impatient 
to demonstrate change.  Berger believes that political 
capital is not something to be preserved, but rather to be 
spent wisely.  Most notable among his initial political 
investments have been the bold proposed reductions in the 
size of the military (by roughly half), which is on track for 
completion by June 30; the formal \"re-launching\" of the Peace 
Accords national agenda; and the process of opening the El 
Salvador and Honduran borders to free transit of goods to be 
completed by July, with a planned extension of the customs 
union to Nicaragua shortly. 
 
5.  (SBU) Berger,s natural spontaneity and decisiveness have 
sometimes led him to make general public statements which 
have been misinterpreted (e.g. Berger\'s statement in favor of 
human rights anywhere was misinterpreted by the press to mean 
the GOG would vote in Geneva to condemn human rights 
violations at Guantanamo Bay).  Berger\'s impulsive style is 
complemented by Vice President Stein\'s more careful one.  In 
addition, Stein personally leads the Government\'s delicate 
dialogue with campesinos, labor unions and other social 
groups.  In contrast, Eduardo Gonzalez, Berger\'s powerful 
chief of staff, is suspected of playing a more Machiavellian 
role behind the scenes.  Rival presidential aspirants suspect 
Gonzalez of personally orchestrating media attacks against 
them. 
 
Challenges and Expectations 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) From the outset, the Berger government has sought 
to manage high public expectations by citing budget 
constraints requiring fiscal \"austerity.\"  At a ceremony 
marking his Administration\'s first 100 days, President Berger 
declared his government \"well established\" and ready to 
confront a burgeoning fiscal crisis.  He blamed the crisis on 
mismanagement and corruption by the Portillo government, and 
launched a campaign to build support for necessary 
revenue-raising strategies by reviving and updating the 1999 
\"fiscal pact\" reached by over 600 civil society groups. 
These strategies reportedly include a combination of 
borrowing, more comprehensive but reduced income taxes, fewer 
exemptions from the value added tax, better tax collection, a 
crackdown on contraband traffickers, and new taxes on alcohol 
and fuel.  Berger will personally present the reforms to 
Congress on May 5. 
 
7.  (SBU) The negotiation of the fiscal pact will be the 
first major test of Berger,s ability to tap private sector 
support, forge consensus within his own GANA coalition, and 
work with a divided Congress.  Divisions in the ruling GANA 
coalition emerged during the Congressional debate over 
electoral reforms.  The reforms finally passed on April 21, 
after members of the GANA coalition from the Partido Patriota 
(PP) broke with a reluctant GANA leadership in support of the 
reforms.  At the insistence of the GANA, additional electoral 
reforms are now being negotiated among the GANA, UNE and PAN. 
 More recently, Roxana Baldetti, the PP\'s Congressional 
leader, complained publicly that GANA leaders had not shared 
details of the proposed fiscal pact.  Privately, she told 
EmbOffs that the PP will resist unpopular tax hikes.  Similar 
divisions affect the UNE and PAN. 
 
8.  (SBU) GANA, UNE and PAN Congressional leaders have 
maintained a \"Governability Pact\" forged at the outset of the 
Berger government, despite severe early strains caused by an 
anti-corruption investigation of UNE and PAN financing 
derived from public funds diverted by the FRG.  After the 
Attorney General,s Office declined to issue arrest warrants 
against the UNE and PAN leaders, the inter-party cooperation 
agreement was patched up and a group of four laws including 
the electoral reforms were passed.  Negotiations are underway 
for a subsequent package of laws to be approved prior to the 
Congressional recess starting May 15. 
 
9.  (SBU) It seems increasingly unlikely that the 
Governability Pact, which divided Congressional Governing 
Board positions among the three parties and excluded the FRG, 
will survive much beyond the upcoming debate over fiscal 
reforms.  According to FRG sources, the FRG has sought to 
entice the GANA into an alternative power-sharing agreement 
by offering it complete control of the Governing Board and 
thereby over the Congressional agenda and budget, in exchange 
for a working alliance.  GANA leaders have told us somewhat 
wistfully that the FRG, though reduced by defections, remains 
the most disciplined block in Congress.  GANA leaders may 
also be tempted to violate the Pact for another reason: to 
accept into its ranks some of the 21 newly independent 
members of Congress who bolted from the opposition parties. 
Doing so, however, would still not give the GANA a working 
majority in Congress. 
 
10.  (U) The current status of forces in Congress, after 
taking into account those defections, is: GANA 47 deputies, 
FRG 31, UNE 28, PAN 14, Unionista Party 7, ANN 4, and four 
other small parties retain a total of 6.  Four of the 21 
independent deputies have announced the creation of a new 
party called \"National Welfare\" (BIEN) and eight independent 
ex-FRG deputies (associated with President Portillo) are 
reportedly considering doing the same.  With 158 total 
deputies, a simple majority requires 80 votes, and a 2/3 
majority requires 105. 
 
Security Risks 
-------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) The Berger Government is most vulnerable to 
growing press criticism over the lack of progress curbing 
high crime levels.  Crime was a major campaign issue, and 
media reports have contested the new government\'s claim that 
crime has declined during its brief tenure.  Minister of 
Government Arturo Soto now claims that the GOG has halted the 
increase in crime, rather than actually reduced it.  GOG 
Security Commissioner Otto Perez Molina, the leader of the PP 
and a presidential aspirant, is politically vulnerable as a 
result of continued public insecurity over crime rates. 
Although some areas of law enforcement, including 
counter-narcotics, show steady improvement, press and public 
opinion is alarmed by rates of violent street crime, which 
continues unabated. 
 
Comment:  USG Interests 
----------------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) While still early to judge, the Berger government 
has proven responsive to USG concerns as we have raised them. 
 To support the new government and advance USG interests the 
Ambassador has publicly praised worthy efforts (e.g., the 
military reduction, CICIACS, and stepped-up counter-narcotics 
activities), and pressed for early action on key bilateral 
issues requiring immediate GOG attention (e.g., Article 98, 
trafficking in persons, labor rights).  On the eve of 
Berger\'s visit to Washington the Ambassador publicly noted 
the emergence of a new era in US-Guatemalan relations. 
Berger,s recent visit to Washington cemented early gains in 
the relationship and his meeting with President Bush boosted 
Berger,s credibility at home. 
 
13.  (SBU) Over the coming year we will be evaluating the 
performance of the Berger government on key issues of USG 
interest, including: 
 
-- successful negotiation of the fiscal package; 
 
-- military modernization/reduction; 
-- the establishment of a CICIACS; 
 
-- ratification of CAFTA; 
 
-- the fight against corruption and impunity; particularly 
when it involves the present government; 
 
-- cooperation against counter-narcotics and trafficking in 
persons; and, 
 
-- effective enforcement of labor rights. 
WHARTON 
"
"16626","5/5/2004 13:29","04GUATEMALA1097","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

051329Z May 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: HISTORIC STEPS FORWARD IN MACK CASE 
 
 
1.  Summary: The Ambassador attended a formal ceremony at the 
National Palace on April 22, at which President Oscar Berger 
publicly apologized to the Mack family for the state\'s 
responsibility in the 1990 murder of anthropologist Myrna 
Mack.  The remarkable ceremony was prompted by a November 25, 
2003, ruling from the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 
(IACHR) that the GOG should formally recognize its 
responsibility for the crime.  End Summary. 
 
2.  The highly public and well attended ceremony conveyed a 
spirit of reconciliation and highlighted warm relations 
between the Berger administration, the Mack family, and the 
Myrna Mack Foundation.  Lucrecia Hernandez, Myrna Mack\'s only 
child, gave the most moving speech, describing her mother\'s 
life and calling on the state to prevent abuses by state 
agents in the future.  Helen Mack, Myrna\'s sister and the 
director of the Myrna Mack Foundation, described her 14-year 
quest for justice and expressed appreciation to President 
Berger for his symbolic action.  The ceremony was also 
attended by Vice President Stein, President of Congress 
Morales, President of the Supreme Court Castillo, numerous 
members of Cabinet and Congress, and a major part of the 
diplomatic corps. 
 
3.  On April 19, the GOG also honored Jose Miguel Merida 
Escobar, the primary investigator in the Myrna Mack case, who 
was murdered in August of 2001 after presenting evidence 
against Noel de Jesus Beteta.  Following speeches by Frank 
LaRue, head of the President\'s Commission on Human Rights; 
Helen Mack; Arturo Soto, the Interior Minister; President 
Berger presented Merida\'s parents with the Golden Cross award 
marking their son\'s work. 
 
4.  Comment:  Despite these noteworthy steps by the GOG to 
honor Myrna Mack and comply with IACHR rulings, the progress 
is incomplete.  Juan Valencia Osorio, whose 30-year 
conviction for Myrna Mack\'s murder was reinstated by the 
Supreme Court on January 19, 2004, remains a fugitive from 
justice.  No one has ever been convicted or imprisoned for 
the murder of Merida Escobar.  Finally, the Berger 
administration has now complied with part of the IAHRC\'s 
ruling, but amid a budget crisis, have not yet allocated any 
funds to pay the $616,000 USD in monetary reparations 
recommended (the highest amount ever awarded by the IAHRC). 
HAMILTON 
"
"16645","5/5/2004 18:47","04GUATEMALA1103","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE98283","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KDEM, VE, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN EMBASSY IN CARACAS TO OBSERVE APPEALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 98283 
 
PolOff discussed reftel points with Silvia Corado, Director 
for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry on May 4. 
Corado agreed that a large international presence is required 
to guarantee the integrity of the appeals process for 
revalidating the recall referendum.  However, the Guatemalan 
government\'s austerity program rules out sending a 
delegation.  Corado said members of the Embassy in Caracas 
would be seconded to the OAS Observer Mission, but had no 
additional details to share. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16647","5/5/2004 20:16","04GUATEMALA1106","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 001106 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT OF STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, KCRM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LABOR/TIP UPDATE #3-2004 
 
 
1.  (SBU) The following is an update of significant recent 
developments in the labor sector and trafficking in persons 
(TIP).  Topics include: 
 
-- Labor:  100 Days in Labor (paras 1-2) 
 
-- Labor:  Apparel Sector Plans Mediation Center (3) 
 
-- Labor:  Uncertainty at NB Maquila (4) 
 
-- Labor:  Prosecutions and Personnel Changes (5) 
 
-- Labor:  Finca Maria Lourdes Arrests (6) 
 
-- Labor:  Reforms Stalled (7) 
 
-- TIP: DHS Trains 376 Officials (8) 
 
-- TIP: New Enforcement Efforts (9) 
 
-- TIP: Solicitor General to Combat TIP (10) 
 
-- TIP: Legislation Update (11-12) 
 
-- TIP: AID Proposes Prevention and Victims Assistance (13) 
 
Labor:  100 Days 
---------------- 
 
1.  (SBU) An internal report (really a matrix with 
indicators) on the accomplishment of Berger Administration 
100-day goals shared by the Labor Ministry with the Embassy 
includes mention of the pending labor code reforms, and takes 
credit for completion of rules implementing the Law of 
Integrated Protection of Children and Adolescents, conducting 
workshops on the law with Labor Ministry employees, 
strengthening of the special child labor inspection unit, 
monitoring of ILO-supported child labor projects, and 
beginning to unify criteria to resolve labor problems in the 
maquila sector.  In addition, the matrix includes other 
efforts such as restructuring the Inspectorate General to 
create a notification section, implementing effective 
mechanism to control corruption, and developing training and 
statistical systems, institutional and administrative reforms 
and job creation initiatives.  In an event marking his 
government\'s first 100 days, President Berger also 
congratulated his Education Minister for providing 8-month 
contracts to 11,000 of 13,000 new teachers permanently hired 
by outgoing President Portillo.  Portillo\'s action had been 
struck down by the Constitutional Court for procedural 
illegalities and 2,000 of those named were found to lack 
basic qualifications. 
 
2.  (U) Unions used the traditional May Day march to burn 
President Berger in effigy, denounce the government\'s 
policies as pro-business, call for the release of labor 
leaders Rigoberto Duenas (jailed since June 2003 for alleged 
involvement in a corruption scheme at the Social Security 
Institute) and Victoriano Zacarias (jailed with other 
protesting trucker union members since February 25 for 
endangering the public) from preventive detention, and to 
reject CAFTA as anti-worker.  President Portillo\'s final 
minimum wage increase was ruled unconstitutional by the 
Constitutional Court in January; a new round of minimum wage 
negotiations have begun.  In February, President Berger named 
prominent labor union leader Jose Pinzon to the Commission to 
Implement the Peace Accords.  The Commission provided input 
to another GOG commission designing a major fiscal reform 
package to help close a yawning budget deficit inherited from 
the previous government.  Unions and other civil groups 
submitted their own proposals. 
 
Labor:  New Mediation Center Project 
------------------------------------ 
 
3.  (U) On March 25, the Apparel Export Association (VESTEX) 
publicly unveiled a mediation/alternative dispute resolution 
project supported by AID through the Central American 
Economic Integration Secretariat (SIECA).  VESTEX labor 
advisor Rolando Figueroa said the Center for Alternative 
Resolution of Labor Conflicts would be available to VESTEX\'s 
260 member companies (224 apparel and 36 textile) and their 
141,638 employees.  Among its goals, the Center will seek to 
improve trust between employers and workers, resolve 
conflicts in their early stages, and improve the image of 
participating firms.  After preparatory work and training of 
mediators, the Center will open in September 2004. 
 
Labor:  Maquila Workers Worried about Closure 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) US-based labor rights NGO US/LEAP, the AFL-CIO 
Solidarity Center, and union leaders at the unionized and 
Korean-owned apparel export plant Nobland International 
expressed concern to LabAtt on April 28 about the rumored 
closing of the plant.  Subsequent discussions with Labor 
Minister Gallardo, Labor Inspector General Celeste Ayala, the 
Korean Embassy, the GAP labor monitor and with VESTEX 
officials clarified that NB has named a new plant manager and 
reduced its production somewhat due to a decline in orders. 
VESTEX convoked a meeting among the new manager, factory 
union leaders, and the FESTRAS labor confederation for May 4, 
which LabAtt will attend as an observer.  Until recently, NB 
management had been participating in good faith in weekly 
negotiating sessions of the company\'s first collective 
bargaining agreement with the union, hosted by a Ministry\'s 
labor inspector.  According to the Korean Embassy, 
productivity at the NB plant here has been slipping and fewer 
contracts have been received from company agents in Korea. 
NB has another plant in Vietnam but is also sensitive to the 
concerns of U.S. buyers that the unionized factory here not 
be closed. 
 
Labor:  New Special Prosecutor, Progress 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) Attorney General Florido recently named a new Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes Against Journalists and Trade 
Unionists, Mario Estuardo Castaneda.  LabAtt will meet with 
the new Special Prosecutor on May 5.  Prior to departing for 
a new assignment, the former Special Prosecutor, Antonio 
Cortez Sis, gave the following updates on cases of interest. 
Mario Roberto Ortiz Barranco, accused of the murder of 
trucking union leader Oswaldo Monzon Lima in June 2000, was 
released on bail (approx. $6,250) in April.  The Special 
Prosecutor has appealed the local court\'s bail decision and 
is awaiting an audience before the appeals court.  Cortez Sis 
reported progress in the investigation, which should 
culminate in a request for the opening of a trial in June. 
Cortez Sis also reported progress on another murder case, of 
Baldomero de Jesus Ramirez in June 1999, which could lead to 
a request for an arrest warrant against the former mayor of 
Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa, Escuintla. 
 
Labor:  Finca Maria Lourdes 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) At the request of the Agrarian Platform, a 
coalition of campesino, land rights groups and NGOs, an 
inter-sectoral \"Negotiation Table\" was established to resolve 
several land/labor conflicts in Quetzaltenango, including the 
Finca Maria Lourdes case, on February 23, 2004.  The Finca 
Maria Lourdes dispute stems from illegal firings of union 
members dating to 1995, and is featured in GSP petitions 
under current review.  Since the firings the plantation has 
changed hands and is reportedly now owned by a relative of 
First Lady Wendy de Berger.  Participants in the Mesa include 
representatives of the workers and owners of Finca Maria 
Lourdes, the UN (MINUGUA), the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s 
Office, CONTIERRA and FONTIERRA (the Government\'s land 
dispute resolution commission and land bank, respectively), 
Congressional deputy Alfredo de Leon and the provincial 
government of Quetzaltenango.  On April 19, two Maria Lourdes 
worker representatives and Agrarian Platform members, Juan 
Jose Mota and Humberto Lopez, were reportedly detained by 
police under charges of \"usurpation\" stemming from their 
illegal occupation of plantation land.  The Platform 
protested the detention and also called for suspension of 
outstanding arrest warrants against other Finca workers under 
similar charges;  members of the Platform claims President 
Berger agreed not to enforce those warrants during 
negotiations.  On April 21, Vice Minister of Labor Castillo 
told LabAtt that it appears that law enforcement authorities 
are not coordinating their actions well with the GOG 
institutions involved in the Mesa, and pledged to try to 
encourage that coordination.  Mota and Lopez were released on 
bail on April 22. 
 
Labor:  Legislative Reforms 
--------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) Labor Code reforms pending before the last Congress 
were sent to the Congressional Labor Commission for review 
where they remain pending.  The Commission has met with 
unions, business (CACIF), FRG Congressional deputies, members 
of the labor judiciary, and women\'s groups, among others. 
Vice Minister of Labor Castillo told LabAtt on April 22 that 
he believes Congress will eventually pass the reforms without 
change, with the possible exceptions of sexual harassment and 
universal severance initiatives.  Labor Minister Gallardo 
told LabAtt April 29 that he would submit the reforms for 
further discussion in the tripartite labor commission he 
chairs. 
TIP:  DHS Provides Anti-TIP Training 
------------------------------------ 
 
8.  (U) During the week of March 22-26 DHS provided 10 
half-day anti-TIP seminars to a total of 376 representatives 
from the National Civilian Police, Civil Aviation 
Directorate, Office of the Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Women, Police Information Service, Solicitor General\'s 
Office, Foreign Ministry, Judicial Unit for Children and 
Adolescents, Immigration Directorate, and airport security. 
The seminar provided information distinguishing TIP from 
alien smuggling, on victim recognition, and how to combat TIP 
while protecting victims.  MFA sources also tell us the GOG 
is developing its own training program for a special PNC task 
force to deal specifically with TIP cases. 
 
TIP:  Recent Enforcement Efforts 
-------------------------------- 
 
9.  (U) With varying degrees of success, the GOG is starting 
to take actions against TIP and to work in coordinated law 
enforcement actions.  Casa Alianza representatives have been 
attending anti-TIP raids at the invitation of authorities, to 
help identify and provide services to TIP victims. 
 
-- Immigration, Public Ministry prosecutors and 150 PNC had 
conducted a coordinated operation targeting gang members near 
the Mexican border in Tecun Uman, and San Marcos province on 
March 5.  A total of 31 illegal migrants (20 Honduran, 10 
Salvadorans, and 1 Mexican) were arrested; 8 reportedly fit 
the profile of gang members, but no TIP victims were 
discovered. 
 
-- On March 10, the Minors Section of the National Civilian 
Police\'s (PNC) Criminal Investigative Service (SIC) arrested 
Oscar Emerito Cabeza Garcia, a 24 year-old Salvadoran running 
the \"Cocoloco International\" club in Zone 19 of the capital, 
and rescued three Salvadoran minors being held for 
prostitution and 5 Salvadoran adult prostitutes.  The adults 
were deported, and the minors were turned over to the courts. 
-- On April 13 police arrested the manager of a Villa Nueva 
massage parlor and rescued three 16-year-old minors (one 
Guatemalan and two Hondurans) from that establishment.  The 
22-year-old manager was charged with migration violations and 
TIP. 
 
-- Press reported on April 14 the return to Nicaragua of a 
17-year-old Nicaraguan who had reportedly been prostituted 
and sequestered in a bar in Antigua.  The girl\'s name was not 
reported (in an article reprinted here with a byline from AFP 
in Managua), and authorities claim no knowledge of the case. 
 
-- Coordinated raids were conducted in Peten province on 
April 17, leading to deportations of adult sex workers but 
did not find victims of TIP. 
 
TIP:  Solicitor General to Combat TIP 
------------------------------------- 
 
10.  (U) On April 18, the Solicitor General Ricardo Rosales 
announced a new agreement with Guatemala City Mayor Arzu to 
develop a plan to rescue street kids (and possible TIP 
victims) from exploitation by panhandling rings. 
 
TIP:  Legislation Update 
------------------------ 
 
11.  (U) On May 5 the GOG published in the daily register 
Guatemala\'s Instrument of Adhesion to the Protocols of the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime.  The 
protocols, \"Against the Smuggling of Migrants\" and \"To 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,\" were 
approved by Congress on August 19, 2003; the Instrument was 
signed by President Portillo on February 4, 2004 and 
deposited with the Secretary General of the UN on April 1, 
2004.  The Protocols entered into force on May 1, 2004. 
 
12.  (SBU) There are several different reforms proposed to 
the Guatemalan Penal Code to bring it into conformity with 
the TIP Protocol mentioned above.  The ILO\'s proposal, which 
includes increased penalties for TIP and TIP-related crimes 
is awaiting approval by different ministries in the Security 
Cabinet before being signed by the President and sent to 
Congress.  Meanwhile, other reform proposals on the same 
subject are already pending before Congress.  The 
Congressional Legislative Secretariat will send competing 
proposals to the Family and Minors Committee, which may 
choose among them or integrate them before emitting an 
opinion. 
 
TIP:  AID Prevention and Victims Project 
---------------------------------------- 
13.  (U) AID has recently proposed a $1.2 million 3-year 
project to prevent and protect victims of TIP in Guatemala. 
The purpose of the project would be to support the 
development of regional, national, and local networks to 
prevent trafficking in persons, and to protect and 
reintegrate trafficking victims.  It would also seek to 
prevent victims from being re-trafficked, and facilitate the 
development and implementation of policies and laws related 
to trafficking in persons.  This approach is designed to 
create a sustainable response to TIP by fortifying existing 
institutions and to step up the response to trafficking in 
persons in Central America and Mexico. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16649","5/5/2004 23:07","04GUATEMALA1112","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE99626","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

052307Z May 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LIKELY TO ABSTAIN OR OPPOSE UNGA 
PALESTINIAN RESOLUTION 
 
REF: STATE 99626 
 
Classified By: Acting PolCouns Erik Hall.  Reason 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1. (C) The Ambassador raised the Palestinian resolution with 
Foreign Minister Briz on May 5, urging Guatemala to oppose 
the UNGA resolution on Palestine.  Briz said it was the first 
he had heard of the issue, and asked his staff to \"look into 
it.\"  PolOff also delivered the demarche to Carla Rodriguez, 
Director General for Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign 
Ministry, who said no decision had yet been taken, but 
speculated that Guatemala might oppose the resolution but if 
not, would certainly abstain. 
 
2.  (C) According to Rodriguez, the GOG will be sensitive to 
the positions of other countries in Central America, Latin 
America and Europe on this issue.  Initial indications of the 
positions of other countries on the resolution were \"not 
encouraging,\" she said.  Costa Rica plans to vote in favor, 
Salvador and Nicaragua plan to be absent, Honduras and the 
Dominican Republic plan to abstain or be absent from the 
session.  Rodriguez said she was not aware of the positions 
of Panama or Belize. Brazil, Mexico and Argentina will vote 
in favor or abstain.  The Europeans are divided between 
abstaining and opposing. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16678","5/6/2004 19:33","04GUATEMALA1117","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

061933Z May 04
","UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/05/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: CICIACS SETBACK IN CONGRESS 
 
 
1.  (U) This is an action request.  See para 10. 
 
2.  (SBU) Summary:  On May 4, the Congressional Human Rights 
and Government Commissions issued a joint recommendation to 
the plenary of Congress against CICIACS, on constitutional 
grounds.  On May 5, President Berger and Vice President Stein 
both publicly and unequivocally expressed disappointment in 
the Commissions\' votes and determination to push CICIACS 
forward.  Faced with this setback, the Executive will attempt 
to avoid a vote by the plenary on CICIACS, which would 
certainly be unfavorable.  To proceed, the Executive must now 
renegotiate the agreement with the United Nations.  UN Senior 
Political Affairs Officer Martha Doggett told the Ambassador 
on May 5 that the UN is willing to discuss changes to CICIACS 
provided they preserve its potential to investigate 
clandestine groups.  This is a serious setback, but we should 
not yet conclude CICIACS is dead and so ask that funding be 
held in reserve.  End Summary. 
 
Congressional History 
--------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) On April 14, the two Commissions reviewing CICIACS 
were divided on their decisions.  While the Interior 
Commission advised against the proposal, the Human Rights 
Commission President, Nineth Montenegro (ANN), facing strong 
opposition and constitutional questions from Commission 
members, requested an opinion directly from the 
Constitutional Court.  Unfortunately, this proved to be a 
tactical error (which Montenegro asserts to HROff was 
orchestrated by the FRG, whose members suggested the 
consultation within the Commission, then swiftly denounced it 
from the bench the next day).  Montenegro immediately faced 
accusations from the FRG bench of violating Congressional 
procedures.  President of Congress Morales successfully 
petitioned the Court not/not to review the proposal and 
instructed the Commissions to make a joint decision within 30 
days. 
 
4.  (SBU) The opposition to CICIACS was organized by former 
Ambassador to the U.S. (and current FRG deputy) Antonio 
Arenales Forno, and Roxanna Baldetti, President of Government 
Commission (of the Patriot Party, a member of the ruling GANA 
coalition).  Both argued forcefully for rejection of the 
proposal without requesting a constitutional review by the 
Court.  In meetings with PolOffs, both Congressional deputies 
claimed the proposal was unconstitutional and would weaken 
rather than strengthen Guatemalan institutions by 
substituting for them. 
 
5.  (SBU) While a Court review could have resolved 
constitutionality issues, the Congressional committees chose 
to make that judgment for themselves.  After a two-hour 
meeting between the Government and Human Rights Commissions 
on May 4, the members voted overwhelmingly to issue a 
negative recommendation on CICIACS to the floor of Congress. 
In the Government Commission, 19 voted against proposal and 
two in favor (ANN and UNE) and in the Human Rights 
Commission, seven voted against, two in favor (ANN and URNG), 
and three were absent.  The Commissions plan to officially 
present this decision to the plenary on May 6.  The strongly 
negative opinion of the two commissions virtually assured 
rejection of CICIACS by the plenary, should it choose to vote 
on the resolution. 
 
Executive Stunned, Regrouping 
----------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) On May 5, President Berger called the Congressional 
action \"absurd\" and said he \"deeply regretted that the 
initiative was stopped.  We will revise the technical-legal 
questions and continue...so that CICIACS will come to this 
country.\"  Vice President Stein commented that \"if the 
Congress decides to obstruct this project in its current 
form, we will look for another way.\"  The same day, FM Briz 
privately expressed chagrin to the Ambassador about the lack 
of discipline of Congressional members of the GANA coalition. 
 
 
7.  Immediately after the Congressional vote, Frank LaRue, 
head of the President\'s Commission for Human Rights 
(COPREDEH), told the Ambassador that he would suggest to Vice 
President Stein that the Executive officially withdraw the 
proposal before Congress votes on it, renegotiate problematic 
language with the United Nations, and request a Court review 
before resubmitting it to Congress.  However, this strategy 
is complicated by Congressional rules.  According to the 
Legislative Secretariat, President Berger could legally make 
this request, but the plenary must approve it with a vote. 
If the proposal is not successfully withdrawn, the Executive 
would have to wait one year before submitting the measure 
again to Congress, unless more than 30% of the new agreement 
had been changed. 
 
UN Willing to Talk 
------------------ 
 
8.  (SBU) On May 5, the Ambassador met with Martha Doggett, 
the UN lead for CICIACS, and Patrick Gavigan, head of the 
MINIGUA Human Rights Office.  The UN is open to some 
renegotiation on the proposal, they said, but is not 
interested in investing donor funds in a water-downed 
agreement.  The Ambassador pledged to lend support in 
lobbying Stein and LaRue to act swiftly and to encourage FRG 
Congressmen Arenales to be open-minded about allowing the 
Executive to find a viable solution with the UN on CICIACS to 
address sovereignty and constitutionality concerns.  Arenales 
subsequently expressed his willingness to cooperate to the 
Ambassador, specifically to refrain from deep-sixing CICIACS 
before the Executive branch can renegotiate it with the UN. 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  (SBU) The setback in Congress, abetted by members of its 
own GANA coalition, has embarrassed the Berger Government, 
which had been publicly supportive of CICIACS and had been 
categorical on the subject with USG officials in Washington. 
It reflects both a lack of attention on the part of the 
Executive, and the will of Congress to act independently when 
neglected.  It also reflects a strong nationalist political 
consensus against an unchecked UN role in the justice system, 
which must be addressed by any revised CICIACS agreement.  We 
have encouraged the GOG and UN to seek an agreement which 
would strengthen the rule of law while addressing these 
concerns. 
 
10.  Action request:  Continue to hold the funds for CICIACS 
that were notified to the Congress.  Despite this serious 
setback, it is too soon to conclude that CICIACS cannot 
succeed. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16686","5/7/2004 0:15","04GUATEMALA1124","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 001124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT OF STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, KCRM, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LABOR/TIP UPDATE #3-2004 
 
 
Note:  this message has been re-sent and includes revisions 
of paras 3 and 6.  End Note. 
 
1.  (SBU) The following is an update of significant recent 
developments in the labor sector and trafficking in persons 
(TIP).  Topics include: 
 
-- Labor:  100 Days in Labor (paras 1-2) 
 
-- Labor:  Apparel Sector Plans Mediation Center (3) 
 
-- Labor:  Uncertainty at NB Maquila (4) 
 
-- Labor:  Prosecutions and Personnel Changes (5) 
 
-- Labor:  Finca Maria Lourdes Arrests (6) 
 
-- Labor:  Reforms Stalled (7) 
 
-- TIP: DHS Trains 376 Officials (8) 
 
-- TIP: New Enforcement Efforts (9) 
 
-- TIP: Solicitor General to Combat TIP (10) 
 
-- TIP: Legislation Update (11-12) 
 
-- TIP: AID Proposes Prevention and Victims Assistance (13) 
 
Labor:  100 Days 
---------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) An internal report (really a matrix with 
indicators) on the accomplishment of Berger Administration 
100-day goals shared by the Labor Ministry with the Embassy 
includes mention of the pending labor code reforms, and takes 
credit for completion of rules implementing the Law of 
Integrated Protection of Children and Adolescents, conducting 
workshops on the law with Labor Ministry employees, 
strengthening of the special child labor inspection unit, 
monitoring of ILO-supported child labor projects, and 
beginning to unify criteria to resolve labor problems in the 
maquila sector.  In addition, the matrix includes other 
efforts such as restructuring the Inspectorate General to 
create a notification section, implementing effective 
mechanism to control corruption, and developing training and 
statistical systems, institutional and administrative reforms 
and job creation initiatives.  In an event marking his 
government\'s first 100 days, President Berger also 
congratulated his Education Minister for providing 8-month 
contracts to 11,000 of 13,000 new teachers permanently hired 
by outgoing President Portillo.  Portillo\'s action had been 
struck down by the Constitutional Court for procedural 
illegalities and 2,000 of those named were found to lack 
basic qualifications. 
 
3.  (U) Unions used the traditional May Day march to burn 
President Berger in effigy, denounce the government\'s 
policies as pro-business, call for the release of labor 
leaders Rigoberto Duenas (jailed since June 2003 for alleged 
involvement in a corruption scheme at the Social Security 
Institute) and Victoriano Zacarias (jailed with other 
protesting trucker union members since February 25 for 
endangering the public) from preventive detention, and to 
reject CAFTA as anti-worker.  President Portillo\'s final 
minimum wage increase was ruled unconstitutional by the 
Constitutional Court in January; a new round of minimum wage 
negotiations have begun.  In February, President Berger named 
prominent labor union leader Jose Pinzon of the major labor 
federation (UGT), campesino leaders and other civil society 
leaders to the Commission to Implement the Peace Accords. 
The Commission provided input to another GOG commission 
designing a major fiscal reform package to help close a 
yawning budget deficit inherited from the previous 
government.  Unions and other civil groups submitted their 
own proposals, and another major labor federation (UASP) 
announced its opposition to the proposed fiscal reforms on 
May 5.  The GOG will receive an ILO Direct Contacts Mission 
May 17-22. 
 
Labor:  New Mediation Center Project 
------------------------------------ 
 
4.  (U) On March 25, the Apparel Export Association (VESTEX) 
publicly unveiled a mediation/alternative dispute resolution 
project supported by AID through the Central American 
Economic Integration Secretariat (SIECA).  VESTEX labor 
advisor Rolando Figueroa said the Center for Alternative 
Resolution of Labor Conflicts would be available to VESTEX\'s 
260 member companies (224 apparel and 36 textile) and their 
141,638 employees.  Among its goals, the Center will seek to 
improve trust between employers and workers, resolve 
conflicts in their early stages, and improve the image of 
participating firms.  After preparatory work and training of 
mediators, the Center will open in September 2004. 
Labor:  Maquila Workers Worried about Closure 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) US-based labor rights NGO US/LEAP, the AFL-CIO 
Solidarity Center, and union leaders at the unionized and 
Korean-owned apparel export plant Nobland International 
expressed concern to LabAtt on April 28 about the rumored 
closing of the plant.  Subsequent discussions with Labor 
Minister Gallardo, Labor Inspector General Celeste Ayala, the 
Korean Embassy, the GAP labor monitor and with VESTEX 
officials clarified that NB has named a new plant manager and 
reduced its production somewhat due to a decline in orders. 
VESTEX convoked a meeting among the new manager, factory 
union leaders, and the FESTRAS labor confederation for May 4, 
which LabAtt will attend as an observer.  Until recently, NB 
management had been participating in good faith in weekly 
negotiating sessions of the company\'s first collective 
bargaining agreement with the union, hosted by a Ministry\'s 
labor inspector.  According to the Korean Embassy, 
productivity at the NB plant here has been slipping and fewer 
contracts have been received from company agents in Korea. 
NB has another plant in Vietnam but is also sensitive to the 
concerns of U.S. buyers that the unionized factory here not 
be closed. 
 
Labor:  New Special Prosecutor, Progress 
---------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Attorney General Florido recently named a new Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes Against Journalists and Trade 
Unionists, Mario Estuardo Castaneda.  LabAtt met with the new 
Special Prosecutor on May 5.  Castaneda said he hoped to 
continue to make progress in priority cases, including the 
prosecution of Mario Roberto Ortiz Barranco, accused of the 
murder of trucking union leader Oswaldo Monzon Lima in June 
2000, who was released on bail (approx. $6,250) in April. 
The Special Prosecutor has appealed the local court\'s bail 
decision and is awaiting an audience before the appeals 
court.  Castaneda estimated that the trial of Ortiz would 
begin in August.  Castaneda said progress on another murder 
case, of Baldomero de Jesus Ramirez in June 1999, which could 
lead to a request for an arrest warrant against the former 
mayor of Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa, Escuintla. 
 
Labor:  Finca Maria Lourdes 
--------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) At the request of the Agrarian Platform, a 
coalition of campesino, land rights groups and NGOs, an 
inter-sectoral \"Negotiation Table\" was established to resolve 
several land/labor conflicts in Quetzaltenango, including the 
Finca Maria Lourdes case, on February 23, 2004.  The Finca 
Maria Lourdes dispute stems from illegal firings of union 
members dating to 1995, and is featured in GSP petitions 
under current review.  Since the firings the plantation has 
changed hands and is reportedly now owned by a relative of 
First Lady Wendy de Berger.  Participants in the Mesa include 
representatives of the workers and owners of Finca Maria 
Lourdes, the UN (MINUGUA), the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s 
Office, CONTIERRA and FONTIERRA (the Government\'s land 
dispute resolution commission and land bank, respectively), 
Congressional deputy Alfredo de Leon and the provincial 
government of Quetzaltenango.  On April 19, two Maria Lourdes 
worker representatives and Agrarian Platform members, Juan 
Jose Mota and Humberto Lopez, were reportedly detained by 
police under charges of \"usurpation\" stemming from their 
illegal occupation of plantation land.  The Platform 
protested the detention and also called for suspension of 
outstanding arrest warrants against other Finca workers under 
similar charges;  members of the Platform claims President 
Berger agreed not to enforce those warrants during 
negotiations.  On April 21, Vice Minister of Labor Castillo 
told LabAtt that it appears that law enforcement authorities 
are not coordinating their actions well with the GOG 
institutions involved in the Mesa, and pledged to try to 
encourage that coordination.  Mota and Lopez were released on 
bail on April 22. 
 
Labor:  Legislative Reforms 
--------------------------- 
8.  (U) Labor Code reforms pending before the last Congress 
were sent to the Congressional Labor Commission for review 
where they remain pending.  The Commission has met with 
unions, business (CACIF), FRG Congressional deputies, members 
of the labor judiciary, and women\'s groups, among others. 
Vice Minister of Labor Castillo told LabAtt on April 22 that 
he believes Congress will eventually pass the reforms without 
change, with the possible exceptions of sexual harassment and 
universal severance initiatives.  Labor Minister Gallardo 
told LabAtt April 29 that he would submit the reforms for 
further discussion in the tripartite labor commission he 
chairs. 
 
TIP:  DHS Provides Anti-TIP Training 
------------------------------------ 
9.  (U) During the week of March 22-26 DHS provided 10 
half-day anti-TIP seminars to a total of 376 representatives 
from the National Civilian Police, Civil Aviation 
Directorate, Office of the Prosecutor for Crimes Against 
Women, Police Information Service, Solicitor General\'s 
Office, Foreign Ministry, Judicial Unit for Children and 
Adolescents, Immigration Directorate, and airport security. 
The seminar provided information distinguishing TIP from 
alien smuggling, on victim recognition, and how to combat TIP 
while protecting victims.  MFA sources also tell us the GOG 
is developing its own training program for a special PNC task 
force to deal specifically with TIP cases. 
 
TIP:  Recent Enforcement Efforts 
-------------------------------- 
 
10.  (U) With varying degrees of success, the GOG is starting 
to take actions against TIP and to work in coordinated law 
enforcement actions.  Casa Alianza representatives have been 
attending anti-TIP raids at the invitation of authorities, to 
help identify and provide services to TIP victims. 
 
-- Immigration, Public Ministry prosecutors and 150 PNC had 
conducted a coordinated operation targeting gang members near 
the Mexican border in Tecun Uman, and San Marcos province on 
March 5.  A total of 31 illegal migrants (20 Honduran, 10 
Salvadorans, and 1 Mexican) were arrested; 8 reportedly fit 
the profile of gang members, but no TIP victims were 
discovered. 
 
-- On March 10, the Minors Section of the National Civilian 
Police\'s (PNC) Criminal Investigative Service (SIC) arrested 
Oscar Emerito Cabeza Garcia, a 24 year-old Salvadoran running 
the \"Cocoloco International\" club in Zone 19 of the capital, 
and rescued three Salvadoran minors being held for 
prostitution and 5 Salvadoran adult prostitutes.  The adults 
were deported, and the minors were turned over to the courts. 
-- On April 13 police arrested the manager of a Villa Nueva 
massage parlor and rescued three 16-year-old minors (one 
Guatemalan and two Hondurans) from that establishment.  The 
22-year-old manager was charged with migration violations and 
TIP. 
 
-- Press reported on April 14 the return to Nicaragua of a 
17-year-old Nicaraguan who had reportedly been prostituted 
and sequestered in a bar in Antigua.  The girl\'s name was not 
reported (in an article reprinted here with a byline from AFP 
in Managua), and authorities claim no knowledge of the case. 
 
-- Coordinated raids were conducted in Peten province on 
April 17, leading to deportations of adult sex workers but 
did not find victims of TIP. 
 
TIP:  Solicitor General to Combat TIP 
------------------------------------- 
 
11.  (U) On April 18, the Solicitor General Ricardo Rosales 
announced a new agreement with Guatemala City Mayor Arzu to 
develop a plan to rescue street kids (and possible TIP 
victims) from exploitation by panhandling rings. 
 
TIP:  Legislation Update 
------------------------ 
 
12.  (U) On May 5 the GOG published in the daily register 
Guatemala\'s Instrument of Adhesion to the Protocols of the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime.  The 
protocols, \"Against the Smuggling of Migrants\" and \"To 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,\" were 
approved by Congress on August 19, 2003; the Instrument was 
signed by President Portillo on February 4, 2004 and 
deposited with the Secretary General of the UN on April 1, 
2004.  The Protocols entered into force on May 1, 2004. 
 
13.  (SBU) There are several different reforms proposed to 
the Guatemalan Penal Code to bring it into conformity with 
the TIP Protocol mentioned above.  The ILO\'s proposal, which 
includes increased penalties for TIP and TIP-related crimes 
is awaiting approval by different ministries in the Security 
Cabinet before being signed by the President and sent to 
Congress.  Meanwhile, other reform proposals on the same 
subject are already pending before Congress.  The 
Congressional Legislative Secretariat will send competing 
proposals to the Family and Minors Committee, which may 
choose among them or integrate them before emitting an 
opinion. 
TIP:  AID Prevention and Victims Project 
---------------------------------------- 
 
14.  (U) AID has recently proposed a $1.2 million 3-year 
project to prevent and protect victims of TIP in Guatemala. 
The purpose of the project would be to support the 
development of regional, national, and local networks to 
prevent trafficking in persons, and to protect and 
reintegrate trafficking victims.  It would also seek to 
prevent victims from being re-trafficked, and facilitate the 
development and implementation of policies and laws related 
to trafficking in persons.  This approach is designed to 
create a sustainable response to TIP by fortifying existing 
institutions and to step up the response to trafficking in 
persons in Central America and Mexico. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16728","5/7/2004 18:33","04GUATEMALA1132","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUATEMALA944","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071833Z May 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: OAS RELOCATES GUATEMALANS FROM ADJACENCY ZONE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 00944 
 
1.  Summary:  On April 30, HROff attended the inauguration of 
a community constructed by the Organization of American 
States (OAS) to relocate Guatemalans living in the \"Adjacency 
Zone\" between Belize and Guatemala.  Twenty families moved 
voluntarily from Nueva Juda on the Belizean side of the 
border, where they had lived since 2001, to wooden homes 
built by the OAS in Melchor de Mencos, Peten.  This ceremony 
marked a significant step forward in the Confidence Building 
Measures for the border conflict.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  In the Confidence Building Measures passed in February 
2003, Belize and Guatemala agreed that all Guatemalans living 
in the Adjacency Zone before October 2000 (when a survey was 
done by the OAS) could remain, but any future settlers must 
be relocated.  Since that time, Guatemalans have continued to 
move into the Adjacency Zone, especially into the Nueva Juda 
community.  Over the past year, the OAS found 55 families 
that admitted to settling in Barrio Nueva Juda since October 
2000 (allegedly after the former FRG Mayor of Melchor started 
selling tracts of land illegally), all of whom have now 
voluntarily agreed to relocate and dismantle their former 
homes.  April 30, on land donated by the Guatemalan 
municipality, the OAS inaugurated the completion of the first 
20 houses of this relocation project.  In the next several 
months, the OAS plans to complete another 35 homes, a school, 
small town hall, and sports fields for children. 
 
3.  Attended by Ambassadors and government officials from 
both Belize and Guatemala, the inauguration had a celebratory 
air.  After speeches by the Mayors of Melchor de Mencos and 
the Belizean parallel community, Benque Viejo, and Belizean 
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, visiting delegates 
ceremoniously distributed deeds and keys to the homes, which 
were assigned to families through a lottery. 
 
4.  Good-will between citizens on both sides of the border 
seemed widespread and genuine, and was especially evident 
when the mayors of the twin Guatemalan and Belizean 
communities, who grew up neighbors and remain close friends, 
danced together on stage.  Members of the Nueva Juda 
community reported being extremely satisfied with their new 
homes.  Teresa Casanova Trujillo, mayor of the Melchor de 
Mencos, told HROff that the border conflict was primarily a 
political issue centered in the capitals and that residents 
of both sides of the border live as neighbors with few 
tensions. 
 
5.  One issue that continues to cause tension in the 
Adjacency Zone is Guatemalan collection of xate, a commercial 
plant marketed widely in Europe.  Hundreds of impoverished 
Guatemalan farmers venture over the contended area on a daily 
basis to collect the leaves of the easily damaged plant, 
occasionally causing incidents with Belizean border patrols 
working to protect borders (RefTel). 
 
6.  Comment:  The inauguration was a welcome sign of 
confidence building between border zone residents, the GOG, 
GOB, and OAS in the lead-up to discussions at the OAS.  With 
the first residents of Nueva Juda in Melchor de Mencos 
happily settled in their new homes, prospects for further 
progress seem brighter. 
HAMILTON 
"
"16927","5/14/2004 16:48","04GUATEMALA1213","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001213 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DRL: DANIKA WALTERS, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: EXECUTIVE RALLIES BEHIND CICIACS 
 
 1.  This is an action request.  See para 8. 
 
2.  (SBU) Summary:  President Berger has taken the first step 
to salvage the GOG-UN agreement to create a UN Commission to 
Investigate Clandestine Groups (CICIACS) by convincing the 
Congressional leadership to withdraw the agreement to the 
Executive before a planned plenary vote.  By pulling the 
agreement before a vote, the Executive is now free to 
resubmit it to Congress after it has been renegotiated with 
the UN.  The GOG\'s strategy for getting the agreement 
implemented is not yet entirely clear, making it difficult to 
predict its ultimate outcome or timing.  What is clear is 
that the Berger Administration is intent on giving CICIACS 
another try in some form.  A recent visit by UN A/SecGen 
Prendergast and positive statements by President Berger, Vice 
President Stein, Attorney General Florido and others have 
helped tip the balance in favor of a modified CICIACS 
agreement.  End Summary. 
 
3.  (U) On May 11, President Berger formally requested that 
Congress return CICIACS to the Executive without a plenary 
vote, which would have certainly been negative following 
negative votes in the Human Rights and Government 
Commissions.  The Ambassador had convinced CICIACS\' main 
opponent in Congress, Antonio Arenales Forno of the FRG, to 
permit the move.  The Congressional plenary, in a quick and 
informal roll-call on May 12, ratified the Congressional 
leadership\'s consent to the President\'s request without 
opposition.  As a result, the Executive will be able to 
renegotiate the agreement with the United Nations and 
resubmit it to Congress without delay. 
 
4.  (SBU) Visiting United Nations Assistant Secretary General 
Kieran Prendergast met with the Ambassador and European 
diplomats on May 10 to discuss the state of play on CICIACS. 
According to Prendergast, Vice President Stein has formed a 
task force which will make recommendations to him on how to 
proceed toward CICIACS implementation within two weeks.  The 
task force\'s mandate includes developing a strategy and 
proposal for changes to the agreement, to be negotiated with 
the UN.  The composition of a later commission to oversee the 
implementation of these proposals for the GOG is still 
undecided.  Presidential Human Rights Commissioner Frank 
LaRue told HROff on May 11 that the GOG would likely 
renegotiate some points of the agreement with the UN, send it 
to the Constitutional Court for an opinion on 
constitutionality (to head off Congressional criticism), and 
re-submission for consideration by Congress. 
 
6.  (SBU) President Berger commented publicly on May 11 that 
\"CICIACS must work in tandem with the Public Ministry, but 
not be a part of it.  If that is unconstitutional, they 
should work together.\"  Taking his cue from the President, 
Attorney General Juan Luis Florido publicly supported a 
renegotiated CICIACS for the first time on May 11, saying 
\"the Public Ministry would accept a proposal which 
strengthens it,\" but said any new agreement must \"subordinate 
CICIACS to the Public Ministry.\"  Florido has quietly opposed 
CICIACS up to now, but changed his tune after meeting with 
Prendergast and UN Senior Political Officer Martha Doggett. 
In a meeting with the DCM on May 12, Florido implied that 
relatively minor textual changes would be needed to win his 
support.  He indicated that he believed those changes would 
also be acceptable to the UN.  In addition, Sergio Morales, 
Human Rights Ombudsman, spoke to the UNE bench May 12, urging 
the deputies to vote in favor of CICIACS when it returns to 
Congress to further the fight against organized crime. 
 
7.   (SBU) Comment:  CICIACS ultimate fate depends on the 
Berger/Stein Administration\'s political will and skill. 
After Congress\' initial setback, President Berger and Vice 
President Stein have taken the first step towards 
resuscitating CICIACS.  However, CICIACS remains in limbo 
while the GOG task force is formed and comes up with its 
strategy.  We expect that strategy to include renegotiation 
with the UN of aspects of the agreement relating to the 
relationship with Florido\'s Public Ministry.  To pass 
Congress, the new text must address constitutional concerns 
of the FRG\'s Arenales and/or Security Commissioner Otto Perez 
Molina, leader of the Patriotic Party, a member of the ruling 
GANA coalition.  Final passage will be fiercely opposed by 
clandestine interests themselves, which are believed by LaRue 
to be using money to lobby against it in Congress.  It is 
still too early to know what timetable will emerge from the 
Executive for CICIACS\' implementation. 
 
8.  (SBU) Action Request.  Embassy requests that DRL and WHA 
hold obligated funds for CICIACS until the timetable for 
implementation is more clear.  In the meantime, we will alert 
the GOG that USG funding is time-bound, and report subsequent 
developments. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17022","5/18/2004 13:36","04GUATEMALA1241","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001241 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN WHA/PPC AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/15/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, CVIS, GT 
SUBJECT: GANA-FRG VOTE STIRS CONTROVERSY 
 
REF: 03 GUATEMALA 1908 
 
Classified By: Acting PolCouns Erik Hall, for reason 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C)  Summary:  Reaction by the opposition, civil society 
and press has been fiercely negative to a perceived GANA-FRG 
alliance which on May 15 gave the GANA control over the 
Permanent Commission which controls Congress during the 
summer recess.  The GANA turned to the FRG after some of its 
own members (in the Patriot Party) refused to support the 
GANA\'s candidates for the commission.  The break provoked 
speculation (as yet unconfirmed) that the Patriot Party (PP) 
would pull out of the GANA; that the Governability Pact 
between the GANA and non-FRG opposition was over; and that a 
fuller GANA-FRG alliance is in the offing.  The skirmish over 
the Permanent Commission could affect prospects for passage 
of high-priority fiscal reforms during the Congressional 
recess.  It may also affect  Congressional consideration of 
other issues of USG interest.  End Summary. 
 
Permanent Commission Maneuvers 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) The regular Congressional session ended on May 15 and 
will resume on August 1.  To convoke an extraordinary session 
to debate pending fiscal reforms, on May 14 Congress took up 
the issue of appointing a Permanent Commission composed of 
the President of Congress (Rolando Morales, of the UNE); two 
of Congress\' five current secretaries, drawn by lot; and two 
other members, to be approved by a vote of the plenary.  When 
the GANA and FRG moved for a vote on the last two positions 
(GANA deputies Jorge Mendez Herbruger and Hector Perez, both 
of the \"M-17\" faction loyal to President Berger), Patriot 
Party members walked out of the plenary.  They accused GANA 
leader Ricardo Saravia of reneging on a promise to submit PP 
deputy Gudy Rivera Estrada for nomination with Herbruger.  On 
May 15, the Herbruger-Perez slate was elected by the plenary 
with 83 votes in favor (including the FRG, GANA, minus the 
PP, and some independent votes).  President of Congress 
Morales later announced that the two Permanent Commission 
members drawn by lot were Otoniel Fernandez (UNE) and Jose 
Conrado Garcia (GANA). 
 
Berger-Rios Montt Dialogue 
-------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) President Berger met with GANA party leaders, 
including Patriot Party leader Otto Perez Molina, on May 17. 
The agenda reportedly included the congressional controversy 
over his private dialogue with FRG leader Efrain Rios Montt, 
which recently became public. 
 
4.  (SBU) Since March 8, Rios Montt has been under a court 
order to remain in Guatemala pending the investigation of his 
involvement in the organization of demonstrations July 24-25, 
2003, popularly known as \"Black Thursday\" and \"Friday in 
Mourning.\"  Nevertheless, as party leader, Rios Montt has 
maintained a regular, private dialogue with President Berger 
and has also met occasionally with other opposition party 
leaders.  These secret meetings have recently become public 
and were confirmed by both Berger and Rios Montt.  On May 12, 
Rios Montt put in a rare appearance in Congress, and 
commented publicly on the GOG\'s proposed fiscal reform 
package, saying the FRG was \"open to dialogue to achieve 
agreements on this issue.\"  The next day, the courts 
tightened the house arrest order against Rios Montt, 
restricting him and six other suspects from leaving their 
homes without permission of the court. 
 
5.  (U) The reaction to the news of the May 15 vote was 
strongly negative.  PAN leader Lionel Lopez Rodas, accused of 
accepting diverted public funds during the campaign, declared 
that \"now we know who is with the FRG.\"  Human rights leader 
Orlando Blanco speaking on behalf of the civil society group 
\"Collective of Social Organizations,\" denounced the Rios 
Montt-Berger \"negotiation of taxes in exchange for impunity\" 
and demanded that Berger rescind any agreement made.  Press 
editorials lamented GANA-FRG cooperation and accused the 
Government of believing the end justifies the means. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (C) It is unclear whether the GANA\'s tactics on the 
Permanent Commission were calculated to rid the coalition of 
the uncooperative Perez Molina, and whether they will 
succeed.  It is conceivable to us that Berger and his 
loyalists now view Perez Molina as a political liability (due 
to disappointing results against crime) or a political 
threat.  Always a controversial figure, Perez Molina has 
embedded his own loyalists in positions of authority in the 
institutions he oversees as GOG Security Commissioner 
(Ministry of Government, Defense, National Civilian Police 
and the Immigration Directorate).  If Perez Molina does 
withdraw the Patriot Party from the governing coalition, the 
GANA will lose eight Congressional votes, making passage of 
the fiscal reforms all the more difficult, and potentially 
affecting other Congressional issues of USG interest, 
including CICIACS and Article 98. 
 
7.  (C) Facing the challenge of a fractious coalition and 
Congress, Berger chose to team with the FRG to advance 
crucial fiscal reforms.  That pragmatism came with some 
political cost.  The harsh reaction by the press and civil 
society to news of the Berger-Rios Montt dialogue and May 15 
vote reflects partisan (anti-FRG) sentiment in those sectors. 
 In weighing further cooperation with the FRG, the Berger 
government will be sensitive to the risk of further damage to 
its credibility with these sectors, and is therefore more 
likely to court ad-hoc alliances than any exclusive 
arrangement. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17082","5/19/2004 15:27","04GUATEMALA1259","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA1241","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191527Z May 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/15/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: PEREZ MOLINA LEAVES GOVERNMENT FOR CONGRESS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1241 
 
Classified By: Acting PolCouns Erik Hall, for reason 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C)  Summary:  On May 17, after meeting with President 
Berger, GOG Security and Defense Commissioner Otto Perez 
Molina announced his resignation from the Executive branch, 
the Patriot Party\'s (PP) exit from the GANA coalition, and 
his return to Congress to lead the PP in opposition.  Perez 
Molina claimed to have quit on principle, to protest the GANA 
alliance with the FRG (plus the Unionista Party and some 
independents) in the naming of the Congressional Permanent 
Commission (see reftel).  The press hailed Perez Molina\'s 
exit and criticized what they characterized as Berger\'s 
blunder.  By all accounts, the UNE and PAN say the 
Governability Pact is now officially over; the GANA expects 
to pick up six Congressional converts after losing the PP\'s 
eight.  GANA leaders insist no deal was made with the FRG for 
its support, which may continue through passage of the 
pending fiscal reforms.  It is unclear how Perez Molina\'s 
exit will affect the on-going military reduction.  Perez 
Molina had been the foremost advocate within the government 
of accompanying military reduction with modernization.  End 
Summary. 
 
Perez Molina\'s Move 
------------------- 
 
2.  (U) When announcing his decision, Perez Molina told the 
press that he resigned in protest over GANA collaboration 
with the FRG, and would now return to Congress to lead the 
Patriots in \"constructive opposition.\"  He predicted that 
other parties would reject any future overtures from the GANA 
as a result, and that the GANA\'s \"only option would be to 
continue (in alliance) with the FRG.\"  Perez Molina said, 
that in his meeting with Berger that immediately preceded his 
announcement, he had expressed concern to Berger that 
authorities were proceeding against two past Defense 
Ministers and their chiefs of finance for allegations of 
massive corruption, but not (Rios Montt\'s son) Enrique Rios 
Sosa, implying the existence of a corrupt political deal 
between Rios Montt and Berger.  Perez Molina also told the 
press that Berger had told him that as the FRG had not asked 
for anything in exchange for its support on the matter of the 
Permanent Commission, he believed the collaboration was 
limited to this single vote.  Later, he blamed GANA 
Congressional leader Ricardo Saravia and Presidential Chief 
of Staff Eduardo Gonzalez for continually excluding the PP 
from GANA decision-making. 
 
Presidential Reaction 
--------------------- 
 
3.  (U) President Berger reacted to Perez Molina\'s 
announcement by saying \"we were not sure whether it was 
better to have them (the PP) as allies or opposition, as we 
were never sure of PP votes.\"  He commented that \"the 
(Governability) Pact with the PAN and UNE was weak and never 
worked.\"  Berger said the agreement with the FRG was not 
conditional, and no different from what he would seek from 
any other party.  Berger said the GANA would negotiate vote 
by vote to pass pending legislation, including the fiscal 
reform package.  Eduardo Gonzalez publicly cited the PP\'s 
early insistence on forming its own separate Congressional 
bench distinct from that of the GANA, its opposition to 
CICIACS, its position on electoral reforms, and the Permanent 
Commission issue as evidence that the PP did not share the 
GANA\'s goals.  Asked about the political cost to the GANA of 
working with the FRG, Gonzalez said that \"the divided 
Congress was the decision of Guatemalans.  This requires that 
all political groups in Congress be taken into account, 
including the FRG.  We must pursue, even with them, what is 
beneficial for Guatemala.\" 
 
The GANA\'s Side 
--------------- 
 
4.  (C) GANA Congressional chief Ricardo Saravia told PolOff 
on May 17 that Molina\'s exit had been long coming, and the 
GANA\'s cooperation with the FRG is just a convenient excuse. 
He accused Perez Molina of personal political motives for the 
PP\'s uncooperative behavior in Congress (over the electoral 
reforms and CICIACS, which Saravia said he is now convinced 
Guatemala desperately needs) and his seeding of confidants 
throughout the Executive branch.  Note:  Perez Molina 
reportedly freed these individuals of any obligation to step 
down and Berger said he had no intention of \"using the 
machete to lop off heads.\"  End Note. 
 
5.  (C) With the Governability Pact now definitively over, 
Saravia said the GANA (with 39 deputies, after the departure 
of the PP\'s 8) expects to accept 6 converts from the 
independent deputies, and will work with the FRG (31 
deputies) and Unionistas (7),  to achieve the simple majority 
needed to pass high-priority pending fiscal reforms during 
the recess (by July 30).  Saravia is the leader of Berger 
loyalists who left the PAN with Berger during the election 
campaign, to form the GANA.  This group, referred to as the 
M-17, is not formally incorporated as a party, and includes 
28 Congress members.  He claimed that the loyalty of the 
remaining two political parties (the Reform Movement, with 4 
deputies; and the National Solidarity Party, with seven) was 
assured.  Note:  Press reports raised doubts about this 
claim, saying PSN leaders also expressed concern on May 17 
about GANA collaboration with the FRG.  On May 18, PSN 
leaders continued to publicly express concern about GANA-FRG 
cooperation.  End Note. 
 
6.  (C) According to Saravia, the GANA\'s collaboration with 
the FRG is solely focused on the fiscal reforms.  He claimed 
there is no deal with the FRG involving prosecutions of 
Portillo government officials.  Saravia said he was forced to 
approach the FRG when it became clear that President of 
Congress Morales would not agree to GANA\'s preferred 
composition of the Permanent Commission (critical to control 
over the Congress during the recess).  Morales had also 
indicated that the fiscal reforms would be sent to many 
different commissions, a recipe, in Saravia\'s view, for 
endless delay.  In contrast, the May 15 
GANA-FRG-Unionista-independent vote gave the GANA majority 
control over the Permanent Commission, and the fiscal reforms 
will be considered by the Finance Commission only. 
 
A View from the Opposition 
-------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) Former UNE Vice Presidential candidate Fernando 
Andrade echoed the editorial line of the major papers to 
EconCouns on May 18.  According to Andrade, the Eduardo 
Gonzalez - Perez Molina rivalry came to a head, provoked by 
the obsession with cobbling together votes for the fiscal 
pact.  He blamed Berger for failing to control both these 
egos within the government.  A better leader would have the 
vision, experience, and maturity to keep the PP inside Gana 
through the military restructuring and find some way to avoid 
the embrace of the FRG.  Instead, the GANA set up Otto Perez 
to seize the high ground before they got what they needed on 
military restructuring and the basic direction of government. 
 According to Andrade, Perez retains the support of the 
ex-PACs and is the person the military high command trusts to 
get modernization in return for down-sizing; he will be big 
trouble for GANA down the road. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  (C) Perez Molina\'s presidential aspirations are widely 
recognized and an eventual break with the GANA was considered 
inevitable.  The GANA\'s collaboration with the FRG offered 
Perez Molina an opportunity to claim the moral high ground 
(and gain the support of a fiercely partisan print media). 
By Saravia\'s account, the GANA believes the price they are 
paying for this collaboration is justified by the near-term 
goal of passing fiscal reforms.  That price could continue to 
mount, however.  Opposition leaders and opinion-makers 
continue to portray the move as a political blunder and blame 
Berger and Gonzalez. 
 
9.  (C) It is unclear how the exit of Perez Molina and the 
Patriot Party will affect ongoing military reductions and 
other issues of USG interest, including CICIACS.  Some 
members of the military saw Perez Molina as the GOG guarantor 
of modernization in exchange for reductions, and may require 
reassurance that the promise will be kept. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17176","5/21/2004 17:35","04GUATEMALA1278","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA1241","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211735Z May 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: BERGER RECOVERS AFTER STUMBLE 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1241 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 1259 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Criticism lingers of Berger\'s handling 
of his private talks with the FRG, but the political storm 
has apparently passed and media criticism has decreased 
considerably.  Berger shored up the GANA coalition after the 
departure of Security Commissioner Otto Perez Molina and his 
Patriot Party by convincing wavering leaders of the National 
Solidarity Party (PSN) that he had not made an alliance with 
the FRG.  After human rights activists suggested she resign 
in protest, Goodwill Ambassador Rigoberta Menchu strongly 
defended the GANA\'s willingness to work with the FRG to pass 
fiscal reforms.  On May 19, Attorney General Florido denied 
any negotiation with the FRG on impunity issues, and 
announced that the Public Ministry had in fact redoubled its 
efforts to prosecute FRG corruption involving Rios Montt\'s 
son, Gen. (ret.) Enrique Rios Sosa, and other FRG members. 
Berger announced that Otto Perez Molina would not be replaced 
as Commissioner of Security and Defense, and said he would 
personally direct the modernization of the military. 
 
2.  (SBU) After concerns about further fracturing of the 
ruling GANA coalition passed, media and public attention has 
returned to the fate of the crucial fiscal reform package 
pending before Congress.  A meeting on May 18 between Berger 
and President of Congress Rolando Morales initially fueled 
speculation about an agreement in support of the reforms 
between the GANA and the National Unity for Hope Party (UNE), 
subsequently dashed by UNE leader Alvaro Colom, who denied 
any such deal.  After meeting with FRG leader Efrain Rios 
Montt, FRG Congress members reiterated support for passage of 
the fiscal pact on May 20.  The fiscal pact reforms were 
formally introduced to Congress on May 19 and 20, and sent to 
five Congressional committees for review.  The GANA and FRG 
have majorities in four of the five.  The fifth, the 
Indigenous Affairs Commission, is handling review of the most 
controversial element of the reforms--personal income tax 
changes.  Signaling flexibility, Berger publicly indicated he 
would accept changes to the initiative.  End Summary. 
 
No GANA-FRG Alliance 
-------------------- 
 
2.  (U)  On May 18, Berger and Vice President Stein 
repeatedly denied any \"alliance\" between the GANA and FRG. 
Instead, Stein characterized the accord as a 
\"circumstantial\" agreement to approve urgent fiscal reforms. 
Former FRG Vice President Francisco Reyes Lopez also publicly 
denied any such agreement.  PSN leaders met with Berger on 
May 18 and later announced their decision to stick with the 
GANA coalition, but a party leader warned that \"if there is 
any other secret agreement with the FRG, we will leave.\" 
 
 
3.  (U) Attorney General Florido held a press conference on 
May 19 to deny any negotiation with the FRG over pending 
investigations/prosecutions for corruption or other crimes 
committed while in office.  Instead, he announced that the 
investigation of July 24-25, 2003 demonstrations organized by 
the FRG would be broadened from six to ten suspects 
(including FRG leader Gen. (ret.) Efrain Rios Montt, 
currently under house arrest).  He also announced that the 
Public Ministry had requested a travel ban (subsequently 
granted by the court) on Gen. (ret.) Enrique Rios Sosa, who 
is under investigation for his role in corruption when he 
served as Army Finance Director in 2001-2002.  Despite these 
moves, on May 20 FRG Congress members announced their support 
for the fiscal reforms after meeting with their leader, 
Efrain Rios Montt, at home, where he is under house arrest. 
 
4.  (U) In her public statements on May 18, Nobel Peace 
Laureate Menchu defended the GANA\'s engagement with the FRG 
as necessary, saying \"the most important thing to govern the 
country is the institutional relationship among those who 
participate in the political process.  The FRG is one of the 
parties in that process, and the President is thinking of 
asking for their support for the fiscal reforms.  If the 
fiscal reforms are not approved, the State pantry will remain 
bare and an economic crisis could threaten stability.\"  She 
went on to say that \"I hope an investigatory commission (to 
charge him with genocide for human rights violations under 
his leadership in 1982-83) is quickly convoked to judge Rios 
Montt.\"  Some human rights leaders had earlier suggested 
Menchu, Frank LaRue and Helen Mack resign their government 
positions to protest any cooperation between the GANA and the 
FRG. 
 
5.  (U) President Berger publicly stated on May 18 that Perez 
Molina will not be replaced as Security and Defense 
Commissioner.  A new Security Council including prominent 
human rights defender Helen Mack will assume an advisory role 
on security issues, he said.  Berger said he would personally 
assume charge of implementing the modernization of the Army, 
which Perez Molina had previously championed. 
 
Fiscal Reforms Move Forward 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) After meeting with the President on May 18, President 
of Congress Rolando Morales emerged to say he and Berger had 
agreed to \"approve a fiscal reform package we agree upon\" 
after receiving alternate proposals from civil society, an 
opposition priority.  Morales also claimed that Berger had 
agreed to send Congress the Executive\'s proposed budget 
re-allocation plan for the remainder of 2004, another 
opposition priority.  Despite press reports that this 
represented an UNE-GANA agreement, on May 19 UNE leader 
Alvaro Colom denied that Morales had made any agreement 
obliging the UNE to vote in favor of the fiscal reforms.  The 
six separate fiscal reforms were read in Congress on May 19 
and 20, after the Berger budget reallocation plan was 
received as promised.  After the formal reading, the six were 
sent to five Congressional committees for review.  Four of 
the five commissions (Finance, Legislative Issues, Mines and 
Energy, and Health) have GANA-FRG majorities.  The last, 
Indigenous Affairs, does not, and will consider the most 
controversial element of the reforms involving personal and 
corporate tax revisions.  President Berger expressed hope 
that the commissions will vote on the accords after one week. 
 He also signaled flexibility, saying the proposals \"are not 
written in stone.\" 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The political storm over GANA-FRG collaboration to 
speed approval of fiscal reforms has damaged Berger and the 
GANA, effectively ending the new government\'s honeymoon.  The 
GANA\'s tactic of engaging the FRG, while pragmatic and 
probably necessary, was abrupt and suffered from its lack of 
transparency.  Most damaging was the fact that it undermined 
the GANA\'s credibility with its base, which remains shaken. 
 
8.  (SBU) Nevertheless, we are impressed by Berger\'s 
well-coordinated moves to recover from the buffeting 
precipitated by the May 17 exit from the Executive of Otto 
Perez Molina.  The move against Rios Montt\'s son was clearly 
meant to signal that, contrary to popular conspiracy 
theories, Berger has not traded impunity for the Rios Montt 
clan for FRG votes.  Rigoberta Menchu\'s defense of the GANA 
tactics helped salvage the Government\'s  credibility and 
advance the prospects of fiscal reform.  Those reforms still 
face many hurdles, especially in the Indigenous Affairs 
Commission, and, will undoubtedly be modified by the 
democratic process.  Berger\'s announcement that he would 
personally assure the modernization which Perez Molina 
championed as key to the military reduction will help keep 
another important Berger initiative on track. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17222","5/24/2004 21:08","04GUATEMALA1292","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE113234","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

242108Z May 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001292 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA INTERESTED IN SECURITY RESOLUTION FOR 
OASGA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 113234 
 
1.  Poloffs discussed reftel points and proposed resolution 
with Marco Tulio Chicas, Director for Integration at the 
Foreign Ministry, on May 20.  Chicas said Guatemala shared 
the goals outlined in the resolution and said he would 
immediately consult with Guatemala\'s mission to the OAS, 
which he said is in the best position to discuss the details. 
 Chicas also pledged to raise our points with his 
counterparts at a Central American Integration System (SICA) 
meeting in El Salvador on May 21. 
 
2.  MFA Director General for Multilateral Affairs Carla 
Rodriguez told Acting PolCouns on May 24 that she had shared 
our points with Francisco Villagran, Guatemala\'s Ambassador 
to the OAS, who plans to raise them with other Central 
American missions to the OAS.  Rodriguez said Villagran 
expressed some uncertainty about how security issues would be 
handled at the OASGA, and even whether there would be a 
general resolution on security this year. 
 
3.  We suggest the Department continue to coordinate this 
initiative with Guatemala\'s mission to the OAS. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17283","5/26/2004 19:22","04GUATEMALA1313","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE127407","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

261922Z May 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001313 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS OPIC FOR INSURANCE OFFICER STEPHANIE M. DOWNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, GT 
SUBJECT: COLITE APPLICATION FOR BILLBOARD CONSTRUCTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 127407 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 01783 
 
1. Summary:  Embassy has no objections to Colite Outdoor\'s 
application for OPIC insurance for its billboard operation 
but recommends caution in defining what is covered due to the 
vagueness of Guatemalan law with respect to \"visual 
pollution.\"  End Summary. 
 
2.  The construction of billboards in Guatemala is regulated 
by Legislative Decree 34-2003, the Law of Advertisements in 
Urban, Suburban and Other Roads.  This law was put in place 
because the prior laws (43-95 and 144-96) were declared 
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court for multiple reasons. 
Copies of the national laws and court rulings are being 
mailed to OPIC, Attn. Mr. Rivera Montes (documents are not 
suitable for faxing). 
 
3.  Companies must obtain permission from the landowner and 
the local municipality.  They may not construct on road 
rights of way.  Tax rates are uniform across the county. 
Foreign firms are taxed at the same rate as domestic ones. 
The location of (urban, rural, etc) and size of the signs 
impact the tax rate. 
 
4.  The two fundamental norms regulating posting of 
billboards are found in Article four of Decree 34-2003: 
\"--a) All necessary means should be taken to obtain the best 
appearance in urban, suburban and other roads, in order to 
avoid danger and facilitate the free circulation of vehicles 
and pedestrians, thus reducing to a minimum the visual 
pollution of the environment. 
\"--b) Respect for the liberty of industry, commerce, and 
work, which one will attempt to stimulate and encourage, 
except in the case of legal limitations and social 
inconviences.\" 
 
5.  More specific regulations are found in Chapters two and 
four.  The prohibition of primary concern is Article 17, Part 
B: 
 
\"It is prohibited to place advertisements that impede views 
of legitimate tourist interest...\" 
 
The local municipalities, which are part of the approval 
process, define what is a view of legitimate tourist interest. 
 
6.  Embassy is not aware of any cases of forcible removal of 
billboards that might be interpreted as expropriation, but we 
recommend caution in defining insurance coverage so that a 
reasonable application of Guatemalan law does not require 
payment of insurance benefits. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17329","5/27/2004 21:04","04GUATEMALA1320","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUATEMALA1124","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001320 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT OF STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, KCRM, PHUM 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA LABOR/TIP UPDATE #4-2004 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1124 
 
     B. STATE 59844 
 
1.  (SBU) The following is an update of significant recent 
developments in the labor sector and trafficking in persons 
(TIP).  Topics include: 
 
-- TIP:  GOG Enforcement Efforts Gaining Traction 
 
-- TIP:  Police Corruption Investigation 
 
-- TIP:  First Conviction Lightly Fined 
 
-- TIP:  Legislation Update 
 
-- TIP:  Kiddy Porn On Streets of Guatemala City 
 
-- TIP:  Papal Nuncio Pledges Cooperation 
 
-- Labor:  ILO Direct Contacts Mission Visits 
 
-- Labor:  MOL Announces Mediation Center 
 
-- Labor:  Apparel Sector Highlights Labor Programs 
 
-- Child Labor:  National Commission Formed 
 
TIP:  GOG Enforcement Efforts Gaining Traction 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2.  (U) Special Prosecutor for Women Sandra Zayas told 
LabAtt, HROff and PolIntern on May 26 that her special unit 
to combat TIP was starting to show results, despite resource 
constraints affecting the anti-TIP unit.  (Note:  We have 
requested G/TIP funding for support to the unit, which lacks 
transportation and office equipment.  End Note)  A recent 
series of raids on brothels had resulted in 17 arrests, 11 
minors rescued from prostitution, and 104 adult prostitutes 
turned over to Immigration for deportation.  A report 
provided listed the following results: 
 
-- 9 coordinated (Public Ministry/National Civilian 
Police/anti-TIP section of the Special Criminal Investigative 
Service, and the Immigration Directorate, Solicitor General\'s 
Office) operations to rescue victims and arrest traffickers 
in bars/brothels nationwide since March 5.  All but 
 
-- 141 adult prostitutes deported. 
 
-- 24 open investigations/prosecutions against 17 
traffickers, including two charged with TIP, 10 charged with 
corruption of minors, one charged with pimping, and four 
charged with hiring undocumented workers (some face a 
combination of charges). 
 
-- 11 minors (14-17) rescued from prostitution. 
 
LabAtt emphasized the need for more effective prosecution of 
traffickers, noting that the first conviction of a trafficker 
(charged with pimping a 13-year-old minor) resulted only in a 
$60 fine.  Sayas said that case and sentence, handled by a 
justice of the peace in Cuilapa, Santa Rosa province, 
occurred before her unit was up an running.  Weak laws and 
the tendency of judges to issue the minimum required sentence 
will complicate prosecutions, but her unit will do its best 
to convict traffickers, she said. 
 
In addition, there have several police actions (only one was 
organized by Zayas\' unit) resulting in the rescue of minors 
in prostitution  in recent weeks: 
 
-- On May 14 on a raid at the Club Platinium in Guatemala 
City, agents of the Criminal Investigation Service (SIC) 
found nine undocumented foreigners, one of whom was underage, 
and a Guatemalan minor, working as prostitutes.  The police 
arrested Angel Alfonso Silva, of Nicaragua, and the 
undocumented foreigners were turned over to Immigration 
authorities. 
 
-- May 19, police in Zone 6 of Guatemala City rescued two 
minors working in prostitution and arrested Edin Obdulio 
Hernandez Acabel, who is believed to be their pimp. 
Meanwhile, a raid on brothels at the Guatemala-Mexico border 
resulted in deportation proceedings against 36 undocumented 
adult women from Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Honduras, and 
three undocumented adult men. 
 
-- On the night of May 21, Alexander Colop, the assistant 
Guatemalan Special Prosecutor for Women, acting upon 
intelligence provided by DHS, raided 6 bars in Retalhuleu and 
found ten female minors working in prostitution.  Five adults 
were arrested and jailed, thirteen adult prostitutes were 
turned over to immigration for deportation, and the minors 
are now being provided victim\'s services by the NGO, Casa 
Alianza. 
 
TIP:  Police Corruption Investigation 
------------------------------------- 
3.  (U) The May 14 raid on Club Platinium came as a result 
from information gathered from the investigation of Rudy 
Ranulfo Giron Lima, sub-commissioner of police, who was 
arrested along with several other police officer members of 
his \'gang\' for the kidnapping of Luis Alfonso Sosa Lopez, the 
son of the President of the Bank of Guatemala.  Giron Lima is 
owner or co-owner of Club Platinium and another capital 
nightclub, Club Samba, which were subsequently raided by 
police.  The Vice Minister of Government subsequently 
suspended other four police officers who were reputed to be 
preferred clients at Giron Lima\'s clubs, and said they would 
be investigated to determine whether they had participated in 
any of the illicit activities at those clubs. 
TIP:  Kiddy Porn on Streets of Guatemala City 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) On May 26, major daily \"Prensa Libre,\" reported that 
street vendors in downtown of Guatemala City were selling 
child porn DVDs featuring European or American children and 
adults performing sex acts.  Current law mandates a fine for 
production or sale of obscene material, without any 
distinction between child and adult material.  However, 
pending reforms would impose prison terms up to 12 years for 
the traffickers of these images.  This reform is pending 
before the Commission on Women, Minors and the Family of 
Congress, as is proposed legislation calling for stiffer 
penalties regarding the trafficking and prostitution of 
minors. 
TIP:  Legislative Update 
------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) ILO Child Labor project officer Berta Lidia Barco 
informed us that the ILO/IPEC penal code reforms, including 
stiffening sanctions for TIP, have been accepted for 
consideration by the Congressional Commission for Women, 
Children and the Family.  The Commission has meshed the ILO 
proposals with a pending reform bill promoted by the 
Coalition in Favor of Reducing Violence Against Women.  The 
Embassy has requested a copy of the reforms, which would also 
criminalize child pornography. 
 
TIP:  Papal Nuncio Pledges Cooperation 
-------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU)  Per Ref B, LabAtt met on May 19 with Papal Nuncio 
Bruno Musaro to discuss USG and Embassy efforts to combat TIP 
in collaboration with the GOG, and our perception of the 
problem in Guatemala.  Musaro, who is recently-arrived in 
Guatemala, expressed interest in and support for USG efforts. 
 LabAtt described the Guatemalan Catholic Church\'s programs 
to assist victims of TIP run by the Pastoral Migration 
mission, which has shelters on the border with Mexico and in 
the capital.  Musaro expressed interest in learning more 
about these programs and willingness to consider future 
collaboration on efforts to combat the problem. 
 
Labor:  ILO Direct Contacts Mission Visit 
----------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) ILO Officials visited Guatemala May 18-21, at the 
invitation of the GOG (requested by the ILO Governing Body in 
March, 2003) to provide technical assistance to improve 
Guatemala\'s performance implementing ILO conventions on 
freedom of association and collective bargaining.  They met 
with the GOG Inter-Institutional Group on Labor Policy, 
coordinated by the MFA, the Special Prosecutor for Crimes 
Against Trade Unionists, and others, and visited union 
leaders Rigoberto Duenas and Victoriano Zacarias in jail, 
where they are being held without bond awaiting trial.  (On 
May 11 the judge denied Duenas\' request for bail; he has been 
imprisoned awaiting trial since June 8, 2003.)  MFA 
Multilateral Affairs Director Carla Rodriguez and Vice 
Minister of Labor Castillo separately told LabAtt that the 
issues of interest to the mission tracked closely with USG 
interests, including progress to combat impunity, enforce 
labor law, and resolve historic labor cases involving 
unlawful firings of workers for unionizing activity. 
 
Labor:  Minister Announces Mediation Center 
------------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (U) On May 24, Minister of Labor Jorge Gallardo unveiled 
a program to establish a Center for the Alternate Resolution 
of Labor Conflicts in Guatemala.  The center, scheduled to be 
operating by the end of 2004, will permit workers or 
management to voluntarily bring disputes before an 
arbitration board.  Gallardo said the new center, to be 
developed by the Central American Economic Integration 
Secretariat (SIECA) and supported by USAID\'s PROALCA II labor 
 
SIPDIS 
capacity-building project, is designed to provide an 
alternative and not to replace the clogged and corrupt labor 
justice system.  Either party may avail themselves of the 
courts if not fully satisfied at any point in the process. 
The apparel sector association, VESTEX, which announced its 
own mediation center to open in September (reported Ref A), 
will share experiences with the new Center. 
 
Child Labor:  National Commission Formed 
---------------------------------------- 
 
9.  (U) On May 5, Jorge Luis Ortega, President of the 
Congressional Commission on Women, Children and the Family 
was selected by Congress as its official representative to 
the newly-formed National Commission of Childhood and 
Adolescence.  The creation of a National Commission was 
mandated in the Child Protection Law of June 2003, which 
includes child labor and other protections.  Ortega later 
announced that the First Lady\'s Secretariat of Social Work 
will be charged with securing resources for the National 
Commission.  The first task of the commission, which will be 
composed of representatives from the public sector and NGOs, 
will be to establish a set of governing rules to be approved 
by President Berger. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17330","5/27/2004 22:47","04GUATEMALA1326","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE94618","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

272247Z May 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001326 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/ISO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, MARR, MOPS, SENV 
SUBJECT: BLANKET DIPOMATIC CLEARANCE FOR TROPICAL STORM AND 
HURRICANE RECONNAISSANCE MISSIONS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 94618 
 
Effective May 25, 2005, the 53rd Weather Reconnaissance 
Squadron has one year of overflight clearance from the GOG. 
The clearance only pertains to the aircraft listed in the 
requesting cable (reftel).  Copies of the clearance are 
availiable upon request.  Contact Mark Stephens at (502) 
331-1541 or at StephensMA@state.gov. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17354","5/28/2004 16:38","04GUATEMALA1328","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE119416","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281638Z May 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, GT 
SUBJECT: TENTATIVE GOG SUPPORT FOR PEREZ IAJC CANDIDACY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 119416 
 
 1.  In the absence of Foreign Minister Jorge Briz (in 
Guadalajara for Ibero-American Summit), Ambassador Hamilton 
discussed reftel talking points with Vice Minister for 
Foreign Affairs Marta Altolaguirre on May 28.  Altolaguirre 
expressed tentative GOG support for Antonio Perez\'s candidacy 
to the IAJC.  The Ambassador sent a copy of Perez\'s 
curriculum vitae and will further discuss the issue with Briz 
and Altolaguirre next week. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17430","6/2/2004 14:35","04GUATEMALA1361","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA1055","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021435Z Jun 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001361 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SHANNON, DOD FOR OGC ALLEN. 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, PM/B, L, T, P, D, IO, S/WCI, 
S/P/PM/AT, OSD/ISP/NP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: (C) DIFFICULT POLITICS OF ARTICLE 98 PASSAGE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1055 
 
Classified By: Acting PolChief Erik Hall for reasons 1.5 (b&d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  As reported reftel, the GOG signed an 
Article 98 agreement on April 28 but requested that we keep 
the agreement confidential while it devises a strategy to 
gain Congressional approval.  MFA Vice Minister Skinner-Klee 
told DCM on May 25 that the GOG remains absolutely committed 
to Article 98 ratification, but does not want to submit it to 
Congress for ratification during the current special session 
for a variety of reasons, including: 
 
-- the political imperative of getting fiscal reforms 
approved demands the GOG\'s full attention; 
 
-- Article 98 is too sensitive/controversial to be 
spotlighted in an extraordinary session of Congress; 
 
-- shifting political alliances within Congress make 
vote-counting difficult right now, and the GOG needs to see 
how the alliances settle out before they will be able to 
count the votes needed for this issue; 
 
-- FM Briz needs to shore up his own political bases before 
pushing Article 98 in Congress; 
 
-- events at Abu Ghraib have given powerful ammunition to 
Article 98 critics, making this a particularly inopportune 
time to present the agreement for congressional and public 
debate. 
 
The Berger Administration therefore prefers to submit Article 
98 to Congress for ratification during the regular session 
starting August 1, and to avoid as much as possible a 
politicization of the issue.  While the latter may be wishful 
thinking, we concur that submitting Article 98 during the 
current special session of Congress could be fatal.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (C) In a meeting with DCM on May 25, MFA Vice Minister 
Jorge Skinner-Klee said the current special session of 
Congress is focused on the political imperative of getting 
fiscal reforms approved before July 30.  This is the Berger 
Administration\'s highest political priority, and demands the 
GOG\'s full attention.  Introducing Article 98 during the 
current extraordinary session of Congress would distract from 
fiscal reform passage and attract unwanted controversy to the 
agreement.  Shifting political alliances within Congress make 
vote-counting difficult right now.  (Note: the ruling GANA 
coalition, the FRG and the Unionista Party appear to be in 
agreement to pass the fiscal reforms, and the PAN may also 
join in support, according to Presidential Chief of Staff 
Eduardo Gonzalez.  End Note.)  The GANA coalition suffered 
the loss of the Patriot Party over its dialogue with the FRG. 
 It is unclear whether the fiscal pact alliance could be 
replicated on other issues, including Article 98. 
Skinner-Klee said FM Jorge Briz needs to shore up his own 
political bases before pushing Article 98 in Congress. 
(Note:  We have heard unconfirmed rumors that Briz might be 
considering resigning.  End Note.) 
 
3.  (C) Skinner-Klee also said recent revelations from Abu 
Ghraib have given powerful ammunition to Article 98 critics. 
He argued that effective US action against the culprits will 
help counter that criticism. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
4.  (C)  News of the signing of the Article 98 agreement has 
not yet become public here.  When it does, it will provoke 
strong criticism from human rights groups, which have formed 
an ad-hoc Commission in Support of the International Criminal 
Court and are actively lobbying the GOG against any Article 
98 agreement.  Opposition to Article 98 is likely to be 
concentrated in civil society and the smaller leftist parties 
including the UNE, ANN, and URNG. 
 
5.  (C) We concur with the GOG\'s caution over how to deal 
with Congress.  Any move to ratify the agreement during the 
extraordinary session, which is focused almost exclusively on 
the issue of fiscal reforms, would likely cause another 
political firestorm like the one the GANA faced after it 
became clear that Berger was in dialogue with FRG leader Rios 
Montt. 
 
6.  (C) Prospects for passage of the fiscal reforms are good, 
as a result of Berger\'s willingness to work with the FRG and 
to consider marginal changes and incentives demanded by other 
opposition parties.  By deferring the Article 98 debate until 
after the fiscal reforms are approved, the prospects also 
improve for the emergence of a working coalition which could 
also support Article 98 ratification.  We will continue to 
discuss how the USG can best assist the GOG\'s efforts to 
approve the agreement. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17528","6/4/2004 18:53","04GUATEMALA1397","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE121718","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

041853Z Jun 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001397 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL EXPRESS SUPPORT OF INTERIM IRAQUI 
GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 121718 
 
1.  On June 4, the Ambassador delivered reftel points to 
Foreign Minister Jorge Briz and Interior Minister Arturo 
Soto.  The Ambassador urged the GOG to express support for 
the Interim Iraqi Government (IIG) bilaterally in a 
diplomatic note and in coordination with other Central 
American countries.  Briz enthusiastically agreed and told 
the Ambassador that the Ministry would work towards a 
statement the same day through the Central American 
Integration System (SICA). 
 
2.  MFA Director General for Multilateral Affairs Carla 
Rodriguez also told PolOff on June 3 that the GOG will be 
unable to offer donations or any material support for Iraq at 
this time due to budget restraints. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17629","6/8/2004 18:52","04GUATEMALA1417","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE78697","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001417 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IFD/OIA/ATBRUYAN AND L/CID/JNICOL 
TREASURY FOR DO/CHRISTOPOLOUS 
USDOC FOR ITA/ATAYLOR 
USTR FOR FHUELGEL 
PASS OPIC FOR O\'SULLIVAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, EFIN, PGOV, KIDE, CASC, OPIC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S 2004 REPORT ON INVESTMENT DISPUTES AND 
EXPROPRIATION CLAIMS 
 
REF: A. STATE 78697 
 
     B. OLSON/BRYAN/NICOL E-MAILS 
 
1.  Land invasions (squatter takeovers) of large farmlands 
are fairly common in Guatemala.  Private sector organizations 
complained that the squatters sometimes acted with government 
complicity during the four-year administration of President 
Portillo, who left office in January 2004.  The new 
administration of President Oscar Berger has declared its 
intention to evict squatters where property rights are 
clearly established, and it has begun to follow thorough in 
several cases.  However, the issue is highly politicized, 
pitting defense of private property rights against continued 
calls for major land reform to address social injustice.  In 
the process, some groups are blurring the distinction between 
complex historical cases, where indigenous groups are 
asserting traditional claims and written records are missing 
or inadequate, and organized invasions of titled land that 
have taken place within the last couple of years.  Even in 
the seemingly clearest of cases, the justice system is slow 
and its rulings are often ignored.  Post is not aware of any 
new cases involving U.S. citizens over the past year and 
updates, below, information reported in 2003. 
 
2. a) Claimant A 
 
b)  2001 
 
c)  Claimant A purchased approximately 3,825 hectares of land 
near the Honduran border in Izabal Department in 1991, 
intending to raise cattle and harvest timber.  Claimant 
reports that approximately 50 armed peasants invaded the 
property on 16 February 2001, taking over 100 hectares of 
improved pasture.  Per a June 4, 2002 communication from 
Claimant, the squatters by that time controlled more than 700 
hectares of land.  Claimant alleged that the standing 
Governor of the State of Izabal, Patricia Quinto, demanded 
that Claimant provide land titles to the squatters.  Invaders 
have allegedly since taken over most of the property, 
stealing cattle and timber and destroying improvements.  Some 
of the invaders allegedly are armed with fully automatic 
assault weapons and have fired upon Claimant\'s administrator. 
 Claimant has filed numerous complaints with the district 
attorney but has had no effective response.  A penal court 
ordered that a civil court must first determine ownership of 
the property based on a claim by the squatters that they have 
historical rights to the land, notwithstanding Claimant\'s 
possession of legal title to the property.  Claimant and 
peasant activists have complained of being threatened by 
heavily armed men who they thought were in the employ of each 
other, but it appears that the armed groups are more likely 
linked to a known and dangerous local narcotics trafficking 
organization that is seeking control of the property. 
 
Embassy officials raised this case with the former President 
of Guatemala and with several of his cabinet officials.  A 
member of the inter-agency commission on land disputes told 
Embassy officers in March, 2002 that land registry records 
from the area had been destroyed during the first half of the 
twentieth century, complicating the task of verifying or 
rejecting claims of traditional rights to the land asserted 
by some of the squatters.  The GOG at the time suggested that 
Claimant seek a negotiated solution with the squatters, but 
Claimant A and Embassy officers responded that the claimant\'s 
title should be respected in the absence of any evidence that 
the title was improperly granted.  Since the inauguration of 
the Berger administration in January 2004, Embassy officers 
have raised the matter with the Minister and Vice Minister of 
Government, who are responsible for the National Civilian 
Police.  Most recently, the Ambassador discussed the case on 
two occasions with the current Attorney General, who agreed 
to meet with Claimant in the near future.  The Attorney 
General had told an Embassy Officer in May 2004 that he had 
ordered his staff to research earlier judicial findings 
before deciding what action to take. 
 
Claimant A estimates the value of confiscated land at $7 
million, and that lost revenues exceeds $500,000.  We are 
informed that, for tax purposes, the land has been valued at 
$150,000. 
 
a)  Claimant B 
 
b)  1998 
 
c)  Claimant B received a fifty-year concession in 1997 to 
operate and expand Guatemala\'s state owned and controlled 
railroad system, which was badly deteriorated and had fallen 
into disuse.  The government was obliged to clear the 
railroad\'s right of way of squatters in Guatemala City and 
along the route to the Atlantic at the time of the start-up 
of privatized railroad service by Claimant in 1998.  The 
government also removed some squatters along the Pacific 
route and the North Coast line to Mexico, which are not yet 
in operation.  However, the number of squatters along 
railroad lines has multiplied since, as squatters return to 
areas cleared by the government and newcomers join their 
ranks.  Claimant has not yet begun operations in the most 
affected areas and has largely discontinued efforts to obtain 
eviction orders while concentrating on its service between 
Guatemala City and the Atlantic ports.  Claimant is currently 
seeking a consultant to prepare a feasibility study to obtain 
financing for the repair and improvement of the tracks on the 
North Coast so that it can provide the connection to Mexico 
and the Pacific port.  The squatter invasions, if not 
addressed quickly and effectively at the appropriate moment, 
could prevent the North Coast service from being reopened, 
which in turn would effectively deny Claimant\'s rights under 
its concession contract. 
 
Claimant B contacted Embassy in May 2002 to provide a 
briefing on the problem and to discuss possible future 
assistance in resolving it, should the problem not be 
resolved by the GOG before work on the route to Mexico 
begins.  Embassy officers raised the matter with senior 
officials of the Ministry of Economy and with the Economic 
and Foreign Trade Committee of the Congress.  The Embassy is 
in periodic contact with Claimant and will continue to 
provide advocacy services as needed. 
 
a) Claimants C 
 
b) 2002 
 
c) Claimants C, brothers, inherited land in Alta Verapaz 
department acquired by their family in the 1800s and first 
half of the 1900s.  There are a number of discrepancies in 
title documents pertaining to parts of the land that have not 
been adequately reconciled, but, with one exception, the 
discrepancies relate to historical divisions within what are 
now larger farms and do not cast doubt on the claimants\' 
ownership rights.  One entry in the national registry from 
the 1800s grants small parcels in the area to local families 
from that era, but it appears that the parcels granted and 
those actually settled by the local families\' descendants are 
substantially different.  A definitive settlement is under 
negotiation. 
 
In 2002, the mayor of a village adjacent to one of claimants\' 
properties demanded unrestricted access to a road the 
claimants had built on their land that greatly improved 
access to the village.  The claimants have allowed the road 
to be used during daylight hours in return for a contribution 
toward maintaining the road but have blocked access at night, 
citing security concerns. 
 
The situation appeared to deteriorate significantly when a 
national peasant organization, CONIC, began organizing 
opposition to the nightly road closure and allegedly began 
encouraging invasion of several of the claimants\' farms, 
including environmentally sensitive watershed areas.  The 
invasions have included the ransacking of claimants\' 
facilities and have prevented normal operation of the 
claimants\' coffee growing business.  One of the claimants 
filed criminal charges against CONIC organizers but agreed to 
suspend further action pending the results of further 
negotiations.  The negotiations include compensation for 
damaged property and are sponsored by government land dispute 
agency, CONTIERRA.  CONTIERRA agreed to put a special 
priority on resolving this case at the request of the 
Embassy.  Embassy officers met on several occasions with 
CONTIERRA\'s national management or with its Alta Verapaz 
representatives, as well as with CONIC leaders and attorneys, 
to underscore Embassy\'s concern that the property rights of 
U.S. citizens be respected and applicable Guatemalan laws be 
enforced. 
 
Claimants note that recurring invasion of duly registered 
private property is a felony offense requiring ex oficio 
action by state law enforcement authorities.  They claim that 
the police have failed to evict invaders on their own and 
have not enforced court eviction orders.  Embassy brought 
this to the attention of the Vice Minister of Government 
(Interior) in February 2003.  A court order was issued in May 
2003 to evict occupiers of one farm (the one with the access 
road to a neighboring village), and the Claimant received 
assurances from the Ministry of Government that 200 policemen 
would be sent to execute the order.  The evictions did not 
take place.  Embassy brought the cases to the attention of 
the Vice Minister of Government of the newly inaugurated 
Berger Administration in February 2004 and two subsequent 
occasions.  The Vice Minister agreed to receive the 
Claimants, but contact has yet to be established. 
 
Embassy has not had direct contact with either Claimant since 
April, 2004.  The government has recently moved to evict 
squatters from other land in Alta Verapaz, which is being 
cited as a principal reason for nationwide peasant 
demonstrations that have been called for June 8 and 9. 
Claimants have chosen not to visit Guatemala City as a 
result, according to an associate.  A U.S. private voluntary 
organization that operates in the region reports that 
mediation efforts it is undertaking together with CARE and 
CONTIERRA appear to be progressing and that there have no 
recent acts of violence.  CONIC has been included in the 
negotiations.  An associate of the Claimants confirms that 
the situation has been relatively calm in recent weeks. 
 
3. Claimant A:  Margaret Argudo, American Citizen, no Privacy 
Act Waiver (PAW). 
 
Claimant B:  Ferrovias Guatemala, A local subsidiary of a 
U.S. company, no PAW. 
 
Claimants C:  Carlos Ardebol and Roger Perez Ardebol, 
American Citizens, no PAW. 
 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"17730","6/10/2004 16:47","04GUATEMALA1442","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001442 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PHUM, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: ANTI-GOG PROTESTS END PEACEFULLY, EARLY 
 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  Nationwide protests organized by labor and 
popular groups scheduled for June 8-9 were suspended late on 
June 8 after protest leaders reached agreement with President 
Berger on a range of measures to address demands.  The 
demonstrations were smaller than expected and remained 
peaceful throughout the day, with no violence reported.  The 
GOG handled this first major anti-government protest 
effectively, preventing violence and defusing the situation 
by engaging in dialogue.  Concessions offered by the GOG 
demonstrated flexibility but did not damage GOG fiscal, trade 
or agrarian agendas.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) On June 8, 7-10,000 protesters from a conglomeration 
of labor, campesino and human rights organizations blocked 
highways and demonstrated at selected sites in the capitol, 
including the international airport.  The main groups 
involved included campesino groups CNOC, CONIC and CUC; labor 
federations UASP, UGT, CNSP, and the national association of 
teachers; the Social Organizations Collective (COS), 
comprised of a network of human rights and social interest 
groups; and the university student organization (AEU).  The 
demonstrations were organized to protest the GOG policy of 
forcibly evicting squatters from disputed plantation 
properties (by campesino groups), and to protest tax 
increases affecting workers in the fiscal reforms under 
consideration by Congress and reject CAFTA (by labor, student 
and social groups). 
 
3.  (U) In Guatemala City, two to three hundred protesters 
gathered at the airport, which functioned normally throughout 
the day, with police maintaining access for passengers and 
workers.  Fifty teachers gathered outside the Ministry of 
Education; 1,000 protesters gathered at the Supreme Courts; 
approximately 500 were outside Congress; and roughly 5,000 
gathered in the city\'s central square.  Highway access to 
Antigua, Sacatepequez province, was closed by 300 protesters; 
several other key highway crossings were blocked in different 
regions of the country.  Protests lasted from around 8:00 am 
until early evening, and were generally peaceful with no 
violent incidents reported in the city and few elsewhere. 
There were several unconfirmed incidents reported outside of 
capitol.  A report that protesters were tear-gassed in Baja 
Verapaz was denied by observers from the Office of the Human 
Rights Ombudsman (PDH).  PDH representatives were present at 
all protest sites to help mediate with authorities and 
prevent violence. 
 
Evictions and Other Demands 
--------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) After a policy of not enforcing eviction orders under 
the former government, the Berger Administration declared 
early its intention to evict squatters from land where 
property rights are clearly established.  It has reportedly 
followed through with this promise in 39 cases since taking 
office.  Twenty-three of these evictions, performed by the 
National Civilian Police (PNC), have been violent.  Campesino 
advocacy groups and other human rights defenders have claimed 
that in some cases the PNC burned crops and homes, looted, 
and have arrived at the plantations drunk, sometimes along 
with private security forces.  (There have been no reports of 
injuries or deaths associated with the evictions.)  The PNC 
has denied any wrongdoing.  The investigative daily \"El 
Periodico\" recently published pictures of burnt houses and a 
child holding teargas canisters allegedly used by police to 
force squatters off of the land. 
 
5.  (U) The other major demands of the protesters included 
calls to limit the burden of new personal tax increases on 
lower-income individuals (by continuing exemption of certain 
types of income and raising the income floor above which 
individuals are taxed), and a rejection of the Central 
America-U.S. Free Trade Agreement. 
 
Organizers Meet with Berger and others 
-------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Late on June 8, an agreement was reached between the 
GOG and protesters, who subsequently canceled the second day 
of protests scheduled for June 9.  The agreement came after 
President Berger, the President of Congress, the President of 
the Supreme Court, and the Attorney General met with leaders 
of the protesting organizations.  During this meeting, which 
lasted close to five hours, participants reportedly agreed on 
the following: 
 
-- the GOG agreed to consider proposing revisions to the 
eviction law within 90 days; 
 
-- the GOG agreed to create a new Prosecutor\'s Office for 
Agrarian Affairs in the Public Ministry to handle any future 
evictions of squatters; 
 
-- the GOG agreed to suspend disputed evictions while the 
land dispute agency CONTIERRA reviews each case; 
 
-- the GOG agreed to exempt the legally mandated \"aguinaldo\" 
and \"bono 14\" salary payments (two extra months salary due 
every employee, hitherto untaxed) from taxable income and to 
raise the floor for personal taxation to 3000 Quetzals 
($375)/month (the original proposal was for a floor of 1500 
Q/month); 
 
-- the GOG promised to translate the CAFTA agreement into 
indigenous languages; 
 
-- protesters agreed to refrain from protests for 90 days; 
and, 
 
-- the participants agreed to meet again on June 15th; 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) These were the first widespread anti-government 
protests and came at a sensitive time for the GOG, as 
Congress considers a fiscal reform proposal crucial to the 
GOG.  Despite relatively low turnout (similar protests under 
the Portillo government occasionally reached 25-30,000), the 
high political stakes required the GOG to take preventive 
action to prevent any violence and political action to defuse 
protester demands, which it did successfully.  The 
concessions offered by President Berger and other authorities 
mollified protesters without damaging the GOG\'s fiscal, trade 
or rural development priorities.  Rather than encouraging 
more protests, as some might fear, the main result of the 
protests was to show that impatience with the GOG among 
social groups has not yet reached critical mass. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17736","6/10/2004 19:07","04GUATEMALA1447","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001447 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, KCRM, KWMN, AORC, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: HUMAN RIGHTS UPDATE #4-2004 
 
 
1.  (U) This message summarizes significant recent 
developments relating to human rights, including: 
 
-- Executive Send CICIACS to Court (paras 2-3) 
 
-- Progress on Southcom Human Rights Initiative (4) 
 
-- Human Rights NGOs Speak Out on National Police (5) 
 
-- New Trial in Rio Negro Massacre (6-7) 
 
-- Threats Against Sons of Journalist Killed in Black 
Thursday (8) 
 
-- Archbishop\'s Legal Team Helps Journalist (9) 
 
-- Congress Reviews Proposal for OHCHR Office (10-11) 
 
-- Berger Donates Retreat to At-risk Youth (12) 
 
-- Inter-American HR Court Hears Case on Massacre (13) 
 
-- Threats Against Torres de Colom (14) 
 
Executive Sends CICIACS to Court 
 
 
2.  (U) On May 27, HROff met with Claudia Samayoa, head of 
the Coalition to Establish CICIACS (a group of NGOs united to 
encourage implementation of the CICIACS agreement), who said 
that Political Reform Commissioner Mario Fuentes Destarac and 
Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales had held a series of 
meetings of the ad-hoc Executive Commission on CICIACS.  In 
addition to Fuentes Destarac, Interior Minister Arturo Soto 
and Vice Minister of Foreign Relations Jorge Skinner-Klee 
represented the Executive branch; Helen Mack, Mario Polanco 
of the Mutual Support Group (GAM), members of the \"Defense of 
the Constitution\" NGO (CEDECON), and the National Bar 
Association participated from civil society.  As a result, on 
June 6, President Berger submitted twenty questions about the 
legality of the current CICIACS agreement to the 
Constitutional Court.  The questions focus primarily on the 
Commission\'s proposed immunities and privileges (e.g. free 
access to government documents and legal immunity of CICIACS 
personnel and property), and its ability to prosecute cases 
independently without the involvement of the Public Ministry. 
 The Constitutional Court has an unlimited amount of time to 
review the case and issue its opinion. 
 
3.  (U) HROff also met with Ombudsman Morales on June 1 to 
congratulate the Commission for its quick work.  Morales said 
he had met with five of the Constitutional Court magistrates 
several days before to discuss CICIACS and believed that the 
judges would rule that the current CICIACS was constitutional. 
 
Progress on SOUTHCOM Human Rights Initiative 
 
 
4.  (U) MilOff reports that SOUTHCOM and the Center for the 
Training of Human Rights (a Costa Rican NGO contracted by 
SOUTHCOM to implement its human rights initiative) have 
reached agreement with the Guatemalan Ministry of Defense on 
the text of a Human Rights Initiative.  The MOD is expected 
to sign a final document next week after approval by the 
President\'s office. 
 
Human Rights NGOs Speak Out on National Police 
 
 
5.  (U) On June 7, 13 human rights organizations, including 
GAM, the Myrna Mack Foundation, and the Rigoberta Menchu 
Foundation, placed an advertisement in the daily \"Prensa 
Libre\" expressing concern to President Berger that military 
officers who lose their jobs in the army downsizing will 
infiltrate the National Civil Police (PNC).  The ad asserted 
that military personnel\'s training and experience are at odds 
with the mission of the police and that integrating former 
soldiers into the PNC would militarize that institution. 
They requested that the President develop a plan to 
strengthen the PNC by toughening recruitment requirements, 
improve training and by increasing political/financial 
support for the PNC. 
 
New Trial in Rio Negro Massacre 
 
 
6.  (U) HROff traveled to Rabinal, Baja Verapaz province, on 
April 28 to observe an exhumation and meet with ADIVIMA, a 
survivors group pushing forward the prosecution of the 1982 
Rio Negro Massacre.  In 1998, three former militia 
(\"ex-PACs\") were convicted of homicide for their 
participation in the Rio Negro and Agua Fria massacres, 
marking the first conviction of perpetrators of a massacre 
since the civil conflict.  In February 2003, arrest warrants 
were issued for seven more individuals in the same case, with 
the help of ADIVIMA.  Six of these individuals, all ex-Pacs, 
are currently in custody awaiting a August 2004 court date; 
retired Army Col. Jose Antonio Solares Gonzalez remains at 
large. 
7.  (U) According to ADIVIMA and Nicolas Garcia, the 
prosecutor in charge of the case, the Public Ministry has 
been unable to obtain any photographs of Solares Gonzalez 
and, although the arrest warrant was issued over a year ago, 
the PNC have not searched the officer\'s last known address in 
Guatemala City.  If tried, the case would be the first 
prosecution of a military official in connection with a 
massacre case.  ADIVIMA will continue to urge the GOG to act 
on the arrest warrant. 
 
Sons of Journalist Killed in Black Thursday Threatened 
 
8.  (U) On May 20, David Hernandez Rubio and Hector Ramirez, 
the sons of Hector Ramirez, the journalist who died during 
the \"Black Thursday\" demonstrations on July 24-25 2003, 
petitioned the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights 
(IACHR) for personal protection following a series of 
intimidating incidents against their family.  The brothers 
are currently pressing charges against Gen. (ret.) Rios Montt 
and other FRG former Government officials for their father\'s 
death.  On May 19, David was attacked and beaten by two men 
in Zone 18.  Earlier that week, Hector also reported that two 
men had interrogated his sister-in-law at his home, that men 
in motorcycles had followed another sister-in-law to 
university, and that eight individuals had broken into a 
property owned by his wife to question residents.  Hector 
Ramirez told HROff on June 8 that, although a police officer 
had been posted at his home, none of the family members were 
being accompanied by security during the day.  The brothers 
have a meeting on June 10 with President\'s Commission on 
Human Rights (COPREDEH), which coordinates GOG action on 
IACHR cases, to discuss security measures. 
 
Archbishop\'s Legal Team Helps Journalist 
 
 
9.  (U) On May 7, the Office of Human Rights of the 
Archbishop of Guatemala (ODHAG), petitioned the court to 
become a private party to the prosecution of attackers of 
prominent newspaper editor Jose Ruben Zamora.  Zamora and his 
family were sequestered and threatened for several hours on 
June 24, 2003.  ODHAG,s lawyers allege there are indications 
that clandestine security forces participated in the 
incident.  Two men, one from the PNC and one from the 
Presidential Guard, have been detained. 
 
Congress Reviews Proposal for OHCHR Office 
 
 
10.  (U) In mid-June, two Congressional committees will 
consider ratifying an agreement with the UN to create of the 
Office of the High Commissioner of the United Nations for 
Human Rights (OHCHR).  The agreement includes annual 
monitoring reports on the status of human rights in Guatemala 
to be presented to the Congressional Human Rights Commission 
and the Hague.  The new office would also represent the UN in 
Guatemala after MINUGUA closes in December 2004.  On 
MINUGUA\'s departure, the Human Rights Ombudsman will take 
over all reporting for compliance with the Peace Accords. 
The OHCHR office, which has unofficially been open since 
January, will also provide information programs and 
technical/economic assistance regarding human rights to the 
GOG.  If the Congress ratifies the agreement, the UN office 
will be established for a period of three years, which can be 
extended on request from the GOG. 
 
11.  (SBU) Both the Human Rights and the Foreign Relations 
Committees will make recommendations to the Congressional 
plenary on the agreement.  On May 15, Birgit Gerstenberg, the 
current head the OHCHR office, told HROff that the Human 
Rights Commission was then divided 5 to 6 (in opposition) on 
the proposal.  However, on June 2, Congressional Deputy 
Antonio Arenales (FRG) told PolSpecialist he believed the 
proposal would pass in both committees due to political 
pressure from the Executive.  (He remains opposed.) 
 
Berger Donates Retreat to At-Risk Youth 
 
 
12.  (U) On May 24, PolIntern attended a ceremony in which 
President Oscar Berger and COPREDEH handed over the 
presidential retreat, Finca Santo Tomas, to the Jorge R. 
Toruno Foundation for Educational Development to establish a 
center for at-risk children.  The Alliance for Crime 
Prevention (APREDE), supported by USAID, plans to spend one 
million USD to transform the retreat into a center that will 
provide job training and counseling to 500 ex-gang members 
and family members each year. 
 
Inter-American HR Court Hears Case on Massacre 
 
13.  (U) The Inter-American Human Rights Court heard the main 
arguments of the Plan de Sanchez massacre case, on April 23 
and 24.  The Guatemalan State is being sued for the 1982 
massacre of 268 people, most of them members of a Mayan 
indigenous community in the Plan de Sanchez village, in 
Rabinal, Baja Verapaz province.  Frank LaRue, the 
Presidential Commissioner for Human Rights, accepted 
responsibility on behalf of the GOG for the massacre during 
the hearing. 
 
Threats Against Torres de Colom 
 
 
14.  (U) On April 20, the Inter-American Commission for Human 
Rights ordered the GOG to guarantee the protection and safety 
of Sandra Torres de Colom, the wife of presidential runner-up 
Alvaro Colom.  Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales 
requested the Commission\'s support after Torres de Colom 
reported receiving several threatening phone calls and had 
been subject to surveillance by unknown vehicles in March 
2004. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17739","6/10/2004 22:38","04GUATEMALA1455","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE126919","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, KWMN, SOCI 
SUBJECT: ECLAC DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: SECSTATE 126919 
 
Acting PolChief delivered reftel demarche via fax and phone 
to MFA Multilateral Affairs General Director Carla Rodriguez 
on June 9, 2004.  In a follow-up meeting on June 10, 
Rodriguez expressed appreciation for the information and 
confirmed that she had shared it with the Guatemalan 
delegation to the Regional Conference on Women in Latin 
America and the Caribbean. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"17741","6/10/2004 23:24","04GUATEMALA1460","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001460 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA FOR DAS DAN FISK; WHA/CEN FOR LINDWALL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, MASS, MCAP, GT 
SUBJECT: BREAKFAST WITH BERGER:  PROGRESS ON MILITARY 
DOWNSIZING, STEIN TO VISIT, DEALING WITH HUMAN RIGHTS 
CRITICISMS, JOINT MAYA JAGUAR WITH BELIZE, OBSTACLE FOR 
FISCAL REFORM 
 
 
Classified By: A/DCM Steven S. Olson for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
1.  (C)  At breakfast with Ambassador June 10, President 
Berger expressed appreciation for U.S. assistance to date on 
military downsizing and accepted that we would need a better 
idea of how the money would be used before asking the 
Congress to unfreeze the $2.2 million of MAP funds.  Vice 
President Stein plans to travel to Washington the week of 
June 28 to help make Guatemala\'s case.  The military is 
impatient to see signs that \"modernization\" will accompany 
downsizing, but the government doesn\'t have the funds.  The 
Guatemalans have good arguments to counter reports of police 
violence during squatter evictions (representatives of the 
Human Rights Ombudsman were present in all cases and did not 
report violence) and hiring of demobilized military to 
strengthen the police (only enlisted men need apply).  Closed 
military bases may not all be sold commerically to raise 
cash, but instead could be sold in parcels with long term 
financing to resolve longstanding and complex conflicts. 
Berger was enthusiastic about a joint Guatemala-Belize Maya 
Jaguar exercise, perhaps trumping lower level reservations. 
Talks with leaders of recent demonstrations suggest that the 
fiscal reform process could take longer than hoped.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU)  Ambassador hosted breakfast for President Berger, 
Vice President Stein, Foreign Minister Briz, Chief of Staff 
Gonzalez, and Appointments Secretary Vila on June 10 at the 
Residence.  ADCM/EconCouns, AID Deputy Director and MILGROUP 
Commander also attended.  Berger had asked to meet to discuss 
assistance with his ambitious military downsizing plan. 
 
Military Downsizing 
------------------- 
3.  (C)  Berger was upbeat and confident that the personnel 
reduction in the military to 15,500 men and women would be 
completed by June 30.  The process was on schedule, and 
thorny issues such as financing pensions (the IPM) and 
severance pay had been settled.  However, he sensed 
uneasiness in the ranks that the promised modernization of 
the military was lagging.  This was feeding rumors that all 
the talk of modernization was only a facade and that Berger\'s 
real intention was to abolish the army.  The government had 
no resources with which to prove the doubters wrong.  He 
asked the status of U.S. efforts to help. 
 
4.  (C)  The Ambassador described the current state of play 
of the two initiatives currently underway:  the continuing 
support from the Center for Civil Military Relations in 
Monterrey CA, with the planned visit of MG (r) Dick Goetze to 
discuss an \"opportunity agenda\" for modernization; and the 
work of a SouthCom military assessment team, currently in 
country.  The Ambassador said that State and DoD had agreed 
to approach the Congress together to review the possibility 
of releasing the $2.227 million of frozen MAP funds, but the 
agencies wanted to be prepared to answer questions concerning 
how the funds would be used.  The SouthCom team currently in 
country was reviewing that question and assessing the 
military\'s most pressing needs.  It was also looking at the 
larger question of the scope and cost of transforming the 
military into the sort of leaner and more capable force that 
the President wanted.  Berger was clearly pleased.  He said 
that the military didn\'t need guns or ammunition; it needed 
the equipment necessary to carry out new roles such as 
responding to a natural disaster. 
 
Selling Assets to Finance Downsizing?  Not Always 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
5.  (C)  The Ambassador asked whether the sale of military 
properties could finance the modernization.  Berger responded 
that it could in part, but the issue was still under study. 
He did not want, a priori, to assume that selling closed 
bases was always the best option.  He planned instead to 
convoke local government and civil society to seek a 
consensus over the best use of land and any facilities.  In 
some cases, a commerical cash sale might turn out to be the 
best option, but he cited the base in Ixcan, Quiche, as a 
case where providing the land to local campesinos (i.e., 
selling it with appropriate long term financing) could prove 
the key to resolving the source of complex historical 
conflicts in that particularly troubled area.  He added that 
giving out land alone wouldn\'t work; there would have to be 
agricultural extension services and other follow-up by the 
government for the land to generate income. 
 
Stein to Washington 
------------------- 
6.  (C)  The Ambassador said that it would be important for 
the Congress to hear from Guatemala about progress in 
military downsizing.  There was widespread enthusiasm in 
Washington when people heard about Guatemala\'s plans, but 
some skepticism was inevitable until concrete results were in 
evidence.  The Ambassador encouraged Berger to use the coming 
visits of Codels Blunt and Shelby to explain his plans and 
describe the impressive results to date.  He also encouraged 
Berger to send his emissaries to Washington.  Vice President 
Stein told Ambassador on the way out that he would plan to 
take a group to Washington the week of June 28. 
 
What Concerns Washington 
------------------------ 
7.  (C)  The Ambassador previewed what he thought 
Washington\'s principal concerns would be when Guatemalan 
visitors presented themselves.  The human rights community 
was concerned by reports of 24 recent cases of evictions of 
campesinos from land they had occupied; by the reported 
complicity of the military in the escape from arrest of Mack 
case defendant Col. Valencia Osorio and continued failure to 
take him back in custody; and by the prospect of demobilized 
military joining and taking charge of the National Civilian 
Police (PNC).  Other areas of concern were transparency in 
the military budget, changing the Constitution and naming a 
Civilian Minister of Defense, and lack of progress on 
creating CICIACS. 
 
Eviction Violence:  Not True 
---------------------------- 
8.  (C)  Vice President Stein addressed the reports of 
evictions of campesinos from land they had invaded.  He said 
the reports of police violence, circulated by campesino 
activist group CONIC via its website, simply were not true. 
He said that a representative of the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s 
office had been present at each of the eviction sites and -- 
with one exception -- had filed no reports of violence.  He 
noted that pictures that had circulated showing campesinos 
standing by burned-down shacks and destroyed crops showed no 
evidence of a police presence.  All eviction operations were 
undertaken by uniformed police, and there were no pictures 
showing uniformed people.  He could not rule out that armed 
men appearing in some photos were members of private security 
forces of landowners where evictions took place, but CONIC 
was not alleging that private forces were the problem.  Stein 
noted that police did misbehave in one case after finding, 
and consuming, a stash of beer.  Berger said that the 
government\'s agreement with organizers of the June 8 
nationwide demonstrations called for a 90 moratorium on 
evictions to ensure that land dispute agency CONTIERRA had 
adequately researched cases and exhausted mediation 
possibilities and that court supervision of evictions was 
adequate. 
 
Ex-Military and the Police 
-------------------------- 
9.  (C)  Berger said that military troops were a natural 
source for recruiting rank-and-file police, as they were 
trained in using weapons and well disciplined.  He was 
categorical in declaring, however, that the government would 
not transfer former military officers into positions of 
command in the PNC. 
 
Belize 
------ 
10.  (C)  The Ambassador outlined U.S. thinking on a joint 
Guatemala-Belize Maya Jaguar counternarcotics operation.  He 
noted that traffickers had responded to a successful 
operation in Guatemala by shifting their flights toward 
Belize, with the result that the two following operations 
found nothing.  The traffickers could spot the movement of 
Chinook and Blackhawk helicopters in advance of the operation 
and simply change their plans.  The U.S. was therefore 
considering basing the helicopters in Belize but being 
prepared to chase tracks into Guatemala.  Berger said he 
thought it was a great idea and that it wouldn\'t be a problem. 
 
11.  (C)  Foreign Minister Briz commented that relations with 
Belize were getting better (after a bad meeting between 
Berger and PM Musa in Guadalajara and the recent hot pursuit 
of a helicopter by Guatemalans some 250 meters into Belizean 
territory, where it crash landed.)  He had sent an emissary 
to Belize to discuss recovery of the helicopter, and matters 
seemed to be moving forward.  He had also discussed the 
border issue with his Belizean counterpart at the OAS 
ministerial in Quito, and they had agreed to meet in 
Washington on July 16 and 17.  He agreed to receive the 
Ambassador on June 14 to discuss these matters further. 
 
Fiscal Reform 
------------- 
12.  (C)  Berger said that progress on fiscal reform was less 
encouraging than he had hoped.  Organizers of the June 8 
demonstrations with whom he\'d spoken June 9 were insisting on 
discussing in detail the components of tax policy together 
with the 2004 and 2005 budgets.  Berger commented, \"That 
would take all year\" and added that it was time to do quickly 
what was possible and move on to other things.  Berger vented 
briefly against the Chamber of Industries\' (Comment: Jaime 
Arimany, known for occasional ill-considered outbursts.  End 
Comment).  He added that opponents from the left \"had a 
point\" when they argued that if \"3 percent of the people make 
80 percent of the money, it\'s obvious who has to pay the 
taxes.\" 
 
Warm Welcome in Washington 
-------------------------- 
13.  (C)  Berger described his April-May visit to Washington 
in glowing terms.  He said that President Bush and Secretary 
Powell treated him \"as if we were old friends\" and \"knew 
everything about Guatemala.\"  He was evidently impressed by 
the extent to which the President and Secretary were briefed, 
and he was particularly struck by the Secretary\'s warmth and 
personality.  He expressed condolences for the death of 
President Regan and said a letter was on its way. 
 
Comment 
------- 
14.  (C)  Berger was chipper and upbeat.  His expectations of 
what we can do to help him with military downsizing appear to 
be grounded in reality, and he seems pleased with what we 
have done to date.  He was on top of the issues and had 
strong and immediate responses to the principal criticisms of 
his government that are circulating here and abroad, such as 
evictions (where Vice President Stein is a particularly 
credible spokesman) and inclusion of former soldiers in the 
police.  The one case where he couldn\'t deliver was the 
disappearance of Valencia Osorio.  He nevertheless appeared 
to take on board that it was an issue that should be pursued. 
 His reaction to a possible joint Maya Jaguar with Belize 
clearly caught Foreign Minister Briz by surprise.  Briz was 
still furious with the Belizeans days earlier because they 
wouldn\'t return the Guatemalan helicopter immediately.  With 
luck, Berger made the command decision that can help put the 
helicopter issue behind us (or at least to the side) and make 
Maya Jaguar work. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17793","6/14/2004 17:54","04GUATEMALA1464","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE125813","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM, ABUD, ES, GT, AROC, CWC, CBW, OPCW 
SUBJECT: GOG RESPONSE TO CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 
DEMARCHE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 125813 
 
 1.  (U) PolOff delivered reftel points to MFA Multilateral 
Affairs Director Sylvia Corrado on June 8.  Corrado asserted 
that GOG wished to respect its obligations to Article VII of 
the Chemical Weapons Convention, but that she was not aware 
of any current legislation.  Corrado will bring up the CWC 
Article VII obligations at an July GOG seminar on 
implementation of international agreements and treaties 
ratified in Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17826","6/15/2004 20:02","04GUATEMALA1477","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001477 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: GT, PGOV, PREL, US 
SUBJECT: TFUS01: REAGAN CONDOLENCES 
 
1.  Summary:  The Embassy received condolence letters 
addressed to the Ambassador from President Oscar Berger 
Perdomo and former President (1986-90) and sitting 
Congressional Deputy Vinicio Cerezo regarding the passing of 
former President Reagan.  The President, the Vice President, 
the Foreign Minister, and the Minister of Education also 
called to express their condolences.  The diplomatic corps 
and several other Government officials signed Embassy 
condolence books.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Unofficial English translations of the texts of both 
messages follow. 
 
Text of Message from President Berger: 
 
 
Allow me to express my condolences for the passing of Mister 
Ronald Reagan, former President of the United States of 
America, and permit me to ask you to extend our nation\'s 
condolences to your illustrious government and to the noble 
people of the United States of America. 
 
 
Text of Message from Former President Cerezo: 
 
 
Recently I became aware of the passing of Mister President 
Ronald Reagan, after a lengthy illness.  I personally had the 
pleasure and honor to share very special moments in the 
history of our two countries and Central America with Mister 
President Reagan, and I always appreciated his sense of 
history and the role that the United States of America should 
play in the world, particularly his convictions regarding the 
greatness of American ideals, as an example for the rest of 
the world. 
 
Surely on some occasions we might have had different points 
of view regarding issues of mutual interest, but I always 
perceived in his attitude that the philosophy that inspired 
his government would permit democratic leaders in the world 
to find common ground despite their differences, which 
convinced me then of the importance of trying to find points 
of convergence uniting our countries in mutual understanding. 
 
This allows me to testify to the important role that Mister 
President Ronald Reagan played in guiding the foreign policy 
of the United States of America in difficult times and 
contributing to the solution of these problems; I always 
respected his ingenuity, his wisdom, and his gift as a 
statesman and for this I offer tribute to the memory of one 
of the great presidents of the United States and of the 
world.  Allow me to offer my sincere condolences and ask you 
to send these sentiments to his family, and through the 
United States Government to the people of the United States 
of America. 
 
3.  The Embassy also received condolence letters from 
Education Minister Maria del Carmen Acena de Fuentes; and 
Carlos Ramiro Martinez, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
 
4.  The Embassy provided two condolence books.  One was 
located in the chancery and was signed by the diplomatic 
corps and other government officials.  Among those who signed 
the condolence book in the chancery were the Ambassadors of 
Korea, the Dominican Republic, Canada, Germany, Japan, Spain, 
the Holy See, Switzerland, Nicaragua, Norway, Argentina, 
Brazil, and Chile; and the Chief of Mission for the OIM.  The 
other book was placed in the American-Guatemala Institute and 
received notes from the general public. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17827","6/15/2004 22:29","04GUATEMALA1479","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE130442","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, GT, PDEM, UNCHR, ECOSOC, UN 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL VOTE AGAINST NO-ACTION IN ECOSOC 
 
REF: SECSTATE 130442 
 
1.  (U) Poloff delivered reftel points to MFA Multilateral 
Affairs Director Sylvia Corrado on June 14.  Corrado relayed 
demarche to the GOG Mission to the UN.  Corrado confirmed on 
June 15 that GOG will vote against any no-action motion on 
Belarus, North Korea, or Cuba resolutions raised in ECOSOC. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"17923","6/17/2004 16:44","04GUATEMALA1510","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE132250","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB/TIA GONZALEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ELAB, OTRA 
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR USDOL/ILAB OFFICIAL 
AND CONTRACTORS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 132250 
 
 Embassy welcomes proposed visit of Paula Church, U S 
Department of Labor/International Labor Affairs Bureau 
(USDOL/ILAB) Program Manager; and USDOL contractors Rodolfo 
Piza, Luis Guillermo Solis, Randall Arias, and Ron Venezia 
from July 1, 2004 to July 3, 2004.  Country clearance is 
granted.  The purpose of the trip is to attend the official 
launch of the USDOL project \"Cumple y Gana.\"  We understand 
no additional Embassy assistance is required regarding local 
transportation or hotels. 
 
2. Your control officer for this visit is Political Officer 
Nicole Otallah.  She may be reached at (502) 331-1541, Ext. 
4204 or on her cell phone at (502) 208-8265.  For assistance 
after Embassy business hours (5:00 P.M.) or in emergencies, 
call the Embassy duty officer at 331-2354. 
 
3.  Regarding reftel request, post has confirmed that the 
Minister of Labor will participate as a speaker at the 
\"Cumple y Gana\" launch on July 1, 2004.  The Ambassador will 
also speak at the event.  POL Intern Francis (Ned) Kelly 
((502) 331-1541, ext. 4636) is handling Embassy participation 
in this event. 
 
4. Mission hours of operation are 7:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. 
Monday through Thursday and 7:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. on 
Friday. Currency exchange facilities are available in the 
airport terminal. The exchange rate fluctuates; at present it 
is about 8.00 Quetzals to 1 U.S. Dollar. 
 
5. Current security regulations may limit visitor\'s access to 
USG facilities and to classified information and classified 
information handling equipment. Implementation of these 
regulations requires that the mission\'s regional security 
office be notified of the full name, Social Security number 
and type of security clearance, if any, held by the visitor. 
Without this notification, visitors will require escort in 
USG facilities and may not have access to classified 
information or classified information handling equipment 
while in Guatemala. 
 
6. Hepatitis A is endemic to Guatemala. We urge travelers to 
obtain a Gamma Globulin or Havrix vaccination before arrival. 
 
7. Guatemala City is at 5,000 feet and has a temperate 
climate: spring/fall weight clothing is most comfortable. 
From June to October it rains almost daily. 
 
8. A passport is required for travel into Guatemala. No visa 
or tourist card is required. A visa is required for any stay 
over ninety days, which the Travel Section will process upon 
arrival. An airport exit fee of USDOLS 30.00 or the 
equivalent in Quetzals is levied on all departing travelers 
bearing a passport other than Diplomatic. 
 
9. Crime Information and Recommendations:  The Department of 
State rates Guatemala\'s crime threat as Critical.  Violent 
criminal activity has been a problem in all parts of 
Guatemala for years, including a high number of murders, 
rapes, and armed assaults.  Well-armed gangs that sometimes 
use massive force and emboldened armed robbers have attacked 
vehicles on main roads in broad daylight.  Travel on rural 
roads increases the risk of a criminal roadblock or ambush. 
Travelers must be alert for car-jacking, road robbery and 
street robbery.  Traveling in groups and with multiple 
vehicles during daylight hours, carrying few valuables and 
using well-traveled routes are advisable.  If confronted by 
criminals, resistance may provoke a more violent response. 
Police response is slow and their capabilities are seriously 
limited.  Roadblocks and demonstrations frequently appear in 
Guatemala with little or no notice.  Most demonstrations in 
Guatemala have been peaceful, but some have turned violent. 
Avoid agitated crowds. 
Petty crimes are common, particularly within cities and 
tourist sites.  Buses are often the scene of thefts, 
intimidation and robberies.  Taxis should be used with 
caution; preference should be given to hotel-based cabs and 
known dispatcher services.  Mission policy is that any 
overland travel, except within the Guatemala City metro area 
or day travel to Antigua, must be coordinated with the RSO in 
advance. 
 
10. Security briefings.  All official travelers are required 
to receive a security briefing from the RSO or an RSO 
approved electronic or paper document via their control 
officer.  Travelers are encouraged to review the Consular 
Information Sheet, available on the State Intranet or 
Internet, prior to travel. 
HAMILTON 
"
"17928","6/17/2004 22:25","04GUATEMALA1519","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE120607","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001519 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI, EAID, PHUM, XL, XM, GT, UN, ECLAC 
SUBJECT: GOG RESPONSE ON ECLAC MEETING IN PUERTO RICO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 120607 
 
(SBU) PolOff delivered reftel points to Carla Rodriguez, 
Director of Multilateral Affairs in the Foreign Ministry, on 
June 17.  Rodriguez said that Guatemala would carefully 
consider its position on the language contained in the 
Santiago Declaration.  The GOG is currently reviewing a 
social development law of 2003 to determine whether it 
conflicts with aspects of the ECLAC Declaration.  Rodriguez 
emphasized that the GOG has no/no intention of withdrawing 
its ICPD reservations. 
HAMILTON 
"
"18089","6/23/2004 15:03","04GUATEMALA1550","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE132852","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001550 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EFIN, HA, PREL, GT, XLUM 
SUBJECT: GOG RESPONSE TO HAITI DEMARCHE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 132852 
 
On June 17, PolOff delivered reftel points to Carla 
Rodriguez, MFA Director General for Multilateral Affairs. 
Rodriguez responded on June 22 that the GOG hopes to send 
troops to Haiti, but will be unable to offer financial 
donations or other material support at this time due to 
budget restraints. 
HAMILTON 
"
"18095","6/23/2004 20:02","04GUATEMALA1555","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PHUM, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: PAYMENTS TO EX-PACS RULED UNCONSTITUTIONAL 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  The Constitutional Court (CC) ruled on June 
21 that payments to the ex-civil self defense patrollers 
(ex-PACs), authorized by the government of former President 
Alfonso Portillo, were unconstitutional.  After a week of 
public threats against the Court, the reaction to the ruling 
from ex-PAC groups was relatively muted.  Some declared the 
start of a new 30-day deadline for payment.  Others will meet 
this weekend.  Opposition leader Otto Perez Molina introduced 
legislation in Congress to authorize the payments.  Although 
the Court decision gave the Berger government an opportunity 
to back away from its commitment, President Berger promptly 
reaffirmed it, defusing threats of violent protest.  End 
Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) The CC determined that Portillo\'s November, 2003 
executive decree authorizing three payments of $218 to over 
500,000 ex-PACs required Congressional approval.  The 
Portillo government authorized and paid the first tranche of 
payments during the electoral campaign last year.  During the 
2003 presidential campaign, candidate Berger said that he 
supported payments to the ex-PAC.  The payments were legally 
challenged by human rights groups in 2003 and suspended by 
the court in January. 
 
3.  (U) The CC\'s 6-1 decision came after Court President 
Cipriano Soto and Magistrate Guillermo Ruiz Wong, both FRG 
allies, recused themselves from the case.  The lone supporter 
of the ex-PAC payments on the CC was Francisco Palomo, 
another FRG magistrate allied with FRG leader Efrain Rios 
Montt.  The press reported that non-FRG magistrates received 
intimidating phone calls before the hearing. 
 
Government Response 
------------------- 
 
4.  (U) In response to the CC decision, President Berger 
reaffirmed his administration\'s determination to make the 
payments, and announced that Deputy Peace Secretary Eduardo 
Aguirre will coordinate a committee to define the form of 
payment.  Berger said he would prefer the payments to go to 
projects to support ex-PACs in their communities rather than 
to individuals, but said the government would await 
Congressional action before making a final determination. 
 
5.  (U) Opposition leader Otto Perez Molina introduced 
legislation to Congress on June 22 which would authorize the 
payments.  He was accompanied by ex-PAC representatives to 
the session, and had publicly called for the ex-PACs to 
refrain from protest pending Congressional action, which he 
predicted would be swift. 
 
Ex-PAC Reaction 
--------------- 
 
6.  (U) After issuing a series of vague threats against the 
court in the run-up to the negative ruling, ex-PAC reaction 
to the decision was muted.  (Note: the ex-PAC are divided 
geographically and by no means monolithic.)  A threatened 
occupation of the Court did not materialize on June 22. 
Instead, ex-PAC leaders from the southwestern region 
announced a new 30-day deadline for payment.  Groups in the 
highlands announced a meeting June 26 in Panajachel, Solola 
province. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Initial fears that the CC ruling would provoke an 
angry ex-PAC reaction have diminished considerably.  In the 
past, ex-PACs had burnt tires, blocked roads and airports and 
taken hostages when disgruntled, but had generally refrained 
from violence.  The risk of violence subsided considerably 
with the announcement of the new 30-day deadline (all past 
deadlines have been extended), Perez Molina\'s Congressional 
action, and Berger\'s signal of support.  The Berger 
government has clearly decided against using the Court 
decision to renege on its commitment to compensate the 
ex-PACs in some way. 
HAMILTON 
"
"18153","6/25/2004 13:36","04GUATEMALA1573","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 001573 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, INL, DRL, PRM 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR ILAB 
AID FOR LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, GT 
SUBJECT: TIP BILATERAL MINISTERIAL MEETING RESULTS 
 
 
This is an action request for G/TIP.  See para 2. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador and Embassy anti-TIP team 
met with the Government of Guatemala inter-institutional 
group to combat TIP on June 22 to formally present the 2004 
TIP report and urge continued progress combating TIP.  The 
GOG\'s reaction to the release of the 2004 Trafficking in 
Persons Report was generally positive, although VP Stein 
publicly differed with the unilateral nature of the report\'s 
judgments.  The Ambassador conveyed Action Plan areas we hope 
to see progress in the remainder of 2004 and briefed the 
group on the Watch List interim report due in six months. 
MFA VM for Migration and Human Rights, Marta Altolaguirre, 
reaffirmed the Berger Government\'s commitment to combat TIP 
and described the GOG\'s new National Strategy against TIP and 
Alien Smuggling and Victims Assistance.  The strategy will be 
refined over coming weeks by a series of working groups, and 
will be presented with a request for funding assistance to 
the international donor community.  For our part, as we 
pressed the GOG for \"actions, not words,\" we were once again 
in the awkward position of reporting \"no decisions yet\" on 
GOG funding requests.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Action Request:  Embassy requests G/TIP support for 
pending project assistance for Guatemala to strengthen 
prosecutions and support GOG victims assistance efforts.  End 
Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
3.  (U) This was the Ambassador\'s fourth meeting with the 
inter-institutional group, organized at our request.  The GOG 
included 44 representatives from institutions from all three 
branches of government: high-level officials from the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Vice Minister of Government, 
the Supreme Court acting president, the director general of 
the Secretariat for Social Welfare, the Director General of 
the Immigration; and the governor of the province of 
Guatemala.  Officials from the National Civilian Police, 
Presidential Secretariat of Strategic Analysis, Secretariat 
for Women, Solicitor General\'s Office, and Department of 
Labor also attended.  This was the first time the GOG invited 
an NGO (ECPAT) to attend;  the IOM was also represented, as 
in a previous meeting.  The Ambassador was accompanied by the 
DCM, TIPCoord, HROff, PAOff, DHSOff, and an AID 
representative. 
 
4.  (U) In press outreach prior to the meeting TIPCoord and 
DHSOff credited the Berger government for its new commitments 
to combat TIP, which merited its inclusion in the Tier II 
Watch List.  Some political sensitivities remain on the GOG 
side, however, as demonstrated by VP Stein\'s public statement 
criticizing unilateral USG judgment of other countries\' 
performance on this and other issues.  VM Altolaguirre 
publicly welcomed the report, cited the urgent need to 
strengthen weak statutes against TIP-related crimes, and 
stated that due to resource constraints, the GOG will request 
international assistance to help victims. 
 
GOG Presentation 
---------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Vice Minister Altolaguirre opened the meeting and 
after introductions described the advances made by the GOG 
since the last bilateral meeting in February, including: 
 
-- Guatemala deposited the instruments of ratification of the 
TIP and Alien Smuggling Protocols of the Palermo Convention 
in the UN on April 1. 
 
-- The GOG signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Mexico 
to the Protection of Women and Minor Victims of TIP and Alien 
Smuggling on the Guatemala-Mexico border. 
 
-- The Directorate of Migration has entered into an agreement 
with the National Immigration Institute of Mexico for the 
Dignified, Secure and Ordered Overland Repatriation of 
Central Americans. 
 
-- On March 9, the Section for Crimes of TIP was created in 
the Criminal Investigative Service of the National Civilian 
Police. 
 
-- There are two proposals before Congress to broaden and 
stiffen sanctions against TIP and TIP-related crimes.  The 
government is considering developing an integrated proposal 
for comprehensive reform of the penal code. 
 
-- Since March, eleven joint operations (involving police, 
prosecutors, and immigration officials) have been carried out 
nationwide, with 217 women deported, two arrest warrants 
issued against nightclub owners, and 12 minors rescued from 
prostitution.  Prosecutors reported that five sentences have 
been issued against traffickers for the crime of pimping 
minors; the prosecutor\'s office has appealed one so far, 
seeking a stronger sanction.  (Note: Prosecutors earlier 
reported 23 cases opened against 17 individuals for 
TIP-related crimes.)  Police reported that in Guatemala City 
this year, there have been 306 detentions of foreign 
prostitutes (102 Hondurans, 97 Salvadorans, 96 Nicaraguans, 
five Brazilians, three Russians, one Costa Rican, and one 
Mexican; 25 people arrested for TIP-related crimes; and 10 
minors rescued from prosecution. 
 
-- The government will open a shelter specifically for 
integrated attention and social reintegration of victims of 
sexual exploitation in Coatepeque, Quetzaltenango province, 
which will have a capacity for 80 victims. 
 
-- The Secretariat of Social Welfare has developed a 
publicity campaign to prevent commercial sexual exploitation, 
with help from the Secretariat of Social Communication and 
from private sources. 
 
-- The Government has created a National Commission to Combat 
Sexual Exploitation of Minors and Adolescents, to implement 
its National Plan with the same goal. 
 
-- the GOG has developed a National Strategy Against TIP, 
Alien Smuggling and to Assist Victims. 
 
6.  (SBU) The goal of the National Strategy is to strengthen 
the capacity of the government to combat TIP and alien 
smuggling through coordinated efforts of government, 
international aid agencies and civil society.  The strategy 
includes eight priority areas, as follows:  legislation, 
prosecution and sanction, prevention, training, legal 
protection (of victims), information (sharing), and 
assistance to victims.  Goals have been developed for each 
area, and a sub-grouping of members of the 
inter-institutional group has been assigned responsibility to 
elaborate activities under each thematic area to achieve 
these goals (in addition, NGOs are to be invited to 
participate in the working group on victims assistance). 
Next steps include development and approval of a 
comprehensive Action Plan, which will be presented to 
international aid agencies with a request for financing. 
Implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the plan will 
follow.  General coordination of these efforts will remain in 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which will be advised by the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM). 
 
7.  (SBU) Immigration DirGen Oscar Cordoba emphasized the 
importance of the new accord with Mexico on dignified return, 
which will return Central American deportees from Mexico 
(over 160,000 last year, more than half of whom were 
non-Guatemalan, and increasing) to cities inside their 
countries of origin.  This will cut down on Guatemala\'s TIP 
problem which was exacerbated by Mexico\'s former practice of 
leaving deportees at Guatemala\'s border, where many fell 
victim of TIP.  Cordoba said the Directorate General of 
Immigration had radically changed its focus under his 
leadership toward respecting the human rights of migrants and 
assisting victims, and working in a coordinated fashion with 
prosecutors and police in operations.  He said the GOG is 
considering granting amnesty to \"regularize\" illegal migrants 
currently in Guatemala and would be seeking advice on how to 
implement such an amnesty program from the U.S. and Mexico. 
 
Ambassador\'s Response 
--------------------- 
 
8.  (U) The Ambassador thanked the GOG for its efforts, and 
noted that the recently-issued USG TIP report reflects our 
view that the GOG is committed to addressing this problem. 
The reports contrasts the performance of the current 
government with the previous one, and took note of the 
memorandum of understanding with Mexico, stepped-up 
operations to rescue victims.  The Tier II rating reflects 
USG confidence in the GOG\'s commitment; its inclusion in the 
Watch List requires us to update progress made implementing 
these commitments within six months and so gives Guatemala 
the opportunity to improve its standing.  The Ambassador 
described ongoing USAID support to an NGO providing shelter 
and vocational training to over 100 victims and potential 
victims of TIP in Tecun Uman on the Mexican border, and said 
we hope to hear soon about additional USAID funding to build 
on this project.  DOJ specialized anti-TIP training will be 
offered in Guatemala, currently scheduled for October (Note: 
since advanced to August).  He said we are also considering 
ways to support the work of the anti-TIP prosecution unit. 
Finally, the Ambassador praised the GOG\'s planned prevention 
campaign, and offered Embassy technical assistance in 
support. 
 
9.  (U) After praising the GOG\'s anti-TIP strategy the 
Ambassador requested that the GOG keep the Embassy informed 
over the next six months of: 
 
--progress on rescues, arrests, prosecutions and sentences in 
the next six months; he requested the GOG to designate an 
official who might provide these statistics. 
 
--collaboration with NGOs including Casa Alianza. 
 
--any GOG estimates of the number of foreign sex workers 
resident in Guatemala.  (DirGen Cordoba pledged to look into 
this.) 
 
--prosecution of a corrupt police official arrested for 
kidnapping and TIP-related crimes.  (VM of Government Angel 
Conte hinted there would be further revelations in this case. 
 Press reported on June 24 that the arrested official is also 
being charged with involvement in a car theft ring.  Note: 
kidnapping, car theft and prostitution rings are mainstays, 
with narcotics trafficking, of organized crime here. 
 
--progress in implementation of GOG collaboration with Mexico 
on TIP. 
 
--progress of legislative reforms. 
 
10.  (U) The Ambassador also suggested to Altolaguirre that 
the GOG build on this cooperation with Mexico by establishing 
a direct bilateral TIP information exchange mechanism with 
the governments of Ecuador, Mexico, Belize, Honduras, El 
Salvador and Nicaragua.  In response to a query from VM 
Altolaguirre, the Ambassador encouraged the GOG to keep USG 
TIP officials informed through regular visits to Washington. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  (SBU) The comprehensive planning and effort that went 
into the GOG presentation and strategy document is impressive 
and reflect the GOG\'s political will to combat trafficking in 
persons and is a good faith effort to seriously address 
trafficking.  In addition to the commitments expressed by the 
inter-institutional group, that political will has repeatedly 
been expressed by President Berger, Vice President Stein, and 
Foreign Minister Briz in meetings with the Ambassador.  The 
GOG is facing immense budgetary constraints and competing 
demands on the revenue base it is working hard to expand.  In 
this context we believe it essential to offer USG support 
where possible and look forward to early decisions from USAID 
and G/TIP on our funding requests.  It has become 
increasingly awkward to press the GOG for \"actions, not 
words\" while we have so far offered only words, not actions, 
on their requests for funding on victims assistance (USAID) 
and aid to the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Women 
(G/TIP). 
HAMILTON 
"
"18244","6/29/2004 20:47","04GUATEMALA1604","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001604 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/28/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: ATTACK AGAINST KAREN FISCHER REPORTED 
 
 
1. (U) On June 23, major daily \"Prensa Libre\" reported that 
Karen Fischer, former Special Prosecutor against Corruption 
and private plaintiff in the 1993 murder of \"El Grafico\" 
publisher Jorge Carpio Nicolle, was the target of an 
attempted assault June 19.  EconCouns contacted Fischer, who 
reported that three men were waiting in front of her 
Guatemala city home when she returned from her farm, and that 
one of the men had fired at her car, injuring a bodyguard. 
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACHR) will hold a 
hearing on the Carpio case on July 5, and Fischer believed 
that the attack against her could be related to the case. 
 
2.  (U) While in route to a political rally in El Quiche on 
July 3, 1993, Jorge Carpio Nicolle, founder of the National 
Central Union party (UCN), twice presidential candidate, and 
then Head of Congress, was stopped in his car and shot to 
death, along with three members of his campaign team.  Though 
surface investigations by the Public Ministry attributed the 
murder to an attempted robbery, human rights leaders have 
maintained that ex-civil self defense patrollers (ex-PACs) 
from Jocopilas were responsible.  Carpio\'s ex-daughter-in-law 
and former private secretary, Karen Fischer, has been active 
as a private plaintiff and spokesperson for the prosecution 
of Carpio\'s death, both in the Guatemalan legal system and in 
the IACHR. 
 
3.  (U) Guatemala press attributed the attack against Fischer 
to the upcoming July 5 hearing on the Carpio case in the 
IACHR.  Fischer was unharmed, but one of her bodyguards was 
injured and briefly hospitalized.  EconCouns spoke to 
Fischer, who told him that she was uncertain about whether 
the incident could be related to the IACHR hearing.  Fischer, 
who requested no assistance from the Embassy, reported that 
Attorney General Juan Luis Florido, Interior Minister Arturo 
Soto, and Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales had also 
called her to expressed concern. 
 
4.  (C)  MINUGUA official Tim Koenigs told the Ambassador 
June 23 that their initial inquiry raised some questions as 
to what may actually have happened.  He noted that Fischer 
had not reported the incident until a day after it happened, 
that she (a former prosecutor) had made no effort to secure 
the crime scene and that the lightly injured bodyguard was 
avoiding being questioned by police.  Koenig said the Office 
of the Human Rights Ombudsman had its doubts, too.  Fischer 
told EconCouns that she had assumed that the police would be 
notified by the hospital and had reported the shooting the 
next day after learning that the police were still unaware. 
To this point, the National Civil Police (PNC) and the Human 
Rights Ombudsman\'s office (PDH) have still not been able to 
question the injured bodyguard further to clarify his 
testimony.  Koenig said it may be difficult under the 
circumstances to determine the truth; stressing that he/his 
staff were speculating. Koenig said embarrasment over an 
accidental discharge may have led the bodyguard to come up 
with the version of an assault. 
 
5.  (C) The June 23 edition of Prensa Libre also reported 
that Frank LaRue, head of the President\'s Commission on Human 
Rights (COPREDEH) received a death threat against himself and 
Fischer in relation to the Carpio case.  However, LaRue 
downplayed the report to HROff, stating that though a 
anonymous  caller to COPREDEH did mention both individuals, 
he did not consider the call a genuine threat. 
 
5.  (SBU) On June 28, daily \"El Periodico\" published a paid 
advertisement from Fischer, thanking the PDH, Minister Soto, 
the international community, and others for their support 
following the attack.  Comment. The PNC have provided 
protection for Fischer coordinated by COPREDEH for the past 
three years and will continue to do so.  The silver lining in 
this incident is that it has drawn increased international 
and press attention to the outcome of the IACHR\'s upcoming 
ruling in the previously low-profile Carpio case. 
HAMILTON 
"
"18344","7/1/2004 22:15","04GUATEMALA1635","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA985","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

012215Z Jul 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO NP/RA, T, L, AND WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2014 
TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: POST SUGGESTS POSTPONING PROPOSED VISIT ON PSI 
SHIP BOARDING AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. A. GUATEMALA 985 
 
     B. B. SECSTATE 141034 
 
Classified By: PolOff Nicole Otallah for reasons 1.4, a,b,d 
 
1.  (C) While Post fully supports the establishment of a 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) ship boarding 
agreement with Guatemala, we wish to avoid overloading the 
MFA and Congress while other sensitive bilateral issues are 
on the boiler.  The MFA has recently indicated that pushing a 
PSI ship boarding agreement at this time could risk diverting 
attention from Article 98, still pending Congressional 
approval (Ref A), and generate a misperception in the GOG of 
overwhelming demands from the USG.  Therefore, Post suggests 
postponing the proposed visit by interagency PSI negotiating 
team (Ref B) until October or November, following hopeful 
passage of Article 98. 
 
2.  (C)  In the past year, Post has successfully lobbied for 
GOG and Congressional approval for the Maritime Agreement, 
Mayan Jaguar (giving permission to the US military to 
participate in joint anti-drug air interdiction operations), 
and Article 98 (supported by the Executive, but still pending 
Congressional approval).  Additionally, while not a USG 
initiative, we have strongly supported Congressional passage 
of a UN Commission to Investigate Clandestine Groups 
(CICIACS), which is hugely controversial.  Following these 
initiatives, Post believes that it would be prudent to wait 
until October/ November before presenting the MFA with 
another major agreement, on PSI, in order to avoid 
overloading the MFA. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"18381","7/2/2004 16:52","04GUATEMALA1641","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021652Z Jul 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001641 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA: TOLUI AND PARODI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, GT 
SUBJECT: FISCAL PACKAGE PASSED:  LESS THAN IDEAL, BUT 
PROGRESS NONETHELESS 
 
 
1. (U)  SUMMARY: The Guatemalan Congress passed on June 21 
and 23 the Temporary and Extraordinary Tax to Support the 
Peace Agreements (IETAP), reforms to the Corporate Income 
Tax, and reforms to the Tax on the Distribution of 
Alcoholic Beverages.  Reform of the value added and 
personal income taxes, and a new tax on bunker fuel, did 
not prosper.  The new tax measures are expected to increase 
tax revenues by Q2,200 million, but this is insufficient to 
cover the projected gap in the 2004 budget if the 
government were to do everything it says it wants to do. 
The government can still reach its 2004 deficit target of 2 
percent of GDP with continued austerity and improved 
collection plus deferral of big-ticket plans.  END SUMMARY. 
 
The Fiscal Proposal: Background 
------------------------------- 
 
2. (U)  The Fiscal Pact Technical Commission (FPTC) 
submitted a tax proposal to the executive at the end of 
April 2004 that included reforms to the income tax, a 
\"Temporary and Extraordinary Tax to Support the Peace 
Agreements\" (IETAP), reforms to the value added tax (IVA), 
a tax on the distribution of alcoholic beverages, and a tax 
on the distribution of bunker fuel. The key components of 
the package for revenue purposes were the income tax 
reforms, the IETAP (which essentially replaces the IEMA 
alternative minimum tax that was declared unconstitutional 
at the end of 2003), and reforms to the IVA to eliminate 
exemptions and, in theory, improve collection. 
 
3.  (U)  The FPTC\'s intention was to broaden the tax base 
by reducing evasion, eliminating exemptions, and including 
more individual taxpayers by creating new tax brackets at 
lower income levels.  A provision in the IVA reform called 
for large scale wholesalers and retailers to pay an extra 
three percent withholding tax on their purchases on the 
theory that it would encourage them to collect all taxes 
from sales to their customers to offset the extra amount 
withheld.  A wide variety of civil society organizations 
protested the personal income tax reforms on grounds that 
the burden would fall on middle and low-income families. 
Low margin wholesalers and retailers protested vigorously 
that they could not cover the additional three percent IVA 
withholding through taxes collected from their customers 
and that the reform amounted to an interest-free forced 
loan to the government.  The Chamber of Industries 
protested that the tax on bunker fuel would make several 
large companies uncompetitive.  After consulting with 
social, labor, and business groups, Congress decided to 
exclude personal income tax, the IVA reforms and the new 
tax on bunker fuel tax. 
 
Only Three Taxes Approved 
------------------------- 
 
4. (U)  On June 21 and June 23, 2004, the Guatemalan 
Congress passed IETAP, reforms to the Corporate Income Tax, 
and reforms to the Tax on the Distribution of Alcoholic 
Beverages.  The three taxes will enter into effect on July 
1, 2004 (the beginning of the next tax year, which does not 
coincide with the government\'s Jan. 1 - Dec. 31 fiscal 
year).  The IETAP will be a minimum tax on commercial, 
agricultural, and other juridical enterprises based on one 
fourth of net assets or one fourth of gross income, 
whichever is larger.  It will be applicable for two and a 
half years, and the rates will gradually decline from 2.5 
percent in 2004, to 1.25 percent in 2005 and 1.0 percent in 
2006.  Main reforms to the corporate income tax include the 
removal of the reinvestment allowance exemption and the 
establishment of new a fixed rate of 5 to 7 percent of 
gross income if companies chose not to apply the 31 percent 
rate on net income.  The tax year for the income tax will 
be shifted from a January 1 -December 31 fiscal year 
beginning in 2005.  Companies who continue to use the 31 
percent rate on net income must comply with additional 
auditing requirements, which might discourage them from 
using this option.  Companies that opt for the fixed rate 
on gross income will be exempted from paying the IETAP. 
 
5.  (U)  The first draft of legislation made the IETAP the 
primary tax on income for businesses subject to it. 
Businesses would then reduce their corporate income tax 
liability by the amount of IETAP paid.  EconCouns 
intervened with the Minister of Finance on behalf of the 
U.S. business community to allow the corporate income tax 
to be the primary tax, as the U.S. tax code would not 
recognize the IETAP as an eligible foreign income tax that 
could be credited against U.S. tax liabilities.  We have 
not seen the final language, as it has not yet been 
published, but we believe the matter has been fixed. 
 
6. (U)  The Tax on the Distribution of Alcoholic Beverages 
establishes a rate of 6 percent on beer, 7.5 percent on 
wines and other fermented beverages and 8 percent on other 
alcoholic distilled beverages.  The rate will be applied to 
the \"suggested sales price\" and not to the alcoholic 
content, as was originally proposed by the Executive.  A 
member of the FPTC shared concerns that the suggested price 
might be subject to local influence peddling aimed at 
lowering the taxable value and that imported beverages 
could be adversely affected. 
What is the Impact? 
------------------- 
7.  (U)  The new taxes will provide additional resources to 
the government, but they will not be enough to cover the 
fiscal gap of the 2004 budget as initially presented by the 
Berger Administration.  Early this year, the Finance 
Ministry had estimated a gap of Q9,717 million (Q8 = 
approx. $1), which would increase to Q13,713 million if 
other expenditures not considered in the 2004 Budget were 
added.  With the fiscal proposal sent by the Executive to 
Congress, tax revenues were expected to increase by Q3,162 
million in 2004.  However, since reforms to the personal 
income tax and to the IVA were excluded, the revenue 
increase is estimated to be Q2,200 million, or 1.02 percent 
of GDP. 
 
8.  (U)  The FPTC estimates that the Tax on Beverages will 
contribute around Q100 million, and the combined 
contribution of the IETAP and the corporate Income Tax 
reforms is expected to amount to Q1,300 million in 2004. 
The remaining Q800 million will be provided by 
administrative improvements carried out by the SAT. 
According to the FPTC, those Q800 million might also 
include part of the effect of the new fixed rate of the 
income tax, which was difficult to estimate separately from 
the IETAP. 
 
9.  (U)  Congress also passed a law that authorizes the 
placement of Q4,400 million in government bonds, which 
added to the Q2,200 million that would be collected as a 
result of the new tax measures gives a Q6,600 million, 
which would be insufficient to cover the projected fiscal 
gap.  Moreover, this amount does not include requirements 
to roll over maturing debt.  The public sector deficit will 
need to be around Q3,300 million, or half of the amount to 
be raised through new taxes and bonds, if the government is 
to meet its target of a public sector deficit of 2 percent 
of GDP.  That will require a combination of austerity and 
aggressive collection. 
 
Comment 
------- 
10.  (SBU)  The government\'s deficit projections have been 
intentionally alarmist as it pursued fiscal reform in an 
inexperienced and unfocused Congress that showed early 
signs of not necessarily wanting to cooperate.  The 
government clearly hoped to make more progress than it did, 
but it made progress nonetheless.  Income tax and IVA 
collections were up for the five months through May 2004, 
compared with the same months in 2003, and total revenues 
fell a modest 0.4 percent as IEMA collections dropped off 
sharply.  The decline in IEMA collections alone was more 
than 13 times the decline in total revenues.  The IETAPS 
will now replace what was lost with the IEMA, so there is 
every reason to expect collections for the full year to be 
better than last year.  In short, the situation is not 
ideal, but continuing improvement in collections and 
austerity in government operating costs, together with 
deferral of some big-ticket items such as compensation for 
former militias (ex-PACS) suggest that an overall deficit 
target of 2 percent of GDP is still within the government\'s 
reach. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"18382","7/2/2004 17:02","04GUATEMALA1643","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA1604","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001643 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: UPCOMING TESTIMONY IN CARPIO CASE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 01604 
 
1.  (SBU) On July 1, EconCouns discussed with former 
anti-corruption prosecutor Karen Fischer her upcoming 
testimony in the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACHR) 
hearing on the 1993 murder of Jorge Carpio Nicolle.  Carpio 
Nicolle was killed while traveling to a campaign rally 
(gearing up for his third run for President) in El Quiche on 
July 3, 1993 (reftel).  Fischer will be one of three key 
witnesses in the July 5 hearing.  She noted to EconCouns that 
she would testify that, as Carpio\'s private secretary, she 
received menacing telephone calls from General Jose Domingo 
Garcia (then Minister of Defense), who was demanding that 
Carpio\'s UNC Party vote for an amnesty for military human 
rights abuses.  Carpio\'s party voted against amnesty a couple 
of months before his murder.  During the meeting, Fischer was 
surprisingly quiet on the topic of the alleged attack against 
her on June 19 (reftel). 
 
2.  (U)  The Ambassador and PolOff met later in the day with 
Frank LaRue, head of the President\'s Commission on Human 
Rights (COPREDEH).  LaRue explained that Fischer currently 
has six, personally chosen National Civil Police (PNC) 
officers accompanying her, coordinated through the Ministry 
of Defense by COPREDEH.  LaRue will also be traveling to 
Costa Rica on July 5 for the Carpio IACHR hearing, as 
COPREDEH represents the GOG before the Court.  LaRue has been 
authorized by President Berger to take responsibility on 
behalf of the state for the lack of investigation into 
Carpio\'s murder.  LaRue also told the Ambassador that the 
IACHR has recently congratulated the GOG for its changed 
attitude, under Berger and LaRue\'s leadership, towards its 
responsibility in cases that reach the Court. 
HAMILTON 
"
"18504","7/7/2004 22:53","04GUATEMALA1668","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE146518","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001668 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KSUM, KCRM, GT, PREFL, KVCORR, KDEMGT 
SUBJECT: GOG RESPONSE ON TRANSPARENCY CLAUSE DEMARCHE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 146518 
 
 PolOff delivered reftel points to MFA Multilateral Affairs 
Director Sylvia Corado on July 6.  According to Corado, both 
Vice-Minister Marta Altolaguirre and Vice-Minister Carlos 
Ramiro Martinez will attend the July 8-9 Meeting of the 
States Parties to the Inter-American Convention Against 
Corruption in Managua.  Charge also attempted to contact 
Vice-Minister Jorge Skinner-Klee to discuss reftel points, 
but the Vice-Minister is currently out of the country. 
PolOff consulted several times with Corado on July 7, but the 
MFA has not made an official decision regarding their 
position on the inclusion of a transparency clause in the 
text of the Declaration of Managua.  However, Corado 
unofficially believes that the GOG will be able to support 
the clause\'s inclusion.  Corado will contact PolOff when the 
MFA has determined their position. 
WHARTON 
"
"18587","7/9/2004 17:13","04GUATEMALA1696","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091713Z Jul 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001696 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GOG GIVES NEW REPARATIONS COMMISSION 3.7 MILLION 
 
 
1.  (U)  Summary. President Oscar Berger formally installed 
Rosalina Tuyuc, head of CONAVIGUA (an organization 
representing widows and orphans from the civil conflict), as 
President of the National Reparations Commission (CNR) on 
July 6.  Berger also confirmed seven Commission 
representatives from the human rights community (named by 
consensus after a bitter two year dispute) and GOG 
representatives from, among others, the Human Rights 
Ombudsman (PDH), the President\'s Commission on Human Rights 
(COPREDEH), and the Ministry of Finance.  Berger presented 
Tuyuc with a check for 3.75 million USD (30 million 
quetzals), the first payment of 37.5 million USD (300 million 
quetzals) that the GOG has committed to distributing annually 
to victims of the civil conflict for the next 13 years.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (U) In addition to Rosalina Tuyuc, the Commission\'s 
members include:  Mario Polanco (GAM); Orlando Blanco (Social 
Movement on Human Rights); Miguel Sanic (CONIC); Ruth del 
Valle (Alliance against Impunity); Maria Toj (DEMA); Miguel 
Itzep; and Aura Elena Farfan.  During the ceremony, Rosalina 
Tuyuc announced that the first payment would be used to 
establish CNR regional offices around the country.  The 
Commission will determine who qualifies for reparations based 
on the reports of the Truth Commission (CEH), the Recovery of 
the Historical Memory Project (REMHI, published by Bishop 
Juan Gerardi in the Archbishop\'s Office on Human Rights two 
days before his 1998 murder), and information from other 
human rights groups.  The members of the Commission will be 
reelected in one year. 
 
3.  (U) The 3.75 million USD paid on July 6 was a small start 
to the total 37.5 million that has already been approved for 
the FY2004 budget, and which the GOG  committed to pay for 
the next 13 years (though later payments will depend on the 
next government).  After identifying the first victims, the 
Reparations Commission plans to use the funds to develop 
individual and community projects, instead of cash payments. 
According to the Executive\'s tasking to the Commission, 90% 
of the funds must go directly to victims. 
 
4.  (SBU) Comment: The selection of the civil society 
representatives for the Reparations Commission took over a 
year, and resulted in a bitter split between two factions of 
human rights organizations -- the \"Coordinadora\" (which 
includes more traditionally Mayan groups, such as GAM, 
CONAVIGUA, CONIC, Defensoria Maya), and the \"Instancia\" 
(which includes organizations more historically based in the 
capital, such as CALDH and Alliance Against Impunity).  The 
two sides arrived at a last minute consensus, replacing five 
individuals who were elected to the Commission during a 
disputed election in May 2003 with an even split of 
representatives from the two networks (Cordinadora: Tuyuc, 
Polanco, Toj, Sanic; Instancia: del Valle, Blanco, Itzep, 
Farfan).  Now, the Commission\'s members are trying to set 
aside personal differences to face the monumental task of 
deciding who will qualify for reparations and how to 
distribute funds to the families of over 200,000 war victims. 
 
 
5.  (U) Frank LaRue, head of COPREDEH, told HROff on July 8 
that he attended the first Commission meeting earlier in the 
day, and that two sides had, for the time, resolved their 
dispute.  LaRue also noted that COPREDEH, one of the 
Commission representatives, proposes to include the 
plaintiffs in 53 Guatemalan cases active in the 
Inter-American Commission of Human Rights in the compensation 
distributed by the 
"
"18588","7/9/2004 17:17","04GUATEMALA1698","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: CENTRAL AMERICAN PRESIDENTIAL SUMMIT 
 
 
1.  (U) Summary: Heads of state from member countries in the 
Central American Integration System (SICA) met in Guatemala 
City at the organization\'s 24th Presidential Summit on June 
29.  Summit representatives discussed reforms to the Central 
American Parliament (Parlacen), migratory issues, commerce, 
and security.  Parlacen heads of state agreed to reconvene in 
August in El Salvador to vote on the Parlacen reforms.  The 
governments of Costa Rica and Belize both stated that if 
Parlacen approves the reforms, they will join the 
organization.  The Ministers of Government will also 
reconvene in late July in Nicaragua to further discuss 
security issues and to complete an agreement facilitating the 
coordination of police forces in the capture and extradition 
of criminals. End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) The attendees of the summit included the Presidents 
of Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
and the Dominican Republic, the First Vice President of 
Panama, and the Vice Prime Minister of Belize.  Antonio Saca, 
President of El Salvador assumed the presidency pro tempore 
of SICA. 
 
Parlacen Reforms 
---------------- 
 
3.  (U) The Parlacen reforms did not pass during this summit 
due to lack of consensus, but representatives will reconvene 
in August for a vote.  The reforms include the reduction of 
Parlacens budget and number of parliamentarians, the 
establishment of clear functions and objectives, and the 
elimination of automatic seats and criminal immunity for 
former presidents.  Vice Prime Minister of Belize John 
Briceno and President Abel Pacheco of Costa Rica indicated 
that their countries would become members of Parlacen if 
these reforms were realized. 
 
Security Issues 
--------------- 
 
4.  (U) The SICA security commission (comprised of the 
Ministers of Government and their counterparts) focused on 
arms trafficking, extradition, TIP, border security, 
combating gangs, and crimes against women.  The Ministers of 
Government will meet in late July to discuss these issues, 
develop a coordinated program of prevention and societal 
reinsertion of gang members, and complete an agreement 
facilitating the coordination of police forces in the capture 
and extradition of criminals. 
 
Migratory Issues 
---------------- 
 
5.  (U) The discussion on migratory issues revolved around 
establishing a common customs procedure for all of Central 
America, facilitating easier regional travel for Central 
Americans, and negotiating an alternative to Temporary 
Protected Status (TPS) in the US for countries whose citizens 
do not enjoy this benefit.  In terms of standardizing customs 
procedures, the heads of state instructed their Ministers of 
Economy and Foreign Commerce to present a plan outlining the 
necessary steps within 30 days, with a plan to complete the 
standardization by December 31, 2004.  The heads of state 
also agreed to intensify regional coordination so that they 
could improve the living conditions for US migrants, reduce 
the costs of transfer for remittances, and lobby the USG for 
an alternative to TPS for countries that do not enjoy those 
benefits. 
 
6.  (U) Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua, also 
agreed to continue their efforts to facilitate regional 
migration of citizens.  During the summit they renewed their 
support of the Plan for Central American Migratory 
Integration (CA-4), which allows for easier ground and air 
movement by citizens of the CA-4 countries without passports. 
 President Oscar Berger told the press that the CA-4 
migration procedures will now extend to airports where, 
\"there will be a window saying: \'Welcome, Central Americans,\' 
and everything will be much easier.\" He also added that these 
changes will be implemented before August 1 of next year. 
WHARTON 
"
"18625","7/12/2004 22:55","04GUATEMALA1718","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

122255Z Jul 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001718 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR IO/SHA JOE BRACKEN AND SASHA MEHRA, DRL/MLA 
MICHAEL BUTLER AND LYNN SICADE, USUN MADELYN SPIRNAK AND 
MICHELLE ZACK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: SECSTATE 150754 
 
REF: GUATEMALA RESPONSE TO ECOSOC CUBAN RESOLUTION 
 
(SBU) PolOff delivered reftel points to Marco Tulio Chicas 
Sosa, Director of Integration at the MFA, and Diego Aballi 
Aparacio, Subdirector of Regional Organizations on July 12. 
Chicas Sosa agreed that the resolution on human rights 
presented in ECOSOC by Cuba was without merit and diverted 
attention from the work of ECOSOC.  Chicas Sosa told PolOff 
that Guatemala would oppose the resolution. 
WHARTON 
"
"18668","7/13/2004 23:49","04GUATEMALA1727","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GROUNDBREAKING CONVICTION OF MILITARY OFFICIALS 
FOR XAMAN MASSACRE 
 
 
1.  Summary. Fourteen soldiers were sentenced to 40 years in 
prison on July 9 for the murder of 11 civilians during the 
1995 Xaman massacre.  The Xaman killings were the last of 
approximately 626 massacres perpetrated by the army during 
Guatemala\'s 36-year civil conflict, and occurred only 
fourteen months before the signing of the 1996 Peace Accords. 
 Following a five year legal tug-of-war, the court found the 
defendants, including one lieutenant and 13 enlisted troops, 
responsible for the extra-judicial murders of eleven 
individuals and the injury of 35 others.  The July 9 Xaman 
sentence is the harshest judgment ever made against military 
officials for crimes committed during the civil war. 
 
2.  Background:  On October 5, 1995, an army patrol of 24 
soldiers, led by second lieutenant Camilo Lacan Chaclan, 
entered the Xaman community in Chisec, Alta Verapaz.  The 
Xaman villagers were among the first group of refugees that 
had returned from years of hiding in Mexico, after being 
reassured by the GOG that the military would not enter the 
community.  Unlike earlier massacres, in which the Guatemalan 
army deliberately targeted civilians while waging a 
\"scorched-earth\" campaign, the Xaman killings resulted from 
poor planning and training of the individual patrol 
responsible.  After a brief standoff with a tense crowd of 
unarmed civilians, the patrol opened fire.  Altogether, the 
soldiers killed nine adults and two children and injured 35 
others. 
 
3.  The Legal Battle:  The Public Ministry in Coban, Alta 
Verapaz, pressured by private plaintiff Rigoberta Menchu 
Foundation, initiated proceedings in the Xaman massacre in 
1998.  After almost a year, a three-judge panel sentenced 
twelve soldiers (including Lieutenant Lacan Chaclan) to five 
years in prison for homicide on August 12, 1999.  The other 
thirteen patrol members received only four years on charges 
of complicity. 
 
4.  Though the 1999 convictions were the first ever against 
military officials for crimes committed during the civil 
conflict, the human rights community, including the Menchu 
Foundation, was openly critical of the short sentences.  The 
Public Ministry appealed the ruling, and in December of 1999, 
the Coban Appeals Court increased the sentences of ten 
individuals to twelve years and fully acquitted the other 15 
(including Lacan Chaclan).  The Supreme Court overturned the 
December 1999 Appeals sentence in April 2000 and ordered that 
the fifteen defendants who had been acquitted the year before 
be re-arrested and retried.  However, police only captured 
four (including Lacan Chaclan).  The other eleven remain 
at-large. 
 
5.  Comment:  The Coban Sentencing Tribunal tried fourteen of 
the soldiers involved in the Xaman massacre in 2004, 
convicting all of them on July 9 to 40 years in prison. 
Human rights leaders Frank LaRue and Helen Mack expressed 
surprise and pleasure to HROff at the landmark conviction. 
Though the sentence will certainly be appealed by the 
defendants, the Public Ministry\'s victory in the Xaman case 
could set a benchmark for other massacre cases languishing in 
the legal system, including Rio Negro and Dos Erres. 
WHARTON 
"
"18721","7/14/2004 22:48","04GUATEMALA1742","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE152014","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001742 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, IS, GT, ICJ, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA RESPONSE TO ICJ ADVISORY ON ISRAELI 
SECURITY BARRIER 
 
REF: SECSTATE 152014 
 
Classified By: Nicole Otallah for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
Charge Bruce Wharton delivered reftel points to Vice-Minister 
of Foreign Relations Jorge Skinner-Clay on July 14. 
Skinner-Clay welcomed the US perspective and agreed to 
discuss our opposition to the UN resolution with Minister 
Jorge Briz.  He indicated, however, that Guatemala was likely 
to support the resolution. 
WHARTON 
"
"18722","7/14/2004 22:52","04GUATEMALA1743","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE132748","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, OTRA, OVIP, KSEP, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: 59TH UNGA - GUATEMALA ATTENDANCE STILL UNDETERMINED 
 
REF: SECSTATE 132748 
 
PolOff delivered dipnote regarding reftel to Marco Tulio 
Chicas Sosa, Director of Integration at the MFA, and Diego 
Aballi Aparacio, Subdirector of Regional Organizations on 
July 12.  According to Chicas Sosa, Foreign Minister Jorge 
Briz and Vice-Ministers Marta Altolaguirre, Jorge 
Skinner-Clay, and Carlos Ramiro Martinez will attend most of 
the event.  However, the MFA will not confirm delegation 
attendance until late August.  Post will update attendance 
information when available in August. 
WHARTON 
"
"18782","7/15/2004 22:28","04GUATEMALA1757","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE153876","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

152228Z Jul 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
IO/SHA - TOM JOHNSON AND SASHA MEHRA, DRL/MLA MICHAEL 
BUTLER AND LYNN SICADE, USUN - MADELYN SPIRNAK AND MICHELLE 
ZACK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL OPPOSE ECOSOC CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 153876 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 01718 
 
PolOff delivered Ref A talking points to MFA Multilateral 
Affairs Director Sylvia Corado on July 15.  Corado reiterated 
Guatemala\'s position in opposition to the Cuban Human Rights 
Resolution, strongly supporting our views (Ref B).  She also 
agreed to discuss with the MFA Vice-Ministers the possibility 
of informing Cuba of the GOG decision and attempting to 
persuade Cuba to withdraw the resolution before the informal 
New York July 16 meeting. 
WHARTON 
"
"18783","7/15/2004 22:51","04GUATEMALA1758","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE151661","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001758 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EFIN, HA, PREL, XL, GT 
SUBJECT: GOG WILL NOT ATTEND HAITI DONORS\' CONFERENCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 151661 
 
PolOff delivered reftel points to Marco Tulio Chicas Sosa, 
Director of Integration at the MFA on July 14.  MFA 
Multilateral Affairs Director Sylvia Corado responded on July 
15 that the GOG has no plans to send representatives to the 
International Donors\' Conference for Haiti.  The MFA had 
previously informed Post that they would be unable to offer 
financial donations or other material support at this time 
due to budget restraints 
WHARTON 
"
"18818","7/16/2004 18:37","04GUATEMALA1765","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA1641","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR TOLUI AND PARODI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, GT, UNCTAD, WTRO 
SUBJECT: TAX COLLECTIONS EXCEED TARGETS THANKS TO PROGRESS 
WITH CUSTOMS REFORM 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1641 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Tax collections are above target through 
June, despite delays in the fiscal reform.  The good news 
comes as a result of much better collections by Customs of 
duties and value added tax in the ports, the result of a 
shifting focus from physical inspection of containers to 
ensuring that all containers are systematically tracked. 
This shift in focus augurs well for revenues, combating 
corruption, and removing a key obstacle to more fundamental 
tax reform. 
 
2.  (U)  Superintendent of Tax Administration Willy Zapata 
told the press July 14 that preliminary data on tax 
collection for the first half of 2004 showed that revenues 
were almost 8% over the target, despite the substantial delay 
in passing tax reform and replacing the IEMA alternative 
minimum tax that was declared unconstitutional in December 
2003 (reftel).  The mid year target had been Q 9.3 billion, 
but actual collections were Q10 billion ($1 = approx Q8). 
Zapata was optimistic that the target for the year of Q21 
billion would be reached with the recent replacement of the 
IEMA with the IETAAP. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Zapata\'s special advisor on Customs Christian Ros 
and Customs Intendent Rodolfo Fernandez told EconCouns and 
Econoff July 7 that collections of duties and value added tax 
on imports had been increasing dramatically and were 
offsetting the revenues lost as a result of the court ruling 
on the IEMA, which took effect in the second quarter of 2004. 
 They said that preliminary information indicated that border 
tax collection for May was some 12% above the amount in May 
2003 and that June collections were up by over 20%.  They 
expected collections to continue to rise as new measures they 
were taking came into effect.  Ros said that under-valuation 
of invoices, the principal focus of the Portillo 
Administration, was not the principal source of tax evasion. 
The greater problem was the complicity of corrupt officials 
in the ports with organized smugglers, allowing containers to 
pass through the ports without a trace.  Ros\'s priority was 
to ensure that everything coming off or on a ship matched the 
ship\'s electronic manifest.  Containers leaving the port by 
truck also had to be in the Customs computer.  Smugglers were 
finding that they could not avoid the controls by sneaking 
containers around inspection points, and that was the reason 
collections were up.  His next step would be to ensure, 
through audits, that what is declared on incoming manifests 
matches up with what importers buy, produce and sell. 
 
4.  (SBU)  Comment:  The news is encouraging, for several 
reasons.  First, prospects are looking better for meeting the 
Berger Administration\'s target of a fiscal deficit no greater 
than 2% of GDP.  Secondly, Ros\'s approach to customs 
management marks a clear intention to shift from a focus on 
physical inspection, where corrupt customs agents have long 
practiced discretion to ignore what they see, to an 
information and audit based system where evasion and 
under-valuation are difficult.  It not only seems to be 
working by raising more revenues, but it is also better 
attuned to the concepts of business facilitation we are 
promoting in the WTO, FTAA and CAFTA.  Finally, effective and 
efficient management of Customs is something the private 
sector has long been demanding as a condition for significant 
tax reform.  The Portillo Administration, along with some in 
the international community, accused the private sector of 
rejecting its responsibility to pay its fair share of taxes. 
Private sector leaders have responded that they will pay more 
taxes, but not until massive contraband is eliminated and the 
playing field is leveled.  The argument is self-serving, but 
it also has merit.  An effective crackdown on contraband will 
remove the strongest argument that still exists for delaying 
effective fiscal reform. 
WHARTON 
"
"18929","7/20/2004 17:04","04GUATEMALA1783","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE154857","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001783 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KWMN, PHUM, SMIG, GT, XK, WM 
SUBJECT: TIER 2 WATCH LIST PLAN FOR GUATEMALA 
 
REF: STATE 154857 
 
1.  On July 16, Charge met with Vice Foreign Minister Marta 
Altolaguirre to discuss progress in fighting trafficking in 
persons, and what Guatemala can do to improve its standing on 
the Tier 2 Watch List.  Charge delivered all the points in 
reftel,  and Altolaguirre took careful notes of each.  Charge 
also left a copy of the Watch List Action Plan. 
Altolaguirre, who chairs Guatemala\'s interagency anti-TIP 
working group, was receptive to the actions recommended and 
noted that they reflected programs the GOG has already begun. 
 She shared with Charge a matrix of specific actions and 
responsibilities among GOG agencies that is the basis of 
Guatemala\'s anti-TIP plan.  Altolaguirre assured Charge that 
the GOG completely shares our goals and is fully committed to 
working with us and other nations to fight TIP.  She noted 
that lack of resources, especially to care for and protect 
victims of TIP, remains a serious constraint for Guatemala. 
WHARTON 
"
"18936","7/20/2004 19:44","04GUATEMALA1791","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE141379","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 001791 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA 
 
PASS TO USTR, TREASURY, AND COMMERCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, KIDE, KTDB, EFIN, ECON, GT, OPIC 
SUBJECT: Guatemala - July 2004 Appendix to 2003 
Investment Climate Statement 
 
REF: STATE 141379 
 
This appendix serves as an update to the 2003 
Investment Climate Statement for Guatemala.  It 
has been provided to assist investors in the 
interim period resulting from the U.S. 
Government\'s decision to begin publishing the 
Country Commercial Guide (of which the Investment 
Climate Statement is a chapter) on a calendar year 
basis, in January instead of August. 
 
The United States Government has reviewed the 2003 
Investment Climate Statement for Guatemala, and 
has noted the following changes that have occurred 
since its publication.  In most circumstances, if 
a portion of the 2003 Investment Climate Statement 
has not been modified in this appendix, it is 
because the U.S. Government is satisfied that it 
continues to reflect accurately the state of 
affairs in Guatemala as of July 2004. 
 
Openness to Foreign Direct Investment:  A new 
administration took office in January 2004, ending 
the atmosphere of confrontation that existed 
between the government and the private sector 
during the previous four years.  The Foreign 
Investment Law removed limitations to foreign 
ownership in domestic airlines and ground 
transport companies in January 2004. 
 
Conversion and Transfer Policies: No significant 
changes since 2003. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation: No significant 
changes since 2003. 
 
Dispute Settlement: No significant changes since 
2003. 
 
Performance Requirements and Incentives:  The 
IEMA, an alternative minimum tax based on assets 
or gross income, was declared unconstitutional in 
December 2003.  The Guatemalan Congress approved 
in June 2004 a Temporary and Extraordinary Tax to 
Support the Peace Agreements (IETAP), which will 
be phased out over three and a half years, to 
replace the IEMA.  Investors benefiting from the 
incentives granted by the Law for the Promotion 
and Development of Export Activities and Drawback 
are also exempted from IETAP during the 10-year 
Income Tax exemption period.  However, the Income 
Tax exemption will be eliminated if the U.S. 
Central America Free Trade Agreement enters into 
force. 
 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment: No 
significant changes since 2003 
 
Protection of Property Rights: High piracy rates 
remain an ongoing concern.  The piracy rate for 
software applications, as reported by the Business 
Software Alliance, increased to 77 percent in 2003 
(principally due to a worldwide change in 
measurement methodology). 
 
Transparency of the Regulatory System: No 
significant changes since 2003. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio 
Investment:  As a result of strong measures taken 
by Guatemala to combat money laundering, e.g., 
enactment of regulation to control offshore 
activities and establishment of a Financial 
Intelligence Unit, the Financial Action Task Force 
removed Guatemala from the list of non-cooperating 
countries in the fight against money laundering in 
July 2004.  As of July 2004, the Superintendence 
of Banks has approved the establishment of 14 
financial groups, 11 of which include licensed 
offshore banks. 
 
Political Violence:  No significant changes since 
2003. 
 
Corruption:  Illicit enrichment has still not been 
criminalized; although enrichment related to 
narcotics trafficking activity is now illegal. 
Several senior officials who served during the 
Portillo Administration are under investigation 
for their role in corruption scandals, and the 
former Finance Minister, Comptroller General and 
Superintendent of Tax Administration are in jail 
pending trial. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements:  Guatemala signed 
in conjunction with the other Central American 
countries a Free Trade Agreement with the United 
States in May 2004.  The Agreement is pending 
ratification from both the U.S. Congress and the 
Central American Congresses. 
 
OPIC And Other Insurance Programs: No significant 
changes since 2003. 
 
Labor: USTR closed its review of worker rights in 
Guatemala at the conclusion of the 2003 annual 
review of the Generalized System of Preferences as 
a result of positive steps taken by the government 
in conjunction with the recently concluded U.S. 
Central America FTA, which includes binding labor 
provisions. 
 
Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports: No significant 
changes since 2003. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics: Statistics 
will be updated in the next full revision of the 
Investment Climate Statement, which will be 
published in January 2005. 
 
Wharton 
"
"18973","7/21/2004 21:24","04GUATEMALA1811","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE152813","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001811 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, CU, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA UNLIKELY SOURCE FOR ASSISTANCE ON CUBA 
TRANSITION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 152813 
 
Classified By: PolOff Nicole Otallah, Reasons 1.4 (B,D) 
 
1.  (C) The Berger Administration is unlikely to push 
actively or publicly for democratic reform in Cuba.  Its 
primary focus is on internal reform and housecleaning.  Its 
roots are conservative, but it is trying to be seen as 
non-ideological, bringing business leaders and human rights 
activists such as Rigoberta Menchu together in the government 
to address serious domestic challenges.  It is avoiding 
public positions on world affairs unless it is confident that 
Guatemalans across the political spectrum will agree, or at 
least not care.  Pressuring Cuba in public is still not a 
safe subject here with the left.  Moreover, Guatemalans rely 
on the services of Cuban doctors, for which former President 
Portillo awarded the Cuban government the GOG\'s highest 
prize, the Orden del Quetzal.  Berger responded deliberately 
to Portillo\'s excess by making the Peace Corps the first 
Orden del Quezal recipient of his administration -- a fine 
and welcome gesture, but not the same as criticizing the 
Cubans or asking them to leave.  He has also sought to be 
helpful with Cuba (e.g., in the CHR and with the ECOSOC 
resolution) when it can be done in the distant confines of 
multilateral organizations and together with his Central 
American neighbors, but he will not be inclined to speak out 
forcefully in public.  It\'s a potentially polarizing subject, 
and further polarization is exactly what he is trying to 
avoid. 
 
2.  (C) Guatemalan NGOs are similarly focused on domestic, 
post-conflict agendas.  Many spring from the left, and their 
roots go back to the conflict and a Cuban-inspired rhetoric 
of revolution.  They have made excellent progress in adopting 
modern democratic thinking and discourse, but the arguments 
of class struggle have not gone away.  They are unlikely 
choices to be promoting democracy in Cuba while still finding 
their way at home.  Some groups on the right can be counted 
upon to demand democratic transition in Cuba as soon as 
possible, but -- fairly or not -- they tend to be readily 
dismissed by the left as those who were responsible for 
genocide.  The most serious and least ideological groups are 
utterly absorbed with building civil society in Guatemala. 
As with the Berger administration, most would support Cuban 
democratization, all else equal, but it would represent an 
unwelcome and potentially polarizing distraction from their 
primary tasks to do so publicly. 
 
 
WHARTON 
"
"19440","8/4/2004 23:06","04GUATEMALA1959","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUATEMALA1696","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

042306Z Aug 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: OAS SPECIAL ENVOY PRAISES GOG PROGRESS ON HUMAN 
RIGHTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1696 
 
1.  HROff attended a forum on August 3 co-sponsored by the 
President\'s Commission on Human Rights (COPREDEH) and 
Landivar University to discuss the GOG\'s impressive new 
acceptance of accountability in cases before the 
Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACHR).  In the front 
of the room, Frank LaRue, head of COPREDEH and GOG 
representative before the IACHR, and Susana Villagran, 
Special Envoy from the Inter-American Commission of Human 
Rights, symbolically sat side-by-side, both praising the 
progress that the GOG has made on human rights during the 
Berger administration.  In three IACHR cases against 
Guatemala during 2004, the state of Guatemala accepted 
responsibility for its failure to protect the lives of those 
involved and to fully investigate the crimes. 
 
2.  According to Villagran, Guatemala should be recognized 
for its compliance with the decisions of the IACHR.  Since 
January 2004, Guatemala has recognized responsibility before 
the IACHR in the 1982 massacre of Plan de Sanchez, the 1984 
disappearance of Luis de Leon, and the 1993 murder of 
Congressman Jorge Carpio Nicolle and three companions, and 
accepted the rulings made by the court.  Even more 
encouraging, the government has begun to act on those 
decisions.  Former President Alfonso Portillo agreed in 
November 2003 to hold a public ceremony recognizing the 
state\'s responsibility in the 1990 murder of Myrna Mack, and 
President Berger followed through on April 22, 2004.  On 
August 3, Villagran openly supported a COPREDEH proposal to 
include 73 cases against Guatemala, which are still being 
arbitrated by the Inter-American Commission, in the National 
Reparations Program. 
 
3.  Comment:  Frank LaRue has told the Ambassador and HROff 
on multiple occasions that he joined the Berger 
administration on the contingency that they would prioritize 
human rights.  Through his position at COPREDEH, LaRue has 
guided the change in the GOG\'s IACHR position, which has 
received praise from the OAS, the UN, and the European Union. 
 President Oscar Berger fully approves and supports 
COPREDEH\'s actions.  In addition, on July 7, Berger approved 
a 37.5 million USD budget allocation for the National 
Commission of Reparations, which civil society has sought 
since the signing of the 1996 Peace Accords (reftel). 
Serious problems remain, but the Berger government has begun 
to deliver on its promises for human rights. 
HAMILTON 
"
"19528","8/6/2004 22:54","04GUATEMALA1979","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001979 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: DISAPPOINTING COURT DECISION ON CICIACS 
 
 1.  (U) The Ambassador and PolOff attended the presentation 
of the Constitutional Court\'s decision regarding the 
constitutionality of CICIACS on August 6.  Disappointingly, 
the judges ruled that many of the robust elements of the 
agreement conflict with the Guatemalan Constitution.  Most 
significantly, the Court decided that CICIACS could not 
legally conduct investigations or prosecutions, noting that 
only the Public Ministry and Judiciary can assume these 
roles.  According to the Court, CICIACS could act as a 
co-plaintiff  in prosecutions, but with the same restrictions 
that apply to a private Guatemalan citizen (i.e. they can act 
only through the Public Ministry, the judge can remove them 
at any time based on an objection of the prosecution or 
defense, etc.).  While foreign CICIACS representatives could 
receive diplomatic immunity, Guatemalan employees would not. 
Additionally, the magistrates announced that CICIACS did not 
qualify as an international accord on human rights, which 
could have offered legal arguments for a much broader mandate 
under Guatemalan law. 
 
2.  (SBU) Comment:  Though Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio 
Morales and civil society publicly state that they will find 
new strategies to move CICIACS forward, the Court\'s decision 
narrows the prospects.  Privately, Claudia Samayoa from the 
Coalition for CICIACS and Morales were despondent and told 
the Ambassador and PolOff that they had little hope for 
salvaging the proposal.  The Ambassador told the Guatemalan 
press that the Embassy was \"disappointed, but that we 
respected the decision of the Court and would study their 
judgment further.\"  PolOff spoke with MINIGUA Political 
Analyst Jared Kotler, who said that the UN would still 
entertain GOG offers to negotiate.  However, today\'s ruling 
cut most of the \"teeth\" out of CICIACS, and UN donors are 
unlikely to invest in an crippled institution.  Post will 
further consult with the UN, GOG, and civil society to 
evaluate possibilities of reviving CICIACS. 
HAMILTON 
"
"19950","8/20/2004 16:51","04GUATEMALA2114","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, GT, KCOR, KCRM, MARR, PGOV, PREL, SMIG, SNAR 
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL SHANK\'S VISIT TO GUATEMALA 
 
1.  Sensitive But Unclassified - entire text. 
 
2.  Summary:  Staffdel Shank,s three-day visit to Guatemala 
gave the Congressional visitors an updated picture of the 
Guatemalan reality, through meetings with key GOG and private 
sector interlocutors.  The GOG representatives emphasized the 
Berger Administration,s accomplishments in the areas of 
military downsizing/modernization, anti-corruption, and tax 
reform.  Human rights activists were less positive about 
changes in the Guatemala military but conceded the goodwill 
of the Berger Administration.  Site visits to an Air Force 
base, a high-crime area, and a police station gave the 
visitors a first-hand look at the lack of resources that 
constrain Guatemalan counternarcotics and public security 
programs.  The message about resource constraints was 
reinforced in an Embassy briefing on counternarcotics/alien 
smuggling and in a meeting with the Guatemalan Minister of 
Government.  End Summary. 
 
3.  House Appropriations Committee, Foreign Operations 
Subcommittee (HACFO) Majority Clerk John Shank, HACFO 
Minority Staffer Mark Murray, and H Legislative Management 
Officer Steve Marchese visited Guatemala on August 10-12 to 
review U.S. assistance programs and meet with Guatemalan 
government and private sector representatives.  Staffdel 
Shank,s program included a Country Team briefing, reception 
with civil and private Sector figures, respective meetings 
with the Guatemalan Vice President (which featured a 10 
minute conversation with President Berger), Minister of 
Defense, and Minister of Government (Interior), and lunch 
with human rights activists.  Meetings with the Guatemalan 
Transparency Coalition and Congressional leadership ) along 
with in-house briefings on AID, counternarcotics and 
trafficking programs - rounded out the Staffdel program. 
 
4.  Following a meeting with the Embassy Country Team, the 
Staffdel traveled to the Presidential Palace, where Vice 
President Stein told the staffers that military downsizing 
was complete.  Repeating points made by Ambassador Hamilton 
in the Country Team meeting, the Vice President noted that: 
a) the reduction of the military budget to .033 percent of 
GDP was twice the .066 figure stipulated in the peace 
accords; the size of the military had been reduced by 66 
percent since 1997 ) twice the 33 percent reduction mandated 
by the peace accords; and that the new military doctrine had 
been developed through a process that included widespread and 
in-depth consultations with the Guatemalan civil sector. 
Stein also mentioned efforts to investigate military 
corruption and promote transparency, citing as an example the 
Attorney General,s sequestration of all military accounting 
records from the past four years. 
 
5.  In discussing assistance for the military, the Vice 
President was enthusiastic about the possibilities of taking 
advantage of the Excess Defense Article (EDA) program and 
told the staffers that Guatemala intended to seek access to 
EDA.  He also made a heartfelt pitch for release of old MAP 
funds.  Stein reiterated that the GOG was committed to 
CICIACS (the international commission to investigate 
clandestine groups) and was optimistic about gaining UN 
support for a redrafted agreement, although he was less 
confident about Congressional prospects.  At the end of the 
meeting, Stein led the meeting participants in brief drop by 
on President Berger, who was extremely cordial. 
 
6.  In their first meeting on Day 2 of the visit, the 
staffers traveled to Aurora International Airport for a 
briefing by the Defense Minister and walk-through inspection 
of military aviation assets.  Defense Minister General Mendez 
began with a presentation that detailed the downsizing of the 
armed forces over the past seven years, including tables of 
personnel strengths, and maps of unit deployments, during 
this time frame.  Mendez also explained how the Guatemalan 
military had shifted from a territorial deployment structure 
(consisting of military regions and detachments that covered 
the entire country) to one based on a functional structure 
(of regional infantry brigades with a pending rapid 
deployment capability).  After describing ongoing reforms in 
military administration and the military personnel system, 
General Mendez noted the various measures taken by the 
military, and the Guatemalan government in general, to assist 
demobilized personnel, and stated that the demobilization had 
been voluntary (i.e. with sufficient candidates to avoid the 
need for involuntary separations). 
 
7.  Air Force Commander General Santamarina led the visitors 
on an inspection of Guatemalan Air Force assets, including 
UH-1 helicopters, A-37 attack aircraft, and turboprop C-47 
and King Air transport aircraft.  The staffers learned that 
all A-37s were grounded due to damaged (crystallized) 
windscreens.  Almost all of the helicopters, and the majority 
of the remaining aircraft, were also grounded.  General 
Santamarina presented several anecdotes that described how 
resource constraints hindered military effectiveness in 
supporting counternarcotics police units. 
 
8.  The staffers, second site visit occurred in Villa Nueva, 
a poor, gang and crime-infested neighborhood in the northern 
part of the capital, and the location of an AID-funded 
justice center and a NAS-funded police investigators center. 
The staffers toured a local police precinct station, 
obtaining a first-hand look at the dismal state of police 
readiness and equipment given the size of the community. 
 
9.  A lunch with several prominent human rights activists 
(including Helen Mack) focused on issues of importance for 
the activists, namely transparency in the military budget, 
the need for long-term planning with respect to military 
downsizing and justice sector reform, the need for 
substantive government action on human rights cases, and the 
need for land reform to address inequalities in wealth 
distribution.  Mario Polanco of the Mutual Support Group 
(GAM) revealed that the military had turned over thousands of 
documents from the files of the dismantled Estado Mayor 
Presidencial.  The PDH had in turn sought staff support for 
the GAM to photocopy the files.  This work had been going on 
for seven months and &hundreds of thousands of pages8 had 
been photocopied so far, Polanco said, but no analytical work 
on the documents had yet been conducted. 
 
10.  CICIACS was one of the principal themes in the meeting 
with Transparency Commissioner Fuentes and other 
representatives from the Transparency Coalition.  In the wake 
of the Constitutional Court decision that struck down several 
of its key provisions, Fuentes announced that the GOG planned 
to analyze the agreement and then negotiate with the UN to 
reach agreement on an acceptable substitute.  Transparency 
Commission representatives then discussed the roles of their 
various organizations, and Fuentes explained that the Supreme 
Court received a large number of anonymous reports about 
misconduct by members of the government.  All of the reports 
were investigated, Fuentes said.  Of these, he claimed that 
70 percent were verified and 30 percent were found to be 
groundless. 
 
11.  Newly-appointed Minister of Government Vielmann gave the 
visitors a discourse on the problems of the police and 
justice sector, much of the blame for which he laid on the 
previous government.  Vielmann sketched out several goals, 
most notably improvement of the Police Academy curriculum and 
training as part of a general enhancement of police 
professionalism, strengthening of the administrative capacity 
of the police, and fighting corruption within the ranks of 
the police.  The Minister averred that Guatemala faced 
serious threats from organized crime, drug trafficking, 
international terrorism, and other forms of transnational 
crime.  He wanted to avoid a &Colombianization8 of 
Guatemala, pledged to work closely with the Embassy in 
combating drug and people trafficking, and welcomed any 
possible assistance from the U.S. Government. 
 
12.  During an informal dinner at the DCM,s residence, law 
enforcement and military members of the Country Team 
described Guatemalan counternarcotics and anti-trafficking 
efforts, with emphasis on the cooperation of GOG authorities 
in repatriation of third country illegal aliens intercepted 
on the high seas.  The staffers were also briefed on the 
nature of drug transits through Guatemala, a phenomenon that 
has left graveyards of wrecked and abandoned smuggling 
aircraft throughout the Peten region.  Country Team members 
also informed the staffers about the extensive maritime alien 
smuggling pipeline from Ecuador to Guatemala and highlighted 
Embassy concerns about the vulnerability to exploitation of 
this and other channels by Special Interest Aliens. 
 
13.  At a breakfast with congressional leadership hosted by 
the Ambassador, staffers heard concerns from the left (ANN 
congresswoman Nineth Montenegro) and the right (FRG 
congressman Antonio Arenales) about how Guatemala could best 
deal with its crime problem.  Congressional leader Jorge 
Mendez (GANA party) spoke about how inexperienced and divided 
the Congress was and how difficult that made passage of 
important legislation.  National Defense Committee Chairman 
Armando Paniagua spoke about the pressing need to improve 
Guatemala,s capabilities to act against international crime, 
including drug traffickers and alien smugglers. 
 
14.  The Staffdel did not have the opportunity to see this 
report before departing Guatemala. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"19955","8/20/2004 18:52","04GUATEMALA2126","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE176535","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002126 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/EPSC MARTINEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ENRG, XK, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN PETROLEUM IMPORTS FROM VENEZUELA -- ALL 
ON A COMMERCIAL BASIS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 176535 
 
(SBU)  The GoG does not purchase petroleum from Venezuela 
under the San Jose or Caracas Accords, and the PetroCaribe 
initiative is not even on the GoG,s radar.  The GoG is not a 
direct purchaser of petroleum for its power sector since the 
handful of electricity generators it owns run on renewables. 
Petroleum product distribution and thermal power generation 
are in the hands of the private sector, and they have not 
found any mechanisms for purchasing petroleum under the San 
Jose or Caracas Accords that offer advantages to purchasing 
from the commerical market.  Imports are of refined products, 
but we note that Duke Energy, an American electrical energy 
producer, is working on switching its San Jose plant from 
coal to Venezuelan orimulsion.  Guatemala imported an average 
of 6,045 bpd of refined petroleum products from Venezuela 
during the first half of 2004, according to the Hydrocarbons 
Directorate of the Ministry of Energy and Mines.  This was a 
little less then ten percent of total imports of 63,350 bpd. 
Venezuelan imports satisfy 12 pct of the demand for premium 
gasoline, 5 pct of demand for regular gasoline, 19 pct of 
demand for diesel, and 1 pct of demand for bunker C or fuel 
oil.  COMMENT: In Post,s judgement, petroleum does not give 
the Government of Venezuela significant leverage over the 
GoG. END COMMENT. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20038","8/24/2004 22:07","04GUATEMALA2146","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA1555","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002146 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND DRL/IL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, EFIN, EAID, MASS, SNAR, PREF, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN CONGRESS APPROVES PAYMENTS TO EX-PACS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1555 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  Guatemala\'s Congress has approved payments 
to ex-members of the civil self-defense patrols (PAC) that 
served as adjuncts to the Guatemalan Army from 1981 to 1996. 
The Congress agreed to pay the equivalent of about 665 
dollars in three payments to each ex-PAC between now and the 
end of 2006. The total bill could be anywhere from $100 
million to $830 million, depending upon the numbers found 
eligible for payment, and on the exact number of ex-PACs who 
already received the initial payment last year.  The fate of 
this measure remains unclear, with the possibility of a 
presidential veto and/or lawsuits challenging its 
constitutionality.  End summary. 
 
2.  (U) Under former president Portillo, the GOG in 2003 
began compensating former members of the paramilitary PACs 
for their service during Guatemala\'s 1960-96 armed conflict. 
Portillo\'s electoral year sop to the ex-PACs was politically 
motivated, and all the major presidential candidates voiced 
support for the initiative.  Human rights groups, however, 
challenged the Portillo initiative in court, and on June 21 
the Constitutional Court ruled the ex-PAC payments 
unconstitutional because they lacked congressional approval. 
 
3.  (U) Congressional action was spurred by threats from the 
ex-PACs to shut down the capital through blockades of 
highways, the international airport, and important government 
offices.  Beginning with the seizure of an oil refinery in 
the Peten in 1997, the ex-PACs have successfully used such 
pressure tactics to obtain movement on this issue, with the 
most recent action being a partial blockade on government 
offices on August 11 while Congress was debating the bill. 
On August 19, Congress approved a modified version of the 
bill, with 119 votes in favor, fourteen more than the 
required two-thirds majority. 
 
4.  (U) Eligibility criteria for the ex-PAC payments have not 
yet been set.  Reliable estimates of the funds needed to pay 
the ex-PACs range from 900 million to 2.4 billion quetzales. 
The potential pool of payees ranges up to 500,000, or even 
higher, since the PAC numbers reached a peak of 1.3 million 
in 1984.  (Many of the ex-PACs received an initial payment 
during the Portillo Administration, but payments were 
decentralized, thus making an accurate accounting difficult.) 
 Critics of the payment schedule who argued for an extension 
of payment period have warned that tax increases will be 
needed to fund this initiative.  For her part, Finance 
Minister Bonilla reported to the press and confirmed to 
EconCouns that the 2004 budget only provides 300 million 
quetzales for the payments.  Any amount above that would have 
to be specifically authorized by the Congress. 
 
5.  (SBU) One Guatemalan newspaper has reported a rumor that 
the U.S. Embassy wants to see a presidential veto of this 
measure because the U.S. believes that the payment is not 
called for in the peace accords, or, alternatively, is 
concerned about a resurgence of the PAC as an organized 
group.  Should this rumor gain any support, the ex-PACs may 
possibly target the Embassy for protests. 
 
6.  (C) Ricardo Saravia, the Congressional leader of the GANA 
governing party coalition, told the Ambassador August 20 that 
he considered the August 19 passage of legislation 
authorizing compensation to ex-PACs to be a defeat for the 
Berger Administration.  The bill was way too expensive, 
Saravia said.  It would break the budget and undermine the 
recently-announced Social and Economic Reactivation Plan. 
Saravia said that GANA had started with a plan that would 
have an annual price tag of 300 million quetzales for each of 
three years and had negotiated up to something over 400 
million quetzales.  Saravia estimated that the plan that 
passed would have an annual cost of Q1,200 million, once all 
possible recipients were taken into account.  He viewed the 
vote as a demonstration by the opposition that they had the 
muscle to do what they wanted when they pooled their votes 
together.  Saravia thought that the bill could be overturned 
on one of several procedural grounds.  He also opined that 
President Berger would have to veto the bill if it couldn\'t 
be overturned for procedural defects. 
 
7.  (SBU) Comment:  Although it is unseemly for Congress to 
be seen as caving in to heavy-handed ex-PAC pressure tactics, 
most Guatemalans believe the ex-PACs deserve some 
compensation for service which was involuntary for the 
majority of these veterans.  However, the financial burden is 
one that the GOG can ill afford at this time, and the 
Congress shirked its responsibility of determining a revenue 
source for the expenditure.  If President Berger does not 
veto the bill, we expect human rights groups will challenge 
the constitutionality of the payments. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"20109","8/26/2004 14:43","04GUATEMALA2163","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA1994","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

261443Z Aug 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002163 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, MOPS, GT 
SUBJECT: ARTICLE 98 RATIFICATION PLANS PROGRESSING 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 01994 
 
Classified By: Ambassador J.R. Hamilton for reasons 1.4 (b) 
and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The Foreign Minister is now persuaded that 
moving ahead quickly on Article 98 ratification makes better 
sense than leaving it to an end-of-legislative session rush. 
 The Ambassador\'s consultations with the FRG and Patriotic 
Party appear to have lined up their support.  If procedural 
tactics in opposition can be managed and if the government 
can deliver all the GANA coalition votes, majority support is 
attainable.  End summary. 
 
2. (C) Since reftel, the Ambassador has consulted on Article 
98 ratification with FRG deputies Arenales and Rios Sosa 
(separately), with GANA caucus leader Saravia, and Patriotic 
Party leader Perez Molina.  All have responded very favorably 
to the Ambassador\'s request for support, though each wanted 
to consult within party councils before making firm 
commitments.  The Ambassador has a meeting scheduled for 
August 30 with FRG caucus chief Crespo, at which time he 
hopes to obtain a firm commitment.  He will meet with UNE 
party chief Colom August 31 to explore the possibilities with 
that party and will follow up with Congress president Morales 
shortly thereafter.  The conversation with Saravia was 
particularly positive in that he was of the view that the 
government would be better advised to send the agreement 
forward sooner rather than later; he undertook to convey that 
view to FM Briz.  Rios Sosa was helpful in suggesting how to 
avoid having the agreement assigned to a committee where 
there is opposition embedded. 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador\'s meeting with Foreign Minister Briz 
August 25 was similarly positive, in that Briz concluded 
(apparently not yet having heard from Saravia) that it would 
be better to push the agreement through in the near future, 
rather than wait.  He and the Ambassador discussed further 
details, including his idea to have his staff draft a 
committee report from which a Congressional committee could, 
in the interest of time, crib.  He agreed to consult further 
once he returns from trips to El Salvador and New York, in 
about ten days.  The Ambassador will have carried out his 
further consultations with the Guatemalan Congress in the 
meantime. 
 
4. (C) Comment:  We are not there yet, but these recent 
conversations are encouraging. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20122","8/26/2004 21:06","04GUATEMALA2180","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KCRM, SNAR, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: GOG LOOKING TO KEEP CICIACS ALIVE 
 
 
1.  The Ambassador met with Guatemalan Transparency and 
Political Reform Commissioner Mario Fuentes-Destarac on 
August 20 to discuss the GOG,s plans to revise CICIACS.  The 
Constitutional Court,s August 6 decision eliminated the 
possibility for an entirely independent CICIACS.  Since that 
decision, Fuentes-Destarac, Vice President Eduardo Stein, and 
Attorney General Juan Luis Florido have developed a new 
vision:  a &super-unit8 within the Public Ministry, led by 
a civil society nominee and possibly staffed by international 
experts.  Though the Executive is still hammering out the 
details, Fuentes-Destarac described to the Ambassador an 
organization that would still have the power to effectively 
investigate organized crime and clandestine groups but also 
observe the confines of the Court,s decision. 
Fuentes-Destarac assured the Ambassador that such an 
organization, functioning within the Public Ministry, would 
be able to solicit judicial orders for wire-taps (a tool that 
the UN and other international representatives believe is key 
to successful investigation of organized crime). 
 
2.  Fuentes-Destarac also discussed the Cabinet,s current 
efforts to broaden the definition of conspiracy charges and 
strengthen the penal code on such crimes in observance of the 
Palermo Protocol on Organized Crime.  The Executive hoped to 
present proposed legislation to the Congress during the first 
week of September. 
 
3.  Earlier in the week, the Ambassador met with three 
representatives from the Coalition for CICIACS:  Helen Mack, 
Claudia Samayoa, and Orlando Blanco.  At that time (and to 
date), the CICIACS Coalition had not yet met with the GOG to 
review possibilities for reform to the agreement.  Members 
were discouraged by the Court,s decision.  The human rights 
defenders proposed discontinuing the fight for CICIACS and 
working directly with the UN High Commission of Human Rights 
(which has signed an agreement with the GOG to open a office 
locally) to develop benchmarks for public institutions, 
guided by the Palermo Protocols.  Though the Ambassador 
agreed with the premise of the benchmarks, he also urged the 
group to first analyze the government,s proposal before 
leaving CICIACS behind. 
 
4.  Comment:  Civil society and international consultants 
designed CICIACS with the capability to work independently of 
the Public Ministry in a large part due to lack of confidence 
in former Attorney General Carlos de Leon.  The appointment 
of better-esteemed Juan Luis Florido changed the equation, 
and a CICIACS-type institution could now more effectively 
function within the Public Ministry.  Civil society remains 
disheartened, but the GOG is strategizing on alternatives to 
the original CICIACS agreement and should be allowed time to 
formulate a proposal.  The GOG will approach civil society 
and the United Nations after developing a new strategy. 
 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"20174","8/27/2004 17:17","04GUATEMALA2191","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

271717Z Aug 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: HARBURY ASKS FOR EMBASSY\'S ASSISTANCE 
 
 
 1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador met with Amcit Jennifer 
Harbury on August 17 to discuss her concerns about the safety 
of the family of Otoniel de la Roca Mendoza, a key witness in 
the 2000 Inter-American Court of Human Rights case on the 
Efrain Bamaca disappearance.  Harbury asked the Ambassador to 
discuss the attacks with the MOD, to assist her in arranging 
a meeting with Vice President Eduardo Stein, and to provide 
guidance for humanitarian parole applications for 18-25 
individuals that she says have been the target of threats and 
violence.  We have since responded to all requests.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (U) Background:  In March 1992, Efrain Bamaca Velasquez 
was taken captive during a skirmish with the Guatemalan 
military.  Since that time, his wife, Amcit Jennifer Harbury, 
fought to determine his fate and -- once it became evident 
that he was killed in captivity -- to locate his remains and 
discover the truth about his disappearance and murder.  In 
December 2000, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 
(IACHR) found the Guatemalan military responsible for the 
detention, torture, and extrajudicial execution of Bamaca. 
The ruling required that the GOG locate the remains of Bamaca 
and return them to his family, pay $498,000 USD in material 
damages to the family, publish the IACHR sentence in the 
government daily and another national newspaper, and 
investigate Bamaca\'s murder and prosecute those responsible. 
End Background. 
 
3.  (SBU) During the 2000 IACHR case, De la Roca Mendoza 
testified that he saw Bamaca being detained at the Santa Ana 
Berlin military base.  In 1997, following threats on his 
life, De la Roca Mendoza moved to the U.S.  Since then, his 
wife, children, and siblings have also moved to the U.S. 
Harbury says that members of De la Roca Mendoza\'s extended 
family have been threatened and that four have been murdered 
in the last four years in revenge for his testimony and to 
still his testimony in more cases.  Harbury told the 
Ambassador that four cousins of De la Roca had been killed in 
the last four years.   (The Embassy has verified that at 
least the most recent two murders took place.  Our inability 
to verify the other two deaths should not indicate that they 
did not happen.)  She believes that three military officers 
named in De la Roca Mendoza,s testimony, Alberto Gomez 
Guillermo, Juan Oliva Carnera, and Napoleon Rojas, who were 
accused of involvement in Bamaca\'s disappearance during the 
IACHR case, are behind this intimidation. 
 
4.  (U) Harbury told the Ambassador that the GOG had paid 
material damages to the Bamaca family, but had not complied 
with other elements of the IACHR sentence, including 
returning Bamaca,s remains or publishing the full text of 
the IACHR sentence.  If the government did not complete these 
actions, Harbury said she planned to return to the IACHR for 
a compliance hearing later this year.  (She did not mention 
the IACHR,s order that the GOG fully investigate the Bamaca 
case and prosecute those responsible, on which no progress 
has been made.) 
 
5.  (SBU) Harbury asked that the Embassy convey to the 
Guatemalan military its concern for the De la Roca Mendoza 
relatives, that we support her plan to request humanitarian 
parole for 18-25 individuals who have been the target of 
threats, and that the Ambassador help her obtain an 
appointment with Vice President Eduardo Stein to discuss the 
case. 
 
6.  (C) The Ambassador personally asked Stein for the 
appointment, which Harbury attended on August 19.  Milgp 
Commander and DATT discussed the murder cases on August 19 
with MOD Chief of Staff General Bustamante, who committed to 
investigating further.  On August 25, the Ambassador 
additionally discussed the case with retired General Otto 
Perez Molina, asking for his help in passing a message to 
\"cease and desist\" to whomever might be responsible for the 
threats and killings.  The Ambassador also asked Perez Molina 
to consider how Bamaca\'s remains might at this date be 
located.  Perez Molina avoided making a firm commitment but 
remained thoughtful and attentive throughout.  DHS provided 
Harbury with paperwork for humanitarian parole and, now that 
we have verified two of the killings as related by Harbury, 
we anticipate recommending approval of the upcoming parole 
petitions. 
 
7.  (SBU) In a meeting with the Ambassador August 20, VP 
Stein said that the GOG recognized the importance of meeting 
all the terms of the IACHR decision in Harbury\'s favor.  He 
acknowledged that, although the GOG had paid in full the 
financial settlement, other elements of the court\'s decision 
still needed closure.  He understood that Jennifer Harbury 
was prepared to go back to the court with a \"compliance 
demand\" if the GOG failed to carry out the court\'s orders in 
full.  Stein indicated some surprise that the GOG\'s 
publication of a summary of the court\'s decision had not 
satisfied Harbury.  He said the GOG would therefore publish 
the full text of the court\'s decision, most likely in the 
government\'s register and as an insert in a leading 
commercial newspaper, such as Prensa Libre. 
 
8.  (SBU) Stein said the issue of finding and returning the 
body of Efrain Bamaca was \"complicated,\" but the Berger 
Administration would do everything possible to comply.  The 
Ambassador mentioned that Milgp and DATT were approaching 
Bustamante to encourage Guatemalan military cooperation in 
searching for, identifying and turning over the Bamaca 
remains.  The Ambassador said he intended to raise the issue 
with Otto Perez Molina, which Stein thought would be a good 
idea. 
 
9.  (U) Harbury met with the DCM August 20 before departing 
Guatemala.  She recounted her efforts, and noted that after 
moving De la Roca Mendoza\'s relatives out of Guatemala, she 
would renew her efforts with the GOG to recover Bamaca\'s 
remains.  The DCM reviewed what we had already done in 
response to her requests. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20175","8/27/2004 17:18","04GUATEMALA2192","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA2180","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002192 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, EAID, SNAR, MARR, KJUS, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL SIMON 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 02180 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  Jennifer Simon, Professional Staff to the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, visited Guatemala from 
August 21-25.  During her visit, Simon met with a broad range 
of GOG and NGO contacts, including Vice President Eduardo 
Stein, MFA Vice-Minister Marta Altolaguirre, Human Rights 
Commissioner Frank LaRue, Minister of Government Carlos 
Vielman, Minister of Defense Casar Pinela, human rights 
activist Helen Mack, Roving Ambassador Rigoberta Menchu, etc. 
 Simon\'s primary interests focused on AID projects and 
funding levels, human rights, CICIACS, military downsizing, 
TIP, and counter-narcotics.  Overall, the visit was very 
positive.  Simon\'s five-word summary of her conclusions from 
her visit was that Guatemala is \"on the right track.\"  End 
Summary. 
 
AID programs 
------------ 
 
2.  (U)  Simon visited a wide-variety of AID projects:  a 
Victim\'s Shelter located in a former military base, a Justice 
Center, non-traditional exporters Agexpront, and a women\'s 
Village Bank.  She said she was struck by the relatively low 
ratio of funding on a per capita basis for Guatemala compared 
with other AID missions in Central America. 
 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
3.  (U)  In various meetings, Simon heard that the levels of 
threats against human rights defenders peaked in 2002 but 
remain high.  Human rights leaders (Menchu, Mack, Blanco, 
Samayoa) expressed confidence in the intentions of Berger and 
Stein.  However, they also expressed concern about deep 
divides in both the Cabinet and Congress on issues such as 
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 
CICIACS, and ex-Pac payments.  Simon\'s visit came immediately 
after Congress passed a bill approving payments to former 
ex-Pacs, and she discussed both the moral issue and the 
fiscal impact of the payments with HR leaders and VP Stein. 
 
CICIACS 
------- 
 
4.  (U) In her orientation briefing with Country Team, the 
Ambassador described his recent meeting with Fuentes-Destarac 
regarding CICIACS (reftel) and summarized the GOG\'s 
developing plan to reshape CICIACS to work within the Public 
Ministry.  Though HR leaders expressed disappointment that 
the GOG had not consulted with civil society or the Human 
Rights Ombudsman since the August 6 Court decision, Simon 
left expressing belief that hope remains for implementing a 
CICIACS-like institution.   She told HR leaders that she 
hoped they would not give up on CICIACS. 
 
Military Downsizing 
------------------- 
 
5.  (U)  Simon discussed the military downsizing with VP 
Stein, Milgp and DATT, and human rights activists.  All 
praised the Berger government for quickly accomplishing a 
significant draw-down with little resistance from the 
military.  Simon also attended a breakfast hosted by the 
Milgp commander, organized for Human Rights Commissioner 
Frank LaRue (COPREDEH) and Defense Minister Pinedo to discuss 
Southcom\'s coordination with the Guatemalan MOD on developing 
a human rights initiative.  Ever since LaRue\'s translation 
for Pinedo\'s presentation in Washington, DC, the warm 
relationship between COPREDEH and the MOD has been striking. 
 
Trafficking in Persons 
---------------------- 
 
6.  (U)  Simon met with Vice-Minister Altolaguirre, who spoke 
of GOG efforts in the inter-institutional group to coordinate 
on TIP.  Altolaguirre discussed the scope of the problem, the 
need for dissemination of information to the public (the 
Secretariat for Social Welfare is currently spearheading a 
 
SIPDIS 
information campaign), and the MFA\'s work on a package of 
trafficking legislation (some legislation on increasing 
penalties is already being reviewed in Congress). 
 
Counter-narcotics 
----------------- 
7.  (U) Simon met with MOG Vielman and Vice-Minister Sylvia 
Vasquez, who discussed their plans to crack down on houses 
distributing drugs near school zones, the implementation of 
the \"Ley Seca\" (closing bars and clubs at 1 am), beginning 
large-scale investigations into major drug cartels, and 
sending a group of 100 police officers to foreign police 
academies for training to later form an elite force. 
 
De-briefing 
----------- 
 
8.  (SBU)  Before Simon\'s departure, the Ambassador spoke 
with her at the airport, expressing belief that US interests 
would be well served by release of the $3.2 million in MAP 
funds for military modernization, a Section 660 waiver for 
Guatemala in order to more effectively work with the national 
police, and maintaining/boosting AID funding.  The Ambassador 
stressed CAFTA\'s importance for consolidating gains in 
Central America.  The Ambassador also mentioned his recent 
meeting with Jennifer Harbury and her upcoming application 
for humanitarian parole for 10-25 relatives of Otoniel de la 
Roca Mendoza (witness in the 2000 IACHR Bamaca case) whom she 
believes are being targeted for threats and murder (Post will 
draft septel recommendation for approval of their petition). 
9.  (U) Simon did not have the opportunity to clear this 
cable before her departure. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"20183","8/27/2004 20:06","04GUATEMALA2201","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUATEMALA2180|04GUATEMALA2192","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

272006Z Aug 04
","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, MARR, KCRM, SNAR, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN VP STEIN MEETS WITH SFRC STAFFER SIMON 
 
REF: (A) GUATEMALA 2180 (B) GUATEMALA 2192 
 
1.  Summary and introduction:  Guatemalan Vice President 
Eduardo Stein received Jennifer Simon, visiting professional 
staff member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, at 
the presidential palace August 24.  Stein outlined GOG plans 
for salvaging CICIACS, explained the GOG\'s position on 
compensating the former paramilitary and answered Simon\'s 
questions about retraining recently demobilized members of 
the military.  End summary. 
 
2.  CICIACS:  Stein told Simon and the Ambassador that the 
Berger administration had not expected the Constitutional 
Court ruling against CICIACS to be so tough, but President 
Berger and his inner circle remained committed to the 
concept.  He said that the GOG\'s point man on CICIACS, 
Transparency Commissioner Mario Fuentes-Destarac, was 
reviewing the text of the GOG\'s agreement with the UN.  The 
intention was to determine whether something similar to 
CICIACS could be established, meeting the concerns of the 
Constitutional Court while maintaining the strength and 
independence of CICIACS as originally conceived.  Stein 
concluded that, \"with or without the UN, we need something 
like CICIACS\" to make headway on the organized crime and 
clandestine groups plaguing Guatemala.  (Note:  Prior to this 
meeting, Fuentes-Destarac told us that the concept was to 
appoint to the Public Ministry a \"super-prosecutor,\" 
nominated by civil society and staffed by international 
experts.  See ref A.) 
 
3.  Ex-PACs:  Stein bluntly admitted that the administration 
was \"deeply divided\" over the issue of paying compensation to 
the ex-PACs (Guatemala 2148).  He noted that the Congress had 
not yet sent the recently approved legislation to President 
Berger but, once it did, he would have 15 days to veto the 
bill or allow it to become law.  Stein said the registry of 
ex-PACs that had been submitted to MINUGUA listed up to 
246,000.  He thought that if this number went no higher, the 
GOG could still afford the payments, but he noted that some 
ex-PACs were claiming more than 750,000 were eligible for 
compensation.  There were at least three major legal problems 
with the legislation, Stein noted, implicitly suggesting that 
a presidential veto (and blowback) could be avoided by 
sending the bill to the Constitutional Court for review. 
 
4.  UNHCHR Office:  The Ambassador noted that the Human 
Rights Committee in the Guatemalan Congress had issued a 
report recommending approval of an agreement with the UNHCHR 
to establish an office in Guatemala.  The measure was still 
awaiting the approval, however, of the Foreign Relations 
Committee.  Stein said that President Berger, upon learning 
that the measure did not yet have the votes for approval in 
committee, had asked GANA members and allies to walk out of 
the committee earlier the same day, leaving the committee 
without a quorum and effectively suspending its vote on the 
measure. 
 
5.  Presidential Chiefs of Staff (EMP) records turned over to 
the Human Rights Prosecutor (PDH):  Simon praised the access 
provided by the GOG for the human rights community to review 
EMP records.  Although Stein modestly downplayed the import 
of the documents, Simon stressed the symbolism in terms of 
transparency, commitment and government priorities. 
 
6.  Military downsizing:  Simon asked about retraining for 
military who had been separated as a result of downsizing. 
Stein explained what the GOG was providing through a 
transition center with IOM assistance. 
 
7.  Ms. Simon did not have the opportunity to clear this 
cable before departing.  Ref B reports on the rest of 
Staffdel Simon\'s visit to Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20326","9/2/2004 17:24","04GUATEMALA2248","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002248 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KJUS, ASEC, SNAR, KCRM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: ATTEMPT TO DISLODGE SQUATTERS LEAVES 
TEN DEAD 
 
 
 1.  (SBU) Summary:  At least ten persons, including four 
police, were killed in an August 31 police attempt to remove 
several hundred squatters from a farm in southwestern 
Guatemala.  The squatters had occupied the farm to protest 
GOG inaction following the apparent disappearance last year 
of the farm administrator after an alleged dispute with the 
farm owner.  According to initial media and police reports, 
the squatters opened fire on police (who did not initially 
have firearms) with AK-47s and other weapons, thus provoking 
a melee that ended with four police and six squatters dead, 
and more than two dozen persons wounded, including fifteen 
police.  The Congress is summoning cabinet members to explain 
the government\'s handling of the incident and the police are 
conducting an internal investigation.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) According to police officials, the confrontation 
began when members of the Civilian National Police (PNC) 
attempted to evict squatters from two farms in Retalhuleu 
Department.  When the PNC contingent neared the Nueva Linda 
farm, it encountered barricades consisting of downed trees 
and burning tires.  The PNC Southern District Commander then 
reportedly pulled back his men and called PNC Headquarters in 
the capital to request reinforcements.  The PNC commander 
also summoned the judge who had issued the eviction order, 
the local prosecutor, an official of the office of the 
Guatemalan Human Rights ombudsman, and the Department 
governor.  The PNC commander claims that gunfire (which he 
recognized as AK-47 fire) erupted from the squatter ranks 
while he and the other GOG officials were meeting with five 
squatter leaders.  The GOG officials and the PNC forces 
immediately fled the scene.  Following the arrival of 
requested police reinforcements, PNC personnel attempted to 
surround the Nueva Linda farm to drive out the squatters, 
thus leading to multiple individual firefights between the 
two sides. 
 
3.  (SBU) The GOG also sent between 80-100 soldiers, one 
armored personnel carrier, and a water cannon to reinforce 
the PNC forces at the farm.  Several media reporters claimed 
to have been beaten by the police during the melee, and there 
is one unconfirmed media account of an extrajudicial 
execution of a squatter by PNC personnel.  The PNC internal 
affairs (OPR) office is investigating the entire incident. 
Congress is summoning Minister of Government Carlos Vielman 
to explain the police handling of the incident as well as 
Agriculture Minister Alvaro Aguilar and Human Rights 
Prosecutor Sergio Morales for their testimony. 
 
4.  (SBU) Upon learning of the outbreak of violence, the GOG 
dispatched a delegation that included Minister of Government 
Vielmann, Human Rights Commissioner Frank LaRue, and Roving 
Ambassador Rigobertu Menchu.  The delegation managed to 
persuade the squatters to withdraw from the farm.  Human 
Rights Commissioner LaRue told the Embassy\'s human rights 
officer that while he deplored the violence, he supported the 
GOG action because the government \"could not allow armed 
groups to fire on the police\" and had \"a responsibility to 
reestablish law and order.\"  LaRue said he believed the 
campesinos initiated the violence with homemade pipebombs and 
gunshots.  He said the police initially went in only with 
batons but required armed reinforcements when campesino 
resistance turned violent. 
 
5.  (SBU) A leading human rights activist told poloff that 
130 farms are currently held by squatters, and 40 have 
pending eviction orders.  As a result of negotiations with 
several campesino organizations, the GOG had suspended all 
eviction orders for a 90-day period due to expire next week. 
The Nueva Linda squatters did not, however, belong to any of 
these campesino organizations.  They were reportedly 
occupying the Nueva Linda farm not to lay claim to the land 
or to protest labor conditions but to draw attention to the 
GOG\'s alleged failure to investigate the disappearance of the 
farm manager, who was also a campesino leader. 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment:  We are following these events closely, 
and in touch with government officials, human rights 
activists and labor leaders to get as full and accurate 
picture of the Nueva Linda tragedy as possible.  Competing 
versions of events make reliable information elusive, and we 
are awaiting further details before reaching conclusions 
about the handling of this incident.  The confrontation at 
Nueva Linda received intense media scrutiny, and the GOG is 
appropriately seized with the issue. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"20609","9/14/2004 16:18","04GUATEMALA2351","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE187644","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/13/2014 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN RESPONSE ON ENDING STATE SPONSORSHIP OF 
TERRORISM 
 
REF: STATE 187644 
 
Classified By: DCM BRUCE WHARTON FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) & (D). 
 
1. (C) Embassy Guatemala polcouns delivered reftel points to 
Ambassador Anamaria Dieguez, MFA Director General for 
Bilateral Relations, asking that the GOG elevate the 
terrorism issue to the top of its bilateral agenda with the 
states listed. 
 
2. (C) Dieguez said the GOG does not have a substantive 
dialogue with North Korea, Libya, Sudan, Syria or Iran.  With 
Cuba, she said, the dialogue is limited to cooperation on 
health and education issues. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"20617","9/14/2004 22:31","04GUATEMALA2365","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, PGOV, PHUM, EFIN, KCOR, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN MILITARY COOPERATING WITH INVESTIGATION 
OF MILITARY FINANCES DURING PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT 
 
 
1.  On September 10, the Guatemalan Defense Ministry complied 
with a civilian court order and released to government 
investigators the military financial records from the 
2001-2003 calendar years.  The investigation is focused on 
allegations of mishandling approximately $115 million in 
military funds during these three years. 
 
2.  The release of documents was delayed by the Guatemalan 
Defense Minister\'s solicitation of an opinion from the 
Attorney General as to the legality of such a release, given 
that the documents in question had customarily been labeled 
as state secrets.  Although some media reports had sought to 
portray the Defense Minister\'s earlier action as an example 
of military obstructionism, the Defense Minister told us and 
others that he had no objections to the request but was only 
seeking to protect himself and the military from legal 
liability. 
 
3.  Illustrating that the Defense Minister\'s concerns had 
some validity, six retired senior officers (former defense 
ministers and former military financial chiefs) filed an 
injunction to prevent release of the documents on secrecy 
grounds.  The injunction was rejected but did add to the 
delay in document release. 
 
4.  Article 30 of the Guatemalan Constitution permits the GOG 
to classify any military or diplomatic information affecting 
national security.  The military had previously used a broad 
interpretation of this provision to withhold all budget 
documents from public scrutiny.  Under the Berger 
Administration, the military has made great strides toward 
budget transparency.  By the end of next year, the military 
budget should be virtually transparent (per pledges by 
President Berger and Defense Minister Mendez), as well as 
greatly reduced from recent years. 
 
5.  Comment:  One of the principal avenues of attack in the 
Berger Administration\'s investigation of corruption during 
the Portillo Administration is an examination of the defense 
budget, which was reputedly the source of serious acts of 
corruption that also damaged the stability and reputation of 
the Guatemalan military.  This particular document release is 
only one element of this investigation, which is also 
reportedly targeting specific expenditures by the now defunct 
Presidential Military Staff (EMP).  The current military 
leadership appears to be fully cooperating with the 
investigation of wrongdoing that occurred under prior 
military leaders. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20748","9/17/2004 18:13","04GUATEMALA2390","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE199611","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2009 
TAGS: CVIS, SMIG, KCRM, SNAR, ASEC, PBTS, GT 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT BUSH\'S REPLY TO PRESIDENT BERGER ON 
DEPORTATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 199611 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) & (d). 
 
1. (U) The Ambassador is seeking an appointment with 
President Berger to carry out ref instructions.  In the 
interim, the Ambassador took advantage of a previously 
scheduled meeting September 16 to provide Guatemalan FM Briz 
an advance brief, given that he and President Berger are 
leaving September 18 for the UNGA. 
 
2. (C) In the thorough discussion of migration issues that 
followed, Briz accepted the statistics showing that 
deportations had actually decreased from the previous year, 
that the U.S. was not singling out Guatemalan citizens for 
deportation, and that U.S. immigration policy was not 
unreasonable. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"20749","9/17/2004 18:14","04GUATEMALA2391","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE197337","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171814Z Sep 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002391 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2009 
TAGS: EAID, EFIN, ECON, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON WORLD HUNGER SUMMIT 
 
REF: STATE 197337 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) & (d). 
 
1. (U) The Ambassador took advantage of a previously 
scheduled meeting with Guatemalan FM Briz to deliver reftel 
points. 
 
2. (U) The Ambassador reviewed the USG\'s commitment to 
fighting hunger and alleviating poverty, noting that 
President Bush had already increased ODA by 50 percent.  He 
stressed, however, that the impractical ideas (such as global 
taxes) raised in the Hunger Summit sponsors\' technical paper 
threatened to take the international debate on development 
policy in an unhelpful direction. 
 
3. (C) Briz said he had not seen the technical paper prepared 
by the summit sponsors and appeared to be unfamiliar with the 
details of the proposal.  He noted that the sponsors were not 
only Brazil but France, Chile and Spain.  Without making any 
firm commitment, he was generally receptive to the 
Ambassador\'s demarche. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20793","9/20/2004 22:36","04GUATEMALA2406","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE200879","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR PM/WRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KHDP, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: INFORMATION ON U.S. MANUFACTURED 
LANDMINES 
 
REF: STATE 200879 
 
Per Reftel Action Request, PolOff called on local OAS 
Demining office to seek information on current landmine 
clearance operations.  OAS representative Guillermo Pacheco 
reported that current operations deal almost entirely with 
unexploded ordnance, with few, if any, landmines being 
recovered.  Pacheco added that U.S. manufactured mines were 
not encountered during past operations as most mines used by 
the guerrillas were of \"homemade\" manufacture, and goverment 
access to U.S. mines was restricted due to conflict-era bans 
on U.S. military assistance to Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20839","9/21/2004 19:05","04GUATEMALA2415","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE163453","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211905Z Sep 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002415 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, EAID, PHUM, SOCI, GT 
SUBJECT: CHILD LABOR UPDATE: GUATEMALA 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 163453 
 
     B. 03 GUATEMAL 02108 
     C. 02 GUATEMALA 2682 
 
 1.  Summary: Significant child labor developments in 
Guatemala over the past year include the introduction in 
Congress of legislation raising the minimum age to work and 
NGO efforts to help children leave the fireworks industry for 
less hazardous jobs.   ILO-IPEC programs launched since 2001 
aim to eliminate child labor in agriculture, one of the mayor 
industries for child labor.  The Interamerican Commission on 
Human Rights noted that, with ILO-IPEC backing, the GOG 
offered scholarships and free meals in late 2003 to encourage 
families to send children to school instead of into the work 
force.  US DOL is also providing almost $8.3 million in 
grants to eliminate child labor in the agriculture sector and 
fireworks industry.  Still an ILO-IPEC report on child labor 
in Guatemala, released in July 2004, reveals that 23.8% of 
children between ages 10-14 participate in the workforce. End 
Summary 
 
Legislation introduced on minimum age to work 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2.    On November 19, 2003, then-President Alfonso Portillo 
sent Congress legislation to approve ILO Convention 138 on 
the minimum age for employment.  Once approved, the new law 
will raise the minimum age for employment from 14 to 15 years 
old.  The bill stipulates that children under 14 can only 
work under extraordinary circumstances.  If the source of 
employment involved hazardous conditions or questionable 
morality (i.e. prostitution, which is legal in Guatemala), 
minimum age would be 18. 
 
3.  These regulations are especially applicable in mines, 
gravel production factories, sweatshops, construction sites, 
electricity, gas and water supplier businesses, warehouses, 
agriculture activities and transportation.  The bill is still 
in the Congressional Foreign Affairs Committee. 
 
ILO-IPEC programs to eradicate child labor in Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
4.  From September 2003 to June 2005, an ILO-IPEC project is 
working to prevent and eradicate child labor in the fireworks 
industry in San Juan and San Raymundo, Guatemala.  The 
objective involves persuading children and teenagers to stay 
in school and launching community projects to help families 
avoid resorting to putting their children to work. 
 
5.  Another ILO-IPEC project, which runs from September 2001 
to November 2004, focuses on eradicating child labor in 
gravel production in Retalhuleu.  An ILO-IPEC project, 
spanning from October 2000 to December 2003, was designed to 
eliminate child labor in broccoli production in Baja Verapaz 
by providing the children with education and other 
alternatives to work.  The coffee sector is also being 
covered by a similar project. 
 
Children, major work force in firecracker industry 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6.  In 2004, the Ministry of Labor approved a set of 
technical safety regulations to operate fireworks factories. 
The norms will go into effect in 2005.  The Ministry of 
Education also initiated a program to facilitate educational 
materials for minors who do not attend school and are 
employed in fireworks factories. 
 
7.  Children of seven years of age and younger are still 
employed in fireworks factories, many of which are 
underground firms.  One case reported by AFP indicates that 
some of these children study in the morning and work in the 
afternoon (though most work fulltime).  According to Boris 
Galvan, coordinator for the Integral Support Association 
(ASI),a child could earn a total of $6.40 dollars per week 
working part-time and producing 25 pounds of firecrackers a 
week. 
 
8.  According to press reports, this business is profitable 
for employers, generating approximately $4 million USD a 
year, but dangerous for employees.  Galvan states that most 
children work fulltime, and estimates that some 30 children 
die each year in incidents related to fireworks manufacturing. 
 
9.  In San Juan Sacatepequez, 50 kilometers from Guatemala 
City, an estimated 3,500 homes (mostly indigenous households 
with five to six children) serve as workshops where some 
10,000 people (including 5,000 children, according to some 
NGOs) manufacture fireworks.  Many work on 12-hour shifts, or 
longer, because they are paid per product, not by the hour. 
However, Galvan pointed out the success of ASI in persuading 
at least 400 families since late 2001 to abandon this 
business and to engage in less hazardous productive 
activities, after helping them gain access to small loans 
with ILO support. 
10.  Other press reports indicate that only 46 fireworks 
producers are legally registered, an estimated 1.31 per cent 
of all operating factories.  In factories, minors are exposed 
to toxic, flammable, and explosive materials, aside from poor 
hygiene and safety conditions. 
 
 
IACHR highlights GOG,s efforts to fight child labor 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
11.  In its 2003 country report, the Interamerican Commission 
on Human Rights (IACHR) noted that, with ILO-IPEC backing, 
the GOG offered scholarships and free meals in 2003 and 2004 
to encourage families to send children who had formerly 
worked in broccoli, coffee, gravel and fireworks industries 
to school instead of into the work force (in San Marcos, 
Retalhuleu, and other municipalities).  The GOG did not 
provide the IACHR with the number of children benefited by 
this plan.  Minors engaged in child labor attend school an 
average of 1.78 years, which is half the average for the 
children who are not employed.  According to the Ministry of 
Education, 89% of children from ages 7-12 attended public 
school in 2003.  However, only 30% of children 13-15 and 16% 
of children 16-18 were registered in the public school 
system. 
 
12.  In 2003, the Ministry of Labor, along with other state 
institutions and NGOs, joined the National Network to 
Eliminate Child Labor in Dangerous Work Environments. 
However, the IACHR noted in December 2003 that the GOG does 
not fully comply with internal legislation or international 
agreements. 
 
13.  In 2003, the GOG launched the Educational Program for 
Working Boys and Girls (PENNAT) in markets, parks, and 
streets in both urban and rural areas.  As part of this 
program, the Ministry of Education distributes 
educational/teaching materials to working children on topics 
normally covered in primary school. 
 
 
USDOL grants aimed at eliminating child labor 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
14.  In FY 2003, US DOL provided $3 million to the ILO/IPEC 
to carry out a project in Guatemala and other Central 
American countries to combat child labor in the agricultural 
sector. 
 
15.  In FY 2003, the US DOL provided $307,000 to ILO/IPEC to 
implement phase II of a project targeting children working in 
the fireworks industry in Guatemala. 
 
16.  With FY 2003 funds, and through the Child Labor 
Education Initiative grant program, USDOL is exploring the 
possibility of funding a $5 million USD regional project 
aimed at providing basic, prevocational, vocational, and 
technical education to children working or at-risk of working 
in the worst forms of child labor.  The regional program 
included Guatemala, among other Central American countries. 
The allocation of funds per country will depend on the 
individual needs of each country.  USDOL anticipates funding 
this project by September 30, 2004. 
 
17.  Letters conveying DOL\'s interest in this regional 
project were sent to the Ministers of Education and Labor in 
Central America.  A DOL representative visited Guatemala in 
October 2003 to meet with Ministry of Education and Labor 
officials to discuss this possible project.  The GOG 
expressed interest in this project. 
 
Much Remains To Be Done 
----------------------- 
 
18.  An ILO study indicates that 23.8% of Guatemalan children 
between ages 10 to 14 are employed.  Bruce Harris, head of 
Casa Alianza, indicates that official Guatemalan GDP figures 
rest on results produced by a workforce that includes 
children as young as 12 years old. 
 
19.  In July 2004, the ILO-IPEC (International Labor 
Organization-International Program on the Elimination of 
Child Labor) published the results of the Child Labor Survey 
in Guatemala covering statistics compiled from July to 
December 2000.  According to the ILO,s data, 23.4% of 
children aged 5-17 years work (a total of 937,530 children). 
The survey notes that 91.7% of working children claim that 
they began working before they turned 15 years old.  Seventy 
three per cent of working children live in rural areas.  The 
agricultural, hunting, forestry and fishing industries 
include 55.8% of child labor.  Working children spend an 
average of 39.6 hours per week at work.  Children engaged in 
child labor have a school non-attendance rate of 54%. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20840","9/21/2004 20:02","04GUATEMALA2416","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE201601","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

212002Z Sep 04

 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA A/S NORIEGA 
USOAS FOR JMAISTO 
USTR FOR RVARGO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/21/09 
TAGS: ETRD, EFIN, PGOV, PREL, GT, DR.XK 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE REQUEST:  SCUTTLING THE DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC\'S PROPOSED HFCS TAX 
 
REF: A. STATE 201601 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 05242 
 
Classified By: Classified by DCM D. Bruce Wharton.  Reason 1.5 d. 
 
(C) DCM will deliver subject demarche to Vice President 
Eduardo Stein on September 22 (the Ambassador is on an 
official visit to the Guatemalan highlands).  President 
Berger is in New York this week for the UNGA, but there may 
be an opportunity to raise the topic with him there.  We also 
note that Foreign Minister Jorge Briz and Undersecretary 
Dobriansky are to meet on the margins of the UNGA, another 
possible opportunity to raise the HFCS tax issue. 
HAMILTON 
"
"20915","9/23/2004 21:52","04GUATEMALA2429","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA2416|04SANTODOMINGO5242|04STATE201601","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA A/S NORIEGA 
USOAS FOR JMAISTO 
USTR FOR RVARGO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2009 
TAGS: ETRD, EFIN, PGOV, PREL, DR, XK, GT 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE REQUEST:  SCUTTLING THE DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC\'S PROPOSED HFCS TAX 
 
REF: A. STATE 201601 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 05242 
     C. GUATEMALA 02416 
 
Classified By: DCM D. Bruce Wharton.  Reason 1.5 (d). 
 
 
(C)  On September 22 DCM delivered demarche on the High 
Fructose Corn Syrup issue to Guatemalan Vice President 
Eduardo Stein.  Stein quickly understood the gravity of the 
situation and immediately agreed to contact Dominican 
authorities to work the issue. 
HAMILTON 
"
"21193","10/1/2004 19:43","04GUATEMALA2505","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE184238","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE/EB/TPP/ABT EDWARD HEARTNEY 
COMMERCE/ITA/OTEXA/MARIA D\'ANDREA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, KTEX 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN TEXTILE AND APPAREL DATA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 184238 
 
Embassy contacted various GoG agencies to collect the textile 
and apparel data solicited by reftel.  Methodologies vary and 
data quality is mixed, so we have had to rely on a few leaps 
of faith to come up with some of our estimates.  The total 
value of industrial production on a national accounts basis 
was $2,990 million in 2002 and $3,140 USD in 2003, according 
to our estimates using Central Bank (Banguat) data.  Note 
that Guatemala\'s national accounts are based on the 1958 
industrial census and are therefore a bit suspect.  The 
Apparel and Textiles Commission (Vestex), a component of the 
Chamber of Nontraditional Exports (Agexpront), estimates the 
total value of textile and apparel production at 1,414.8 
million USD in 2002 and 1,486.5 million in 2003.  Value added 
in textile and apparel exports (presumably comparable to the 
national accounts data for industrial production) was $345.8 
million in 2002 and $418.5 million in 2003, according to 
Banguat (reporting net exports in the services account on a 
balance of payments basis).  The corresponding percentages of 
value added in industrial production represented by textile 
and apparel exports would be 11.6% and 13.3% for 2002 and 
2003, though we caution against using three-digit precision. 
There were 195,954 workers in the manufacturing sector 
registered with the Guatemalan Social Security Institute in 
2002 and 196,337 in 2003.  Agexpront\'s surveys indicate that 
the number of workers in the apparel industry in was around 
106,100 in 2002 and 108,100 in 2003.  As of the time of this 
writing, Agexpront does not track the number of workers in 
the textile and apparel sector, though it is planning to 
start.  The POC for textile and apparel issues is Econoff 
Mark Andrew Stephens. 
HAMILTON 
"
"21420","10/7/2004 22:50","04GUATEMALA2563","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE209789","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002563 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AC/ISN, USUN FOR DISDEL, GENEVA FOR CD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, GT, CDG, UNGA 
SUBJECT: 59TH UNGA: GUATEMALA AND U.S. DRAFT REFORM 
RESOLUTION FOR FIRST (DISARMAMENT) COMMITTEE 
 
REF: STATE 209789 
 
Poloff delivered reftel nonpaper and draft resolution October 
6 to Guatemalan Foreign Ministry Director for UN Affairs Luis 
Carranza.  Carranza said that his office was following the 
issue closely, and noted imminent GRULAC and NAM meetings on 
the topic.  Carranza stated that Guatemala would likely join 
the GRULAC and NAM consensus on the draft resolution. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"21511","10/12/2004 14:05","04GUATEMALA2578","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04USUN2095","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121405Z Oct 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002578 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NP/RA, T, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: NEXT STEPS ON PSI 
 
REF: (A) USUN 2095 (NOTAL) (B) GUATEMALA 1635 AND 
 
     PREVIOUS 
 
1.  This is an action request.  See paragraph 4. 
 
2.  Following up on U/S Bolton\'s discussion with Guatemalan 
Foreign Minister Briz (ref A), the Ambassador raised the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) with Briz on 
September 29.  Briz expressed support for the PSI in 
principle.  He said the Foreign Ministry would welcome a 
visitor from Washington to discuss the PSI in greater depth. 
 
3.  Comment:  Guatemala has only two Guatemalan-flagged 
vessels.  Post understands that Guatemala may therefore not 
warrant bringing someone from Washington to discuss a 
shipboarding agreement at this time. 
 
4.  Action request:  Post requests Department guidance on how 
best to respond to GOG interest in PSI. 
WHARTON 
"
"21741","10/18/2004 18:09","04GUATEMALA2636","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE215870","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CCA AND IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/18/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD, PHUM, CU, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: DEMARCHE OPPOSING CUBA\'S UN RESOLUTION 
AGAINST THE EMBARGO 
 
REF: STATE 215870 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Alexander Featherstone, Reason 1.4(D 
) 
 
(C) Poloff delivered reftel demarche on October 13 to Luis 
Carranza, Deputy Director for UN Affairs in the Foreign 
Ministry\'s Multilateral Affairs Directorate.  Carranza noted 
that the decision on this vote would be made at a higher 
level and alluded to political considerations that have led 
the GOG to support this resolution in previous years. 
HAMILTON 
"
"21742","10/18/2004 18:10","04GUATEMALA2637","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE218465","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/WCI AND L/UNA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, KAWC, PHUM, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: DEMARCHE ON U.S. NOMINEE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA 
 
REF: STATE 218465 
 
 Poloff delivered reftel talking points and copy of Meron\'s 
curriculum vitae on October 13 to Luis Carranza, Deputy 
Director for UN Affairs in the Foreign Ministry\'s 
Multilateral Affairs Directorate.  Carranza noted that there 
were many highly-qualified candidates and said that Guatemala 
would give careful consideration to Judge Meron\'s candidacy. 
HAMILTON 
"
"21965","10/22/2004 19:14","04GUATEMALA2673","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002673 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2014 
TAGS: CASC, ETRD, MARR, PHUM, NU, ES, OAS, USAID 
SUBJECT: LUNCH WITH PRESIDENT BERGER 
 
Classified By: Ambassador J.R. Hamilton for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:   At lunch October 21, President Berger and 
the Ambassador addressed a variety of international and 
national topics.  Principal among them, Berger said Guatemala 
would give the informal candidacy of exGuatemalan UN PermRep 
Gert Rosenthal 30 days and then fall in behind his good 
friend Francisco Flores.  Berger is deeply concerned over the 
stability of the Bolanos government in Nicaragua and was 
pleased to learn of our strong support for it.  Berger 
intends to keep current Defense Minister Mendez Pinelo on 
through the end of the year and then replace him with General 
Carlos Aldana (not current chief of staff Ricardo Bustamante, 
whose nomination would send shivers through the human rights 
community).  Berger acknowledges that Guatemala has not 
pushed CICIACS the way it should but reiterates his 
government\'s interest.  Ditto for establishment of an office 
here of the UN Human Rights Commissioner.  He is still 
optimistic that Hague Convention-consistent adoptions 
legislation can be approved by the Guatemalan Congress this 
year.  He is similarly optimistic that the CAFTA will enjoy 
strong support in the Guatemalan Congress.   Expressing 
appreciation for U.S. support of what his government wants to 
accomplish, the President also committed to signing, together 
with the Ambassador, the recently negotiated 5-year umbrella 
agreement with AID in a public ceremony.  End summary. 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador and Mrs. Hamilton hosted the lunch, 
which Mrs. Berger also attended. Taking each topic in turn: 
 
3.  (C) OAS Secretary General election: 
 
Berger said he knows former Salvadoran President Francisco 
Flores a lot better than he knows veteran Guatemalan diplomat 
Gert Rosenthal, but that he had signed off on an effort to 
explore possibilities of a Rosenthal candidacy just before 
Flores phoned him to advise of his candidacy and to seek 
Guatemala\'s support.  Berger says Flores would provide the 
OAS strong leadership, while noting that Rosenthal is a good 
diplomatic technocrat.  Berger confirmed that the Central 
Americans have committed to supporting a single candidate - 
whoever can line up the most support in the next month. 
Berger thinks that Flores\' baggage is his close association 
with the U.S. and that the votes of Venezuela, Brazil and 
CARICOM states could conceivably be won by a Rosenthal 
candidacy.  He is aware of Peruvian and Argentine interest, 
but notes that Chile, Bolivia and Colombia would not support 
an Argentine candidacy and he is not sure that Peru\'s 
interest, whether for Paniagua or FM Rodriguez, is serious. 
Notwithstanding his observation about Flores\' relationship 
with us, Berger indicated an expectation and hope that the 
U.S. would support him, repeating that Flores could provide 
the kind of strong leadership the OAS needs.  The Ambassador 
said we think Flores is in fact the strongest candidate, to 
which Berger responded that he was honor-bound to let 
Rosenthal have a run at the job but that he would fall in 
behind Flores after that. 
 
4.  (C) Nicaragua: 
 
Berger spoke of his trip over the weekend to Managua to 
support the embattled Bolanos government and he recounted 
Bolanos\' description of what he is facing in terms that match 
Managua\'s reporting.  He was not previously aware that we are 
strongly supportive of Bolanos and sounded relieved to hear 
it, noting that ousting Bolanos would be \"disastrous\" for the 
region and its image as a democratic, modernizing partner of 
the U.S. in CAFTA. 
 
5.  (C) Defense Ministry: 
 
Confirming what our DATT has been picking up, Berger said he 
had decided to make recently promoted General Carlos Aldana 
his next Minister of Defense, at the end of the year, a 
traditional time for changes in the military.  Berger 
acknowledged that former GANA coalition partner General Otto 
Perez Molina is upset that his own close associate, General 
Ricardo Bustmante, current Chief of Staff of the Armed 
Foreces, is being passed over and retired.  Berger said he 
had not yet settled on a replacement for Bustamante. 
(Comment:  Bustamante\'s appointment would have been 
unsettling to civil society groups, here and abroad.  Aldana, 
who is a support, not combat, officer, will be better 
received outside the military.  Inside it, there will be 
grumbling that an officer who has not paid his combat dues is 
being elevated.  End comment.)  On a related subject, Berger 
said his government would (contrary to what we have been 
hearing) have funds in its 05 budget for military 
modernization.  He also said that Guatemala is prepared to 
send up to 650 troops to Haiti (500 bilaterally, an 
additional 150 as part of a Central American peacekeeping 
battalion).  He noted that the compensation from the UN was 
not insignificant.  So lucrative as to be a source for 
modernization. 
 
6.  (C) CICIACS, the Office of the UN Commissioner for Human 
Rights, and Article 98: 
 
Berger acknowledged the Ambassador\'s point that CICIACS has 
been languishing but reiterated his government\'s support of 
reconfiguring it so as to overcome Constitutional Court and 
Congressional objections.  A further comment implied that he 
has personally spoken about CICIACS in recent meetings he has 
held with Congressional leaders.  He is similarly committed 
to winning Congressional approval for the agreement with the 
UN to set up an office here of the Commissioner for Human 
Rights.  He said Human Rights Adviser La Rue and former UN 
PermRep Rosenthal are en route to Geneva now to tweak the 
agreement so as to meet the strongest Congressional 
objections to it.  Berger did not make any particular comment 
about Article 98 but seemed comfortable with the Ambassador\'s 
description of MFA/Embassy plans to seek ratification this 
fall. 
 
7. (C) CAFTA: 
 
Asked about the Guatemalan timetable for submitting CAFTA to 
their Congress, Berger\'s response suggested he had not given 
it much recent thought, as he recalled what he had told the 
Ambassador a couple of months ago, that the Centrals wanted 
to move in unison.  He did say that, in his own travels 
around the country, he is finding that indigenous leaders 
strongly favor CAFTA and that only a few \"tiny groups\" would 
ultimately be opposed.  Comment:  This unfortunately does not 
jibe with our own impressions that the public, indigenous 
groups especially, are not yet well informed on CAFTA. 
Berger could hardly contain his enthusiasm for a November 15 
ceremony on the border with El Salvador where the last 
remaining obstacles to physical integration will be stood 
down.  Crossing the border will thereafter be much like 
crossing a state line in the U.S.; Berger feels that he and 
his Salvadoran counterparts have done more this year to 
promote real integration than their predecessors did in 40. 
 
8. (C) Adoptions: 
 
Berger and Mrs. Berger, who is deeply involved in the 
adoptions issue, confirmed that they are supporting a new, 
Hague-consistent version of adoptions reform legislation, 
that they oppose any suspension of adoptions (as some 
reformers have advocated), and that they favor a grandfather 
clause for adoptions in process once the new legislation goes 
into effect.  Mrs. Berger thought the opportunity for getting 
such legislation approved this year was slipping away but the 
President, citing a conversation earlier this week with the 
President of Congress, said there was still a good chance for 
positive action. 
 
9. (C) Bilateral relations: 
 
The Ambassador briefed Berger on his consultations in 
Washington, noting the changed, more positive view of 
Guatemala both within and outside the executive branch (while 
emphasizing the more critical view, largely because of 
CICIACS and the UNHRC office, within the U.S. human rights 
community).  The Ambassador said that we have a good 
possibility of freeing up at least $2m in frozen MAP funds 
and that doing so would send an important signal of progress 
made civil-military relations and ending impunity within the 
military.  Reiterating how out on a limb he is with his 
military over modernization, Berger said he would be deeply 
grateful if we could provide such support.  He also recounted 
with pleasure how friendly and gracious (\"and he recognized 
me immediately\") the President was when they spoke briefly at 
the UNGA and said how much he appreciates the support we are 
giving in general.  In that vein, he said he wants to conduct 
a public signing of the new 5-year umbrella agreement between 
his government and AID, which AID has recently negotiated. 
 
3. (C) Comment: 
 
This was a fairly informative, useful exchange.  Atmospherics 
were on this occasion quite good. 
HAMILTON 
"
"22050","10/27/2004 0:28","04GUATEMALA2716","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

270028Z Oct 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002716 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA, WHA/CEN AND VO/F/P, INFO DHS-KEN LEUTBECKER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY GUATEMALA SUPPORTS APPLICATIONS FOR 
HUMANITARIAN PAROLE FOR ELEVEN MEMBERS OF THE OTONIEL DE LA 
ROCA MENDOZA FAMILY 
 
 
1.  Eleven members of the Otoniel De La Roca Mendoza Family 
have applied for humanitarian parole in the United States. 
Otoniel De La Roca Mendoza is a witness to the 1992 detention 
and torture of Efrain Bamaca Velasquez by Guatemalan military 
authorities.  In 1997 Mr. De la Roca Mendez sought and gained 
legal residency in the United States after continuous threats 
against him made it impossible for him to continue living in 
Guatemala.  Now that he is beyond the reach of those who wish 
to intimidate him, his family members still in Guatemala have 
become the subject of threat.  In the last four years, four 
members have been murdered after receiving threats against 
them made on account of Mr. De La Roca Mendoza\'s testimony. 
The most recent murder took place in July 2004.  Embassy 
Guatemala believes that the threats, intimidation and murders 
are directly related to Mr. De La Roca Mendoza\'s knowledge 
and testimony against those responsible for human rights 
violations and extrajudicial killings during Guatemala\'s 
armed conflict.  We believe that the it is in the interest of 
the United States to grant humanitarian parole to the eleven 
members of the De La Roca Mendoza family.  Doing so will 
preserve life, enable Mr. De La Roca Mendez to continue 
giving testimony against human rights violators, and will 
send a clear signal to human rights victims and perpetrators 
in Guatemala that the United States will do everything it can 
to stop the cycle of violence and impunity. 
 
2.  The eleven persons applying for humanitarian parole are: 
- Clara Luz Solares Alvarado 
- Saira Aydee Alvarado Diaz 
- Higinia Alvarado Vasquez 
- Jimena Estefania De La Roca Archila 
- Maria Guadalupe De La Roca Archila 
- Oralia De La Roca Archila 
- Gerson David Escobar De La Roca 
- Abraham De La Roca Solis 
- German Anibal De La Roca Melendez 
- Sulmy Mabeli Perez Alvarez 
- Jose Oswaldo Perez Alvarez 
 
3.  We understand that documentation, including I-131 forms 
and I-134 affidavits have already been forwarded to DHS 
Parole and Humanitarian Assistance Branch offices in 
Washington, DC. 
 
4.  Thanks you for your positive consideration of these 
important application for humanitarian parole. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"22110","10/27/2004 22:54","04GUATEMALA2726","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA2673","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN PLEASE PASS TO OAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2014 
TAGS: IO, PGOV, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S NOMINATES CANDIDATE FOR OAS SECRETARY 
GENERAL 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 02673 
 
Classified By: Ambassador J. R. Hamilton for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U)  Embassy has received Diplomatic Note No. 3922 dated 
October 22, 2004, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
presenting the candidacy of Dr. Gert Rosenthal, former 
Guatemalan Ambassador to the United Nations, for the 
Secretary General position of the OAS.  Post will send by fax 
 
SIPDIS 
copy of the Dip Note, including the Curriculum Vitae of Dr. 
Rosenthal. 
 
2.  (C)  Reftel discusses Post and GOG analysis of the 
candidacies for the SYG position. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"22492","11/4/2004 22:29","04GUATEMALA2804","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

042229Z Nov 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002804 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, GT, PGOV, PHUM, PINS 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S EX-PARAMILITARY GROUPS BLOCK 
TRANSPORTATION COUNTRY-WIDE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 
 
1. Summary.  Guatemala\'s ex-PAC members practically shut down 
the nation on November 3 in protests over the Government\'s 
failure to disburse payments promised to them in the 2003 
election.  These payments have been delayed due to 
constitutional challenges to the process.  Congress 
immediately met to resolve the primary challenge, but many 
others remain.  The economic damage from the blockades was 
significant as the transportation network was paralyzed.  The 
ex-PAC leaders are likely encouraged by their success and may 
use these tactics again if their grievances are not resolved, 
given that there is little talk of punishment for the illegal 
activity.  End summary. 
 
Protests and damages 
-------------------- 
2. Veterans of the Civilian Self-defense Patrols (known as 
ex-PAC, by their Spanish initials) again protested the 
failure of government to approve payments for their service 
during the Guatemalan civil war by blocking highways, 
airports, seaports, and other transportation infrastructure 
on November 2.  The protests blocked at least 38 different 
highways and facilities throughout Guatemala, disrupting 
commerce, transportation, and tourism.  Some highways were 
blocked at dozens of points, trapping travelers between 
blockades.  Flights were diverted from the airport serving 
major tourist destinations in the north of Guatemala to other 
installations. 
 
3. Economic damage from the protests was significant.  In at 
least one major seaport, no ship could load or unload cargo, 
nor could local industrial operations access the port to 
process their exports.  The paralyzation of the road network 
shut down commerce nationwide.  Representatives from the 
umbrella business chamber CACIF estimated that this type of 
interruption costs Guatemalan businesses USD 1.5 million per 
day.  They further noted that the hardest hit amongst the 
victims of these interruptions were the small- and 
medium-sized businesses, many of whom deal with perishable 
goods. 
 
Reasons for discontent 
---------------------- 
4. Payments to the ex-PAC were a major issue in the 2003 
presidential campaign.  Before the 2003 elections, the former 
Portillo Government made the first of a projected three 
payments to approximately 500,000 ex-PAC members.  (Note:  At 
their peak in the 1980s, the Guatemalan Army had enrolled 1.2 
million members in the PAC, many in an involuntary manner. 
End note.)  Under President Berger, the new Government passed 
a bill to continue the project, however, the Constitutional 
Court upheld a privately-mounted legal challenge.  The 
Guatemalan Constitution requires that new proposals identify 
funding sources, which the original ex-PAC payment 
authorization bill did not. 
 
5. While the protests and highway blockades passed without 
overt violence, the national disruption spurred Congress to 
consider immediately the draft revisions to the bill 
authorizing issuance of treasury bonds to finance payments in 
2004, 2005, and 2006.  Congress passed the bill with the 
favorable vote of 114 of 120 Members of Congress present in 
the late afternoon of November 2, but Government officials 
reportedly stated that they would send the revised bill to 
the Constitutional Court for review before enacting its 
provisions.  Indeed, a second constitutional challenge by a 
coalition of human rights groups and private citizens remains 
pending.  While this second challenge includes the funding 
issue that Congress ostensibly resolved, it also challenges 
the project under more than a dozen other constitutional 
provisions. 
 
Comment 
------- 
6. Many observers, including Members of Congress, human 
rights organizations, and the international community are 
repelled by both the general idea of making payments to the 
ex-PAC and the specific processes for doing so, which are 
rife with potential for abuse.  Nonetheless, the Government 
cannot go back on its promise to make the payments, given the 
ex-PAC demonstrated capability of mobilization and the 
percentage of the electorate that stand to gain short-term 
benefit from the payments.  The Government inherited this 
mess from the previous administration, and has neither 
sufficient funds nor sufficient support for the project. 
They have no choice, however, but to continue anyway. 
 
7. It is unfortunate that it took such significant social 
interruption to spur Congress into action.  Having rewarded 
the ex-PAC for their economically damaging protests, 
Guatemala can expect more of the same, particularly as there 
has been little discussion of punishment for ex-PAC leaders 
for these illegal activities (although the Public Ministry 
did request arrest warrants for three of the ex-PAC leaders). 
 We expect further disruption on the part of ex-PAC members 
who did not receive payments in the first tranche, as well as 
more wide-spread protest over any delay of further tranches, 
which can be expected due to financial and legal 
considerations. 
HAMILTON 
"
"22494","11/4/2004 23:06","04GUATEMALA2805","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUATEMALA2248","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002805 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ECON, GT, KCRM, PGOV, PHUM, PINS, ASEC 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN SQUATTERS REINVADE SITE OF PREVIOUS 
VIOLENCE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2248 
 
1. Summary:  Guatemalan squatters reinvaded Nueva Linda farm, 
the site where eleven people were killed during a violent 
eviction in August.  The squatters, who this time were 
unarmed, maintain their previous demand for government action 
to investigate the 2003 disappearance of their colleague and 
have added several new demands regarding compensation for the 
violence and property destruction of the previous eviction. 
Subsequent reports on that eviction have been contradictory 
and various government and non-governmental actors have taken 
public stances on the issue, leading to heightened tensions. 
Negotiations continue, although a second eviction is 
possible.  End summary. 
 
A new occupation 
---------------- 
2. On October 28, Guatemalan squatters reinvaded the Nueva 
Linda farm in western Guatemala\'s Retalhuleu Province, site 
of the August 31 conflict between squatters and security 
forces that killed eleven people, including four police 
officers, during a court-ordered eviction (reftel).  When 
approximately 300 squatters reoccupied the site on October 
28, they took 19 private security guards hostage for three 
hours, until a mediator from the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s 
Office (PDH) negotiated the hostages\' release.  The Vice 
Minister of Government (Interior) reportedly stated that the 
National Civil Police (PNC) were ready to undertake a second 
eviction, but that he hoped negotiations allow for a peaceful 
resolution. 
 
3. The PDH mediator also reported that the squatters were 
unarmed, unlike the previous occupation in which the 
squatters opened fire on the police with assault weapons. 
Government authorities have not yet received a court order to 
begin a second eviction, and the Minister of Government 
reportedly assured human rights activists that they would not 
undertake an eviction without judicial order.  President 
Berger, the PDH, Catholic Church officials, and various NGOs 
and individual political figures have called for dialogue and 
a peaceful resolution.  The squatters also stated their 
intentions to protest peacefully, but noted that if evicted, 
they would return to occupy the farm until their demands are 
met. 
 
4. Squatters continue to demand government action to 
investigate the disappearance of the Nueva Linda farm manager 
in 2003 and have demanded compensation for their alleged 
losses during the August eviction.  The squatters demanded 
prosecution and punishment for the members of the security 
forces responsible for the deaths of the seven squatters, 
plus financial recompense for the losses of five vehicles, 
the corn harvest, and various personal goods destroyed in the 
conflict. 
 
5. The squatters also insist that Retalhuleu Governor Carlos 
Quintana be excluded from any mediation or dialog due to 
their belief that he was partially responsible for the 
earlier violence.  Indeed, Quintana\'s attempt to meet with 
the squatters on October 29 was rejected.  They requested 
that a negotiating commission be established, to include 
Members of Congress Nineth Montenegro and Raul Robles, the 
Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office, the National Coordinator of 
Campesino Organizations, San Marcos Department Bishop (and 
land reform activist) Alvaro Ramazzini, the Public Ministry, 
and the journalists present at the August 31 eviction. 
 
6. The basis for the squatters additional demands was a 
report by the Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office on October 12 
that criticized the security forces for excessive use of 
force and suggested that three of the seven squatters\' deaths 
were the result of extrajudicial killings by the security 
forces.  Through the Ministry of the Interior and the 
National Civilian Police, the Government rejected the 
Ombudsman\'s report, suggesting that it had been influenced by 
politics.  The Congressional Commission on Human Rights also 
agreed that no evidence had been presented to back the PDH 
claims of extrajudicial killings.  The Commission noted that 
the forensic investigation was shoddy at best, and the 
circumstances of the August 31 deaths will likely never be 
clarified. 
 
Congressmen and Ombudsman address demands 
----------------------------------------- 
7. The squatters say that their primary motive for both 
occupations was the 2003 disappearance of farm manager Hector 
Reyes and the lack of any substantial investigation by police 
and prosecutors.  The Human Rights Ombudsman\'s Office 
reported that police and prosecutors failed to investigate 
Reyes\' disappearance and noted discrepancies and 
methodological failures within the official reports. 
Allegations persist, however, that Reyes in fact now lives in 
the United States.  A local newspaper reported recently that 
Reyes\' wife expressed in a telephone interview from the 
United States that she has come to an arrangement with the 
farm owners and is no longer pursuing a case. 
 
8. The Ombudsman\'s Office and the Congressional Commission on 
Human Rights, headed by Member of Congress Nineth Montenegro, 
have requested that the Attorney General reactivate the case 
of Reyes\' disappearance both to review existing evidence and 
to initiate further investigation, such as the exhumation of 
several unknown bodies that were buried shortly after Reyes 
disappeared.  The Commission on Human Rights also requested 
that President Berger dismiss the Retalhuleu Governor for his 
role in the violence. 
 
Journalists and the first eviction 
---------------------------------- 
9. Additional developments have also occurred regarding the 
press coverage of the August 31 eviction, during which police 
allegedly assaulted and threatened journalists and 
confiscated their cameras and other equipment. 
 
10. Based on the events of the August 31 eviction, seven 
journalists filed a case against the police through the Human 
Rights Ombudsman\'s Office and the Inter-American Court of 
Human Rights.  Since then, family members of two of the 
journalists have been murdered, which some human rights 
activists suggest was intended to intimidate the journalists. 
 Although government figures believe that the two murders 
were examples of common crime (the second of the murders 
occurred during the second of two bus robberies by the same 
armed gang on October 31), the prosecutor\'s office of the 
Public Ministry and the National Police are keeping the cases 
open. 
 
11. Additionally, the equipment confiscated from the 
journalists still has not been returned.  The Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes against Journalist and Trade Unionists 
transmitted a request to the National Police for the 
equipment, but the Attorney General ordered them to transfer 
the case to the Special Prosecutor for Organized Crime\'s 
office in Quetzaltenango (the regional office covering the 
area in which the eviction took place). 
 
Comment 
------- 
12. The reoccupation of Nueva Linda is a test for the 
Government\'s ability to enforce the rule of law, one that the 
Government has so far failed.  Prosecution of squatters for 
the shooting deaths of the four policemen killed in the 
August 31 eviction has stalled, as has disciplinary action 
against the riot police who apparently used excessive force 
against the journalists. 
 
13. With some 130 current farm invasions, the Government 
faces an obvious dilemma in that the informal freeze on 
evictions avoids violence but also may serve to encourage 
further takeovers.  In addition, it appears that in some 
cases takeover organizers have turned these siezures into a 
business by charging fees for squatters to participate. 
(According to some media reports, the initial Nueva Linda 
takeover was led by a notorious alien smuggler.)  Along with 
the ex-PAC blockades (septel), these takeovers are one more 
public security headache for a government that is 
ill-equipped to cope with such challenges. 
HAMILTON 
"
"22685","11/9/2004 14:31","04GUATEMALA2819","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE236869","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002819 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, IO, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA WILL SUPPORT ALL UNGA HUMAN RIGHTS 
RESOLUTIONS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 236869 
 
 PolOff delivered reftel talking points to Luis Carranza, 
Deputy Director for UN Affairs in the MFA.  Carranza stated 
that the GOG will support all the resolutions discussed in 
reftel and would oppose any retaliatory resolutions presented 
by the Government of Belarus against the USG.  Though 
Guatemala usually avoids co-sponsoring resolutions in the 
UNGA, Carranza indicated that the GOG would be willing to 
consider co-sponsoring the resolution on Iran if the Canadian 
Government approached the MFA directly.  Upon request, PolOff 
forwarded a copy of the resolution text included on the DRL 
website, as Carranza had not received anything from 
Guatemala\'s UN office. 
HAMILTON 
"
"22747","11/10/2004 15:52","04GUATEMALA2840","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002840 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA:  UN OPEN TO PROPOSALS FOR AN ALTERED 
CICIACS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 1929 AND PREVIOUS 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2180 
 
1. (U) Summary:  Attorney General Juan Luis Florido met with 
UN/DPA representative Martha Doggett on October 28 to discuss 
his proposal for a new Special Prosecutor on Organized Crime 
and Clandestine Groups, designed to complement an eventual 
CICIACS.  According to Doggett, who spoke to PolOff November 
4, she referred Florido to other UN agencies for the type of 
technical assistance that he requested.  The UN remains open 
to Guatemalan plans to redesign CICIACS to work within the 
confines of the Constitutional Court\'s August 6 ruling (Ref 
A).   PolOff met with Frank LaRue, Chief of the President\'s 
Commission on Human Rights (COPREDEH) on November 5, who said 
that President Berger had authorized at least three 
Guatemalan institutions to develop alternative CICIACS 
proposals and that the President would choose the Executive\'s 
unified strategy from among these.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Attorney General Florido proposed to Doggett that 
the UN offer technical assistance to a new CICIACS-model 
Special Prosecutor\'s Office on Organized Crime and 
Clandestine Groups (note:  the Public Ministry, i.e. Attorney 
General\'s Office, already has one office specifically 
dedicated to organized crime).  When asked how this new unit 
would differ from other existing units on human rights, 
corruption, and organized crime, Florido stated that it would 
investigate clandestine groups.  To Doggett, Florido did not 
clearly distinguish between the existing entities in the 
Ministry and his proposal.  Florido clarified to Doggett that 
he intended this assistance to eventually complement a 
redesigned CICIACS, not replace it, since CICIACS itself 
would take at least several years to negotiate and establish. 
 He made no proposed changes to CICIACS itself. 
 
3.  (U) Doggett told Florido that several UN bodies with 
specific expertise offer technical assistance, including the 
UNDP, UNODC (Office on Drugs and Crime), and UNHCHR.  She 
recommended that he speak further directly with these 
agencies about his idea.  (Comment:  DPA was originally 
designated to handle the UN negotiations on CICIACS because 
it oversees MINUGUA, but Doggett told PolOff that her office 
could not work on other technical projects.) 
 
4.  (SBU) The agreement between the UN and GOG to establish 
CICIACS will expire at the end of 2004.  In addition to 
Florido\'s proposal, the head of SAE (Secretariat of Strategic 
Analysis) called DPA and said that he had been tasked with 
redrafting CICIACS.  Overall, Doggett expressed confusion 
about who in the Government was in charge of CICIACS and 
frustration that, while Berger has expressed determination in 
several meetings with the UN to redesign CICIACS following 
the Court\'s decision, the Executive has not yet returned with 
a plan.  However, she tempered her frustration with the 
assertion that the UN would still be interested, at the 
political level, when the GOG did present a unified proposal. 
 
 
5.  (SBU) On November 5, head of COPREDEH, Frank LaRue, told 
PolOff that Florido\'s proposal to the UN was his alone and 
did not represent the Executive\'s position.  According to 
LaRue, Berger has authorized at least three agencies, 
including the Public Ministry, SAE, and COPREDEH, to develop 
new strategies for CICIACS.  Berger plans to evaluate the 
proposals in December.  LaRue will propose a Guatemalan 
Special Prosecutor who works within the Public Ministry, but 
is supported by international staff. 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment:  The UN can easily extend the deadline for 
CICIACS before year\'s-end or reopen it in 2005.  Even more, 
they\'re willing to do so if the Berger Administration 
continues to demonstrate determination to create CICIACS and 
presents a well thought-out and cohesive strategy for 
revising the proposal. 
HAMILTON 
"
"22766","11/10/2004 17:36","04GUATEMALA2845","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE228298","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002845 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND G/TIP 
DOJ FOR OPDAT:BILL HALL AND FAITH COBURN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KWMN, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S INTERIM ASSESSMENT FOR TIP 
 
REF: STATE 228298 
 
1. The Government of Guatemala made appreciable progress in 
each of the following areas in regard to trafficking in 
persons (TIP).  The responses below are keyed to the 
questions in paragraph D of reftel.  Our own comments follow 
in para 2. 
 
a) Guatemala has several pending legal proposals to codify 
trafficking in persons as a crime in Guatemala\'s criminal 
code.  A proposal tightly focused on the actual 
transportation of persons with criminal intent has passed its 
first reading in Congress, and the second reading is expected 
soon.  This draft was originally proposed by immigration 
officials to remedy the specific legal shortcomings that they 
faced in their own work.  The proposal was then revised and 
strengthened by the Chair of the Congressional Commission for 
Government (Interior), whose purview includes law enforcement 
issues.  The Government\'s Inter-Institutional Committee on 
TIP issues, in which we are active participants, is finishing 
work on a broader legislative proposal to address and refine 
all aspects of trafficking in persons, as described in more 
detail septel.  These two main proposals are not mutually 
exclusive. 
 
b) Both the National Civilian Police (PNC) and the Attorney 
General\'s Office have set up specialized units to concentrate 
on TIP.  These units have increased the coordination between 
their respective departments as well as their individual 
activities to interdict and prosecute TIP. 
 
c) NGOs play a primary role in Guatemala\'s anti-TIP activity. 
 In particular, public sector agencies recognize local 
chapters of international NGOs Casa Alianza and ECPAT as full 
partners in the fight against TIP.  The PNC continues to use 
Casa Alianza\'s survey of sites engaging in child prostitution 
as a target list for raids and arrests.  Following such 
raids, rescued victims routinely are delivered to Casa 
Alianza for housing and treatment.  ECPAT provides on-going 
anti-TIP training to agents of the PNC, the Special 
Prosecutor\'s Office, and the Immigration Service. 
Furthermore, ECPAT is developing an anti-TIP curriculum for 
the Police Academy\'s use in introductory training for new 
recruits.  (Note:  ECPAT\'s full name is End Child 
Prostitution, Child Pornography, and Trafficking in Children 
for Sexual Purposes.  End note.) 
 
d) In the first three quarters of 2004, the PNC conducted 113 
raids of bars, brothels, and other businesses.  They rescued 
18 minors (ages 14-17) and made 40 arrests.  Also based on 
the raids, immigration officials deported 141 adult foreign 
prostitutes. 
 
e) Following the publication of the USG\'s Report on TIP, 
President Berger and Vice President Stein made extensive 
public comments on TIP.  Other officials at the Ministry of 
Government (Interior) and its various law enforcement 
agencies, the Attorney General\'s Office, and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs regularly make public comment on trafficking 
issues.  The Ambassador and Foreign Minister Briz recently 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding on behalf of USAID and 
the Government of Guatemala, respectively.  Significantly, 
Briz insisted on signing the Memorandum at this level and the 
event received extensive media coverage. 
 
f) As noted above, ECPAT provides on-going training programs 
for all of Guatemala\'s law enforcement agencies.  Such 
training is welcomed by the agencies themselves and their 
parent political structure, the Ministry of Government 
(Interior).  The Department of Justice OPDAT team conducted a 
site survey in September 2004 to plan a week-long anti-TIP 
training program in early 2005.  The OPDAT team received an 
enthusiastic welcome and the continued support from 
Guatemalan governmental and non-governmental institutions. 
 
g) Law enforcement agencies continue to recruit and train 
officers as a continuing effort to combat corruption in all 
of their efforts.  This is readily apparent in anti-TIP 
activities.  Law enforcement officials note that some of 
their raids have been ineffective due to advance warning 
reaching suspected traffickers.  On at least one occasion, a 
senior law enforcement officer returned unexpectedly early 
from a foreign trip to conduct an unannounced raid, thus 
maximizing operational security. 
 
2.  Comment:  We are impressed with the level of dedication 
and professionalism exhibited by the Government of 
Guatemala\'s various agencies to refine and expand the fight 
against TIP.  We hope that the first legal reform proposal 
described above will become law before the end of CY2004 and 
that the second will pass in the first quarter of CY2005. 
Equally as important as official activity, however, is the 
general understanding of TIP across Guatemalan society. 
While government works to expand legal penalties for TIP, 
judges are not currently using all of the penalties available 
under current law.  There is little recognition of TIP as a 
crisis amongst members of Congress or by the constituencies 
they represent.  We intend to encourage the members to take a 
stronger leadership role outside of their legislative 
responsibilities, to increase recognition and understanding 
of the issue. 
HAMILTON 
"
"22818","11/12/2004 18:31","04GUATEMALA2868","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA1447","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA:  MINUGUA CLOSES ITS DOORS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1447 
 
1. (U) Summary:  On November 15, MINUGUA will hold a closing 
ceremony in the National Palace to commemorate the end of its 
ten years in Guatemala.   Over the last two months, the 
organization has released a final report and held a closing 
conference to evaluate the progress made in implementation of 
the 1996 Peace Accords.  MINUGUA hailed the \"drastic 
reduction of the military\" as the greatest accomplishment of 
the Berger administration thus far.  During his conference 
speech, MINUGUA Chief of Mission Tom Koenigs cited combating 
impunity, discrimination, and poverty as the greatest 
lingering challenges for the GOG.  While MINUGUA closes up 
shop, the establishment of a new UN office in Guatemala, the 
OHCHR, still remains uncertain.  The interim UN OHCHR (Office 
of the High Commission of Human Rights) office that had 
opened in preparation for an official mission will close 
November 30, to reopen only if and when the GOG and High 
Commissioner can arrive at agreement on the mission of such 
an office.  End Summary. 
 
MINUGUA\'s Closing Remarks 
------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) On October 27, the Ambassador and DCM attended the 
opening remarks of President Oscar Berger, Tom Koenigs, and 
Rigoberta Menchu at MINUGUA\'s closing conference, 
\"Constructing Peace:  Guatemala from a comparative 
perspective.\"  According to Koenigs, \"eight years after their 
signing, the Peace Accords are alive and relevant.  The most 
transcendental (measure) has been the dramatic reduction of 
the military.\"  MINUGUA\'s report also commended President 
Berger for appointing Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Rigoberta 
Menchu and human rights activist Frank LaRue to the Cabinet, 
apologizing on behalf of the state for atrocities committed 
during the civil conflict, and allocating the first funds to 
the National Reparations Program under the direction of 
Rosalina Tuyuc. 
 
3.  (U) However, in health, education, and discrimination 
against indigenous persons, Koenigs noted that the GOG has 
not affected profound changes in the last eight years, and 
that Guatemala still faces among the greatest poverty and 
inequality in Latin America.  MINUGUA expressed grave 
concerns about insecurity and impunity in prosecution of 
crime, as well as continued threats against human rights 
defenders.  Finally, the report remarked that the growing 
tension in agrarian issues, illustrated by over 100 illegal 
occupations of private land by peasants and consequent 
government evictions, occasionally violent, of occupied land, 
will present another continuing challenge for the GOG. 
 
4.  (U) The conference that followed hosted panel discussions 
on topics ranging from the justice sector and public security 
to economic reforms.  Following the conference, UN Under 
Secretary General for Political Affairs, Kieran Pendergast, 
 
SIPDIS 
will attend a series of events November 11-16, cumulating in 
a closing ceremony hosted by the GOG and MINUGUA on November 
15. 
 
Fate of UN OHCHR Office Uncertain 
------------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) The debate on the establishment of a local UN OHCHR 
office in Guatemala continues.  In September, two 
Congressional committees issued contradictory recommendations 
on the ratification of the agreement between the GOG and the 
UN OHCHR (the Human Rights Committee voted in favor of the 
proposal and the Foreign Relations Committee against); the 
Committees presented their decisions to the plenary on 
November 11.  Some Congressional representatives, led by FRG 
Deputy Antonio Arenales Forno (a former Guatemalan UN 
Representative in Geneva and Ambassador to the US, who serves 
on both the HR and FR Committees), have insisted that 
Guatemala should not/not be the first country to host a local 
UN OHCHR office under Article 4 of the General Assembly 
Resolution.  Under this Article, the proposed office would be 
required to submit an annual report about its activities to 
the High Commissioner, who would then distribute it to member 
countries.  congressional deputies in the Foreign Relations 
Committee also object to the requirement for an official 
report.  In consideration of the Foreign Relation Committee\'s 
qualms, the Executive has proposed changes to the UN OHCHR on 
the language of the agreement. 
 
6.  (SBU) After the Portillo Administration signed an 
agreement with the UN OHCHR to open an office in December 
2003, the High Commissioner sent a Representative to 
Guatemala and opened an interim office with a small staff in 
anticipation of the agreement\'s ratification (originally 
presented to Congress in March 2004).  On November 10, 
Project Coordinator for the Guatemala UN OHCHR, Birgit 
Gerstenberg, told PolOff that this office would officially 
close November 30.  At the Government\'s request, the UN OHCHR 
has agreed to open renegotiation of the original agreement. 
Guatemala UN Representative Jorge Skinner-Klee will travel to 
Geneva in the coming weeks to lead discussions. 
 
7.  (SBU) Comment:  What the Executive must do to satisfy 
Congress on the UN OHCHR office is eliminate the official 
report, and Gerstenberg reports that the High Commissioner is 
not willing to take that measure.  Therefore, negotiations 
are likely to stall unless the two sides can find some yet 
unidentified middle ground. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"22820","11/12/2004 19:07","04GUATEMALA2869","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE238931","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121907Z Nov 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002869 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/WCI, IO/UNP, AND L/UNA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, KAWC, PHUM, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA OFFERS EXCHANGE OF SUPPORT FOR U.S. 
CANDIDATE TO ICTY 
 
REF: A. STATE 238931 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2637 
     C. STATE 214865 
 
1.  (U) This is an action request, see paragraph 3. 
 
2.  (SBU) On November 12, the Guatemalan Foreign Ministry 
informed us that Guatemala is willing to support the 
candidacy of Judge Theodor Meron for reelection to the 
International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia provided that 
the USG supports the candidacy of Guatemala for the Executive 
Board of UNICEF in elections that will take place in May 2005. 
 
3.  (U) Request Department provide language to respond to the 
GOG offer. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"22950","11/17/2004 15:51","04GUATEMALA2904","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 002904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, EAID, GT, MARR, PGOV, PHUM, SNAR 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA HUMAN RIGHTS UPDATE #5-2004 
 
 
1.  (U) This message summarizes significant recent 
developments relating to human rights, including: 
 
-- Conviction in murder of Menchu Foundation accountant (para 
2) 
 
-- Courts Give PDH Access to EMP Documents (3) 
 
-- Journalists Demand Justice for &Black Thursday8 Riots (4) 
 
-- Threats Against CALDH and Plan de Sanchez Witnesses (5-8) 
 
-- PDH Leads &Movement Against Violence8 (9) 
 
-- USG donates $86,000 to Special Unit for Human Rights 
(10-11) 
 
-- Threats against ANN Deputy Nineth Montenegro (12) 
 
-- Supreme Court Recuses Judge in Gerardi Case (13) 
 
-- New Trial for Rio Negro Massacre Suspended (14) 
 
-- Freedom of the Press Has Improved (15) 
 
 
Conviction in murder of Menchu Foundation accountant 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
2.  On June 24, Ever Lopez Gomez and Billy Rene Barrios were 
sentenced to 9 and 29 years respectively for the April 2002 
killing of Menchu Foundation accountant Guillermo Ovalle. 
Although Menchu Foundation officials believed the accountant 
had been murdered to intimidate the organization, the Special 
Prosecutor for Human Rights believes that Lopez and Barrios 
killed the accountant during a shoot-out in a failed robbery 
of a restaurant. 
 
Courts Give PDH Access to EMP Documents 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3.  The Human Rights Ombudsman,s office (PDH) told Poloff in 
July that the PDH, with support from Mutual Support Group 
(GAM) and Security and Democracy (SEDEM), is currently 
copying thousands of documents recovered from the now-defunct 
Presidential Military Staff (EMP).   On January 6, a judge 
ordered the military to allow the PDH access to the 
information.  The PDH and other groups plan to analyze the 
documents to assist in locating children disappeared in the 
civil conflict and learn more about the military,s 
operations during that period.  The documents include 
information on operations, maps, paychecks, car and gas 
records, accounting, and human resources. 
 
Journalists Demand Justice for &Black Thursday8 Riots 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
4.  Approximately 50 reporters marched through the capital on 
July 24, the one-year anniversary of the 2003 &Black 
Thursday8 riots organized in favor of the presidential 
candidacy of retired General Efrain Rios Montt, to demand 
justice for the death of Hector Ramirez, who died of a heart 
attack while running from a crowd of rioters.  The Special 
Prosecutor for Human Rights office has indicted 20 
individuals, including Rios Montt,s grandson and niece, for 
involvement in planning the chaos.  Rios Montt, Secretary 
General of the FRG, remains under house arrest for his 
suspected role in the riots (though, in practice, he is not 
restricted to his home, but to the capital).  In addition, 
the Supreme Court is investigating six former government 
officials, four congressional representatives and two mayors, 
and will decide whether to remove their immunity from 
criminal prosecution.  Special Prosecutor Gudiel told PolOff 
that many witnesses have refused to testify out of fear of 
reprisal.  (Comment:  The legal basis for this prosecution is 
shaky at best.  Unable to identify the rioters who actually 
chased Ramirez, the Prosecutor is going after FRG leaders who 
organized the demonstration as the \"intellectual authors\" of 
Ramirez\'s \"aggravated\" heart attack.) 
 
Threats Against CALDH and Plan de Sanchez Witnesses 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
5.  The Legal Center for Human Rights (CALDH) and the Plan de 
Sanchez community in Baja Verapaz (site of a 1982 massacre in 
which the army and ex-Pacs allegedly killed 268 people) were 
the targets of over 20 acts of intimidation between March and 
September.  CALDH provided legal support to community members 
of the Plan de Sanchez community for a April 23 and 24 
Inter-American Court (IACHR) hearing on the massacre.  In 
April, during an IACHR hearing, the Government admitted 
responsibility for not investigating the massacre.  The 
threats against witnesses to the massacre and CALDH increased 
in incidence following the hearing. 
 
6.  On March 11, a CALDH driver was kidnapped in front of the 
CALDH office, held for several hours, questioned about his 
work, and released after the theft of his vehicle.  On 
September 7, the police captured a suspect in the kidnapping, 
who is currently awaiting a line-up and trial.  After the 
driver,s experience, CALDH requested police protection, 
which was approved and coordinated by COPREDEH (President,s 
Commission on Human Rights).  In July, however, a string of 
intimidating actions against the organization and community 
began. 
 
7.  On July 14 and 15, there were two break-ins at the home 
of CALDH director Edda Gaviola, although nothing significant 
was stolen.  On July 17, unknown intruders broke into the 
annex office of CALDH in Guatemala City.  On the same day, a 
witness in the IACHR case received an inoperative bomb with a 
note threatening his life.  On July 30, another threat 
against the Plan de Sanchez witnesses was delivered to 
CALDH,s office in Rabinal.  The vehicle of a CALDH employee 
was hijacked on September 13.  Throughout July to September, 
CALDH employees were followed in vehicles, threatened by 
phone and in person.  The investigation into the series of 
threats is ongoing. 
 
8.  On August 12, the Ambassador visited the CALDH offices to 
hear first hand about the threats and express USG concern. 
Three Amcits working with NISGUA, an accompaniment 
organization working with the Plan de Sanchez community, 
attended the meeting.  On August 11, CALDH met with 
Government Minister Carlos Vielmann and with Attorney General 
Juan Luis Florido.  Vielmann committed to improving the 
diligence of the PNC security forces, who were frequently 
absent from in front of the organization,s office during 
July.  PolOff has discussed the threats with the Special 
Prosecutor for Crimes against Human Rights Defenders Betty 
Gudiel on multiple occasions.  Gudiel reported progress in 
the March kidnapping case but stated that in the other case 
lack of evidence had limited investigations and prosecutions. 
 In response to the threats against CALDH and other 
organizations, the Ambassador also hosted a reception on 
September 29 in honor of and to convey support for the local 
human rights community.  In October, CALDH relocated its 
primary offices to a new location (the move was planned 
before the threats began).  Since that time, CALDH staffers 
have not received further threats. 
 
PDH Leads &Movement Against Violence8 
------------------------------------- 
 
9.  Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales, in coordination 
with the Catholic and Protestant churches and over 400 other 
organizations, formed the &Movement Against Violence,8 on 
June 14 to raise awareness about the growing violence in 
Guatemala.  On August 13, over 5,000 individuals participated 
in a national march led by the Movement.  The GOG gave 
government employees several hours off work if they choose to 
participate.  The Movement also created working groups to 
analyze different types of violence and make recommendations 
to the GOG. 
 
USG donates $86,000 to Special Unit for Human Rights 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
10.  On August 30, the Ambassador and Attorney General Juan 
Luis Florido signed an agreement to donate $86,000 of DRL 
funds to the office of the Special Prosecutor to Combat 
Crimes against Human Rights Defenders.  The Ambassador 
stressed the Embassy,s support for the Special Unit and the 
effective investigation of crimes against human rights 
defenders.  Betty Gudiel, the current Special Prosecutor, was 
hand-chosen by Florido to replace Thelma de Lam (who had 
personal disputes with Florido and was closely allied with 
former AG Carlos de Leon).  The Special Unit has taken 
several cases to court in the last several months, including 
the April 2002 murder of Menchu Foundation accountant 
Gillermo Ovalle (see para 2), the April 2003 murder of Mayan 
priest Diego Xon Salazar (one individual was convicted and 
sentenced to 15-years in prison), and the September 2003 
murder of community organizer and member of the Council of 
Ethnic Communities (CERJ) Eusebio Macario (the court found 
the suspect not-guilty). 
 
11.  The grant aims to better equip the Special Human Rights 
Unit to arrive quickly at  crime scenes, interview witnesses, 
track and evaluate case progress, and more effectively record 
evidence and prosecute cases.  These funds will purchase two 
vehicles, third-party liability insurance policies, 16 
personal computers, one laser printer, 10 UPS stations and 
computer cabling. 
 
Threats against ANN Deputy Nineth Montenegro 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
12.  Mario Polanco, director of Mutual Support Group (GAM), 
reported to PolOff that, from August to September, ANN 
Congressional deputy Nineth Montenegro, President of the 
Human Rights Committee and former director of GAM (and 
Polanco,s spouse), received 20 threatening phone calls. 
Unknown individuals broke the windows of her vehicle in front 
of her home and rifled papers inside but stole nothing.  The 
Congresswoman,s car was followed, and unidentified men 
loitered in front of her home.  In the past two months, the 
threats have subsided. 
 
Supreme Court Recuses Judge in Gerardi Case 
------------------------------------------- 
 
13.  Prosecutors in the 1998 murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi, 
the Coordinator of the Archbishop,s Office on Human Rights 
(ODHAG) are currently investigating 10-12 more suspects 
thought to be involved in the killing.  On August 25, the 
Supreme Court ruled that the head of the Fourth Penal Court, 
Willevaldo Contreras, should be recused from hearing further 
cases against individuals implicated in Gerardi,s murder (he 
heard the previous trial), because he has previously made 
public statements demonstrating partiality.  The Fourth Penal 
Court appealed the ruling and that decision is pending. 
 
New Trial for Rio Negro Massacre Suspended 
------------------------------------------ 
 
14.  On October 19, a new trial began against six ex-PACS 
(three others were convicted in 1998) for the 1982 Rio Negro 
massacre.  However, after just one day of testimony, defense 
lawyers presented a motion to suspend to correct the spelling 
of the witnesses, names in trial paperwork.  The trial was 
not expected to resume for several months.  Witnesses and 
lawyers on the case have received numerous threats in the 
months leading up to the new trial. 
 
Freedom of the Press Has Improved 
--------------------------------- 
 
15.  According to the Committee on Freedom of the Press and 
the OAS Special Rapporteur for Freedom of the Press, 
conditions for journalists in Guatemala have improved in the 
last year.  The representatives presented the reports at the 
October 25 General Assembly meeting of the Inter-American 
Press Society (SIP).  Gonzalo Marroquin, President of the 
Guatemala SIP Committee, stated, &it seems that an 
institutional policy of confrontation and pressure against 
the press doesn,t exist in Guatemala.8  Eduardo Bertoni, 
Special OAS Rapporteur, recognized that in Guatemala the GOG 
&investigates some cases, which doesn,t happen in other 
parts of the region.8  However, Bertoni also observed that 
the cases which are investigated &are not done so rapidly 
and with the desired results (of prosecutions).8 
HAMILTON 
"
"23012","11/18/2004 21:06","04GUATEMALA2926","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE232089","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

182106Z Nov 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002926 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, GT, UNGA, UN 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: RESPONSE TO DEMARCHE ON REPASCH 
CANDIDACY FOR RE-ELECTION TO UN JOINT STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 
 
REF: STATE 232089 
 
(U)  Following delivery of reftel talking points and Repasch 
C.V. on November 8, Poloff met November 17 with Luis 
Carranza, Vice Director for UN Affairs in the Guatemalan 
Foreign Ministry\'s Multilateral Affairs Directorate. 
Carranza said that the Foreign Ministry had reviewed the 
Repasch C.V. but was not prepared to divulge its preferences 
for the Joint Staff Pension Committee election. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23083","11/19/2004 19:58","04GUATEMALA2941","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE243652","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002941 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON UNGA HUMAN RIGHTS RESOLUTIONS 
 
REF: (A) TRIVELLI-HAMILTON E-MAIL (B) STATE 243652 
 
     (C) GUATEMALA 2819 
 
Classified By: DCM Bruce Wharton for reasons 1.5 (b) & (d). 
 
1. (C) Poloff spoke to Luis Carranza, Deputy Director for UN 
Affairs in the Guatemalan MFA, about Guatemala\'s abstention 
on the Iran resolution at the UNGA and support for the 
remaining country resolutions.  According to Carranza, 
following our reftel meeting with him where he had indicated 
support for all the resolutions including the one on Iran, 
Vice Minister Carlos Ramiro Martinez reviewed the draft Iran 
resolution and expressed doubts about its failure to 
acknowledge some positive developments in Iran.  Martinez met 
with the Canadians, who also failed to persuade him.  He then 
gave the instruction to abstain. 
 
2. (C) Carranza said the GOG still planned to vote in favor 
of the resolutions on Belarus, Zimbabwe, Congo, and Sudan. 
The MFA issued instructions to that effect to its people in 
New York.  Carranza said he understood that the text of the 
resolution on Sudan was still being negotiated in New York, 
thus suggesting that GOG support for that resolution might be 
contingent on the outcome of those deliberations.  Poloff 
stressed to Carranza the importance we placed on the votes 
and our interest in the GOG\'s positions. 
 
3. (C) Acting FM Marta Altolaguirre subsequently confirmed to 
polcouns that the MFA had instructed its New York mission to 
vote \"yes\" on these resolutions. 
 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"23154","11/22/2004 17:39","04GUATEMALA2945","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE240429","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002945 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, IS, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: OPPOSING ANTI-ISRAELI BIAS AT UNGA 
 
REF: STATE 240429 
 
(SBU) Poloff delivered reftel talking points to Luis 
Carranza, Vice Director for UN Affairs in the Guatemalan 
Foreign Ministry\'s Multilateral Affairs Directorate on 
November 17.  Carranza said Guatemala was not prepared to 
move from abstention to a \"no\" vote on the resolutions in 
this year\'s votes. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23157","11/22/2004 18:58","04GUATEMALA2948","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE246188","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002948 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2014 
TAGS: PREL, HA, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON HAITI DEMARCHE 
 
REF: STATE 246188 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) & (d). 
 
(C) Polcouns delivered reftel demarche to Guatemalan Acting 
FM Marta Altolaguirre, who agreed wholeheartedly with U.S. 
assessment.  She said Guatemala\'s troop contribution to 
MINUSTAH was just one indicator of Guatemala\'s commitment to 
the \"long-term efforts\" that would be required of the 
international community in Haiti.  Altolaguirre volunteered 
that her personal view was that Aristide had been a 
\"disaster\" and could play no useful role in Haiti\'s future. 
She said she would forward to Guatemala\'s delegation to the 
Ibero-American Summit, already in San Jose, our concerns 
about Haiti and the need to express support for Latortue and 
the Interim Government of Haiti. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23271","11/24/2004 16:21","04GUATEMALA2964","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA2941","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 002964 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, GT, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON UNGA HUMAN RIGHTS RESOLUTIONS /// 
CORRECTED COPY//// 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 2941 
 
     B. TRIVELLI-HAMILTON E-MAIL 
     C. STATE 243652 
     D. GUATEMALA 2819 
 
Classified By: DCM Bruce Wharton for reasons 1.4 (b) & (d). 
 
1. (C) Poloff spoke to Luis Carranza, Deputy Director for UN 
Affairs in the Guatemalan MFA, about Guatemala\'s abstention 
on the Iran resolution at the UNGA and support for the 
remaining country resolutions.  According to Carranza, 
following our reftel meeting with him where he had indicated 
support for all the resolutions including the one on Iran, 
Vice Minister Carlos Ramiro Martinez reviewed the draft Iran 
resolution and expressed doubts about its failure to 
acknowledge some positive developments in Iran.  Martinez met 
with the Canadians, who also failed to persuade him.  He then 
gave the instruction to abstain. 
 
2. (C) Carranza said the GOG still planned to vote in favor 
of the resolutions on Belarus, Zimbabwe, Congo, and Sudan. 
The MFA issued instructions to that effect to its people in 
New York.  Carranza said he understood that the text of the 
resolution on Sudan was still being negotiated in New York, 
thus suggesting that GOG support for that resolution might be 
contingent on the outcome of those deliberations.  Poloff 
stressed to Carranza the importance we placed on the votes 
and our interest in the GOG\'s positions. 
 
3. (C) Acting FM Marta Altolaguirre subsequently confirmed to 
polcouns that the MFA had instructed its New York mission to 
vote \"yes\" on these resolutions. 
 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"23278","11/24/2004 17:20","04GUATEMALA2969","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE239529","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

241720Z Nov 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002969 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, KIRF, PGOV, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: NO REPORTS OF ANTI-SEMITISM 
 
REF: SECSTATE 239529 
 
The Jewish community in Guatemala is small (less than one 
thousand or 0.008% of the general population) and confined to 
Guatemala City.  PolOff spoke to Guatemalan\'s leading rabbi 
and several Jewish citizens in April 2004 and November 2004. 
They did not/not report any acts of violence against or 
harassment of Jewish people for their beliefs.  As reported 
in the 2004 IRF, Government policies contribute to the free 
practice of relgion for all religious denominations. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23384","11/29/2004 13:35","04GUATEMALA2985","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA2840|04GUATEMALA2868","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002985 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, KCRM, SNAR, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: UN OFFICIAL\'S VISIT TO GUATEMALA SPURS ACTION ON 
CICIACS AND OHCHR 
 
REF: (A) GUATEMALA 2868 (B) GUATEMALA 2840 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) & (d) 
 
1. (U) Summary:  The Government of Guatemala sent UN SYG Kofi 
Annan a letter reaffirming its commitment to CICIACS and 
outlining interim measures it is taking to pave the way for 
CICIACS.  The letter was prompted by the visit to Guatemala 
of UN U/S for Political Affairs Kieran Prendergast to 
Guatemala.  The \"Human Rights Coalition Against Clandestine 
Structures\" issued a press release criticizing the GOG\'s 
letter to Annan and, more broadly, the GOG\'s failure to 
dismantle organized crime.  On a separate but related matter, 
GOG officials have told the Embassy they are on the verge of 
reaching an agreement with the UN High Commissioner on Human 
Rights to open an office in Guatemala.  End summary. 
 
-------------------- 
GOG LETTER TO THE UN 
-------------------- 
 
2. (U) Acting President Eduardo Stein\'s November 19 letter to 
UN SYG Kofi Annan reaffirmed the GOG\'s commitment to CICIACS 
without identifying a strategy for overcoming congressional 
and judicial opposition to elements of the CICIACS concept. 
As a \"supplement\" to the GOG\'s efforts to install CICIACS, 
Stein\'s letter said the GOG would establish a Special 
Prosecutor to combat organized crime and would ask the UN to 
provide international experts to help staff the office.  In 
the letter, the GOG also committed to push for congressional 
approval of new laws against organized crime, including a 
witness protection law and the establishment of a National 
Forensic Institute, and made reference to GOG efforts to 
obtain wiretapping authority.  (Embassy notes that a few days 
earlier, visiting German FM Joschka Fischer announced the FRG 
would provide some funding for the National Forensic 
Institute.)  The letter said the GOG would form a High Level 
Commission with representatives from the Vice Presidency, the 
Ministry of Interior, the MFA, and the President Human Rights 
Commission, the Congress, the Human Rights Ombudsman, the 
Courts and the Prosecutor\'s Office to coordinate GOG efforts 
against organized crime. 
 
3. (U) The Human Rights Coalition Against Clandestine 
Structures (HRCACS) issued a November 23 press release 
criticizing Stein\'s letter to Annan as \"rhetorical 
subterfuge\" to mask the GOG\'s lack of commitment.  HRCACS 
pointed out that Guatemala already had a number of Special 
Prosecutors who had proven ineffective in tackling problems 
such as money laundering, narcotrafficking, corruption, and 
attacks against labor leaders, journalists and human rights 
activists.  Some of the special prosecutors had international 
experts working with them to no avail.  The communique also 
questioned the GOG\'s commitment (conveyed in Stein\'s letter) 
to increase funding for police, prosecutors and the courts, 
noting that the GOG,\'s recently approved 2005 budget 
continued a downward trend for the criminal justice system. 
HRCACS signatories included prominent NGOs such as the Myrna 
Mack Foundation, the Rigoberta Menchu Foundation, CALDH, GAM 
and ODHAG. 
 
4. (SBU) On a separate but related matter, GOG officials have 
told the Embassy they are on the verge of reaching a new 
agreement with the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights, 
which would presumably meet congressional concerns, in order 
to open an office in Guatemala.  MFA U/S Marta Altolaguirre 
made this point to several embassy officers in the last week 
as did Presidential Human Rights Commissioner Frank LaRue. 
------------------- 
PRENDERGAST\'S VISIT 
------------------- 
 
5. (C) The GOG\'s latest efforts on CICIACS and the OHCHR 
appear to have been prompted by the November 15 visit to 
Guatemala of UN U/S for Political Affairs Kieran Prendergast. 
 Prendergast told the Ambassador that he had met with VP 
Stein, who had expressed frustration that the MFA had not yet 
reached an agreement with the UN High Commissioner for Human 
Rights for the opening of an OHCHR office in Guatemala. 
Stein thought the remaining differences were a matter that 
\"could be resolved in ten minutes.\"  Stein claimed to have 
given Guatemala\'s new permrep to the UN, Ambassador Jorge 
Skinner-Klee, a deadline of November 17 to strike a deal with 
Geneva, at which point he would take over the OHCHR 
negotiation. 
 
6. (C) Prendergast noted that Skinner-Klee had recently paid 
him an introductory call, during which Skinner-Klee\'s opening 
gambit had been to feign an air of grievance for having been 
assigned to replace the popular and highly respected Gert 
Rosenthal as Guatemala\'s permrep to the UN.  Skiner-Klee then 
segued into \"preemptive truculence,\" asserting that his 
predecessor had had an easy job at a time when Guatemala 
enjoyed smooth relations with the UN, whereas Skinner-Klee 
expected he would have to deal with \"problems.\" 
7. (C) Prendergast said he was aware that Skinner-Klee was a 
cousin of Antonio Arenales-Forno, the leading congressional 
critic of the OHCHR and CICIACS initiatives, and thought that 
Skinner-Klee shared the same nationalist objections to UN 
\"intrusion\" into Guatemalan affairs. 
 
8. (C) The Ambassador noted that FM Briz at a lunch the 
previous week had said the GOG was not opposed to having the 
OHCHR office report on Guatemala as long as it did not become 
the High Commissioner\'s report.  Prendergast said he 
perceived some flexibility on the High Commissioner\'s part, 
too.  But he also noted that he had no mandate from Geneva to 
negotiate on behalf of the High Commissioner and therefore 
had not been fully briefed on the issue.  Prendergast advisor 
Martha Doggett said the High Commissioner required in the 
agreement a written reference to the office\'s mandate to 
observe and report on Guatemala. 
 
9. (C) Prendergast said both Stein and Rosenthal had 
recommended that the OHCHR office should be prioritized ahead 
of CICIACS, since CICIACS was a tougher challenge. 
Prendergast indicated he agreed with pursuing them in that 
order.  In response to the Ambassador\'s question, he said it 
was not clear to him who had the GOG\'s lead for developing a 
new CICIACS proposal.  Doggett noted that Guatemalan Attorney 
General Florido had called on Prendergast\'s office in New 
York to flog his own request for technical assistance and 
funding but did not appear well-versed on CICIACS. 
 
10. (C) In response to questions by Prendergast, the 
Ambassador noted that the Berger administration had 
demonstrated earlier in the year its ability to push 
legislation through the Congress with its all-consuming 
effort on the tax package.  The Ambassador also noted that a 
CICIACS-type unit within the Public Ministry might still be 
able to achieve some of its original objectives even without 
the autonomy envisioned under the proposal that was shot down 
by the Constitutional Court. 
 
11. (C) On November 16, Frank LaRue, head of the President\'s 
Commission on Human Rights (COPREDEH), told the Ambassador 
that VP Stein had convened a working group about CICIACS on 
November 13.  LaRue, who participated in the meetings, said 
that the group had developed a strategy that entailed asking 
the UN to designate a Special Envoy to continue negotiating 
CICIACS with the GOG, lobbying Congress anew in January 2006, 
and seeking another judicial opinion once a new 
Constitutional Court is seated in April 2006.  In the 
interim, the GOG would request UN assistance for Guatemalan 
prosecutors to investigate organized crime and clandestine 
groups. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
12. (C) As outlined above, the GOG wants its Special 
Prosecutor proposal  to be seen as complementary to its 
efforts to establish CICIACS.  The HRCACS\'s concern is that 
the Special Prosecutor, once in place, will become an 
inadequate substitute for CICIACS, not a supplement.  The 
original proposal for CICIACS envisioned an unprecedented 
level of intrusiveness and autonomy for international 
investigators to set up shop in Guatemala.  Optimism for 
CICIACS\'s success hinged on the hope that the independence of 
its international staff would keep Guatemala\'s \"hidden 
powers\" from obstructing investigations.  While the new 
Special Prosecutor may be a far cry from what was originally 
envisioned under the daring CICIACS proposal, it is the most 
feasible interim measure available to the GOG.  The HRCACS\'s 
sharp criticism of Stein\'s letter to Annan is probably the 
result of the GOG\'s failure to consult with the NGOs which 
had campaigned for the creation of CICIACS.  Reaching out to 
these NGOs, however, probably would not have netted the GOG 
any brilliant new strategy.  In its communique, HRCACS does 
not offer any alternatives that get around the Constitutional 
Court\'s objections to CICIACS.  But a more inclusive approach 
might have kept the HRCACS members inside the tent. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23508","12/1/2004 23:33","04GUATEMALA3071","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 003071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, GT 
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM GUATEMALA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.4 (b) & (d). 
 
1. (U) This is the first of a series of biweekly cables with 
which, in a more discursive style than the standard telegram, 
the Embassy intends to report on newsworthy political and 
economic developments and provide some context to Guatemalan 
policy-making. 
 
---------------------- 
Cabinet Changes Coming 
---------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) There is much speculation that President Berger, 
nearing completion of his first year in office, is 
considering changes in his cabinet.  It is already public 
that his young, dynamic Minister of Energy and Mines, Roberto 
Gonzalez, will move over to the presidential palace in 
January to become chief of staff.  At lunch with the 
Ambassador, Gonzalez displayed a detailed knowledge of the 
mining and energy issues he had been working as Minister and 
a lively curiosity about new issues outside his current 
portfolio.  He said that in his new position he hoped to work 
closely with the Embassy and intended to pay special 
attention to the bilateral agenda. 
 
3. (SBU) At the Ministry of Energy and Mines, Gonzalez is to 
be replaced by his competent, respected and energetic Vice 
Minister, Carolina Roca.  She will have her hands full over 
the coming weeks.  Guatemala\'s Constitutional Court 
unexpectedly ruled against the regulatory authority for 
electricity (CNEE), ordering reversal of the CNEE\'s decision 
to limit subsidized electricity rates to those who consume 
less than 100 KWH per month.  The Court also ordered 
reimbursement of all who were affected.  The court was 
responding to a motion filed by the Human Rights Ombudsman, 
who is known to argue that inexpensive electricity is a basic 
human right.  Guatemala\'s model legislation and regulatory 
structure were not affected, but the court-ordered firing of 
the CNEE\'s board sets a potentially damaging precedent of 
intrusion into the board\'s autonomy.  This week, Roca has 
organized a major forum on mining in Guatemala that has 
become a magnet for anti-mining activists of all stripes. 
The Marriott decided late last week to cancel its offer to 
host the event when local groups (Madre Selva and Marielos 
Monzon) demanded equal time and space for an event they 
wished to organize.  Consequently, the event was moved to a 
hotel away from the city center.  Finally, Roca and the 
revenue collection service (SAT) are under pressure to do 
something about the mushrooming problem of gasoline and 
diesel contraband, which the major distributors claim is 
driving them out of business.  We are working with Roca to 
try to get TDA assistance in establishing better controls. 
 
4. (C) Berger, who is leaving this weekend for Miami to be 
one of the keynote speakers at the opening plenary dinner of 
the Miami Conference on the Caribbean Basin (CCAA), has been 
openly pressing for the well-respected Lizardo Sosa to quit 
his job at the Central Bank.  Sosa\'s star lost some luster 
over his support for the Portillo Administration\'s Eurobond 
issuances.  More recently, Sosa is rumored to have incurred 
the displeasure of exporters over monetary policy, 
particularly exchange rates.  Berger reportedly wants to move 
Finance Minister Toni Bonilla to the Central Bank, inviting 
speculation about who will take over the Finance Ministry. 
Berger cannot legally force Sosa out of the Central Bank but 
with his public comments is clearly trying to make Sosa 
uncomfortable and leave.  There is some criticism that 
Berger\'s campaign against Sosa is not only unseemly but 
encroaches on the Central Bank\'s autonomy.  Likewise, having 
moved Willy Zapata from the SAT to the Superintendence of 
Banks, we hope he will find someone equally respected, and 
possibly more operational than the able but sometimes 
ethereal Zapata, for the SAT position. 
 
5. (SBU) MinDef Mendez Pinelo is expected to move out in 
January because he is already past the military\'s mandatory 
retirement deadline.  We have also heard that Health Minister 
Sosa, having dragged Berger into IPR grief by pushing new 
legislation on generic pharmaceutical drugs, may be moving 
on.  Thanks to Sosa, intellectual property rights are 
consuming much of our time.  Sosa took advantage of a lull to 
stampede a bill through the Congress on November 19 that 
eviscerates data protection for pharmaceuticals and 
agricultural chemicals.  We and others had been assured that 
the bill was dormant.  The bill is a case study in cynicism, 
guaranteeing the rights of developers of new products in its 
operational language and then defining \"new products\" so as 
to ensure that none will ever exist.  The Ambassador told 
Berger in the clearest terms that this was exactly the sort 
of issue that was getting the Dominican Republic kicked out 
of CAFTA.  Berger has fifteen days to veto the bill once he 
receives it (he has not) and has thus ordered Sosa to launch 
a process to come up with something acceptable with which to 
replace it.  Berger told the Ambassador December 1 that it 
would be too politically costly simply to veto the bill. 
Berger and Vice President Stein seem to recognize that 
Minister Sosa will not be helpful in producing a decent 
substitute and have now inserted presidential advisor and FTA 
advocate Mickey Fernandez into the process -- a good sign. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Congress Gets a D; Changes May Improve Grade 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) The Congress went into recess November 25 and was 
pretty much panned by the critics, who noted that it was the 
least productive session in at least eight years.  This is 
due in large measure to it being the most fractious congress 
in recent memory.  In addition to its lack of legislative 
accomplishments, however, the Congress was buffeted by 
nagging scandals, ranging from revelations of exorbitant 
salaries paid to ghost advisors, questions about the 
procurement of a new telephone system and the contracting of 
a security firm, the end-use of vehicles donated by Taiwan 
and congressional junkets.  The most egregious of the last 
appears to be an all-expenses paid trip for the departing 
president of congress, Rolando Morales, to Thailand and 
Indonesia in the company of a female \"advisor\" whose name 
does not show up anywhere in personnel files of the congress. 
 UNE leader Alvaro Colom told the Ambassador that Morales, 
who also belongs to UNE, did not have the managerial skills 
or experience to run Congress.  It is widely believed, 
however, that Colom and Morales were treating each other as 
rivals within UNE.  Colom told the Ambassador (and, the 
following day, announced to the press) that he was asking 
UNE\'s \"Discipline Tribunal\" to review allegations against 
Morales of corruption and mismanagement. 
 
7. (SBU) In the last month, however, the Congress elected new 
leadership for 2005.  It also approved some changes to its 
internal procedures that could help make it more productive 
next year.  These include reducing to 25% the quorum 
necessary for committees to do their work, eliminating the 
requirement for multiple readings (literally) in plenary of 
the full text of all legislation and making the texts of all 
bills available electronically.  With these new rules and the 
leadership of the new \"junta directiva\" headed by president 
Jorge Mendez Herbruger, who belongs to President Berger\'s 
coalition, there is reason to hope that next year the 
Congress might accomplish more. 
 
8. (SBU) Mendez Herbruger told the Ambassador he was fully 
aware that the Congress had plummeted to an all-time low in 
public prestige.  He said his task was to rescue the image of 
Congress by putting it to work.  He noted that he and his 
junta directiva had been elected without an opposing slate, 
although UNE and PAN absented themselves from the vote.  JMH 
claimed to enjoy direct access to President Berger and all 
the cabinet ministers but also expected to consult with key 
presidential adviser Eduardo \"Guayo\" Gonzalez on political 
issues. 
 
9. (SBU) Until the Congress comes back into session January 
14, it will be under the care of a five-member Permanent 
Committee that is to dispatch all urgent business requiring 
immediate attention.  The press, however, is speculating that 
the Permanent Committee is conspiring to vote a pay raise for 
all 158 congressional deputies of an additional $15,000 per 
year.  Public opposition to the pay raise when it was first 
floated earlier this year was so intense that the congress 
quickly backed off.  The press is convinced that the 
Permanent Committee members will somehow pull a fast one and 
push through a pay raise, thus absolving their congressional 
colleagues from responsibility. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Military Mystery:  Whodunit and Who Is it? 
------------------------------------------ 
 
10. (SBU) Meanwhile, some of the public\'s attention has 
focused on last week\'s \"discovery\" of the alleged burial site 
of Col. Raul Cerna.  As finance chief of the now-dissolved 
EMP, Cerna was a key witness in efforts to track down the 
whereabouts of at least $30 million of the $115 million or 
more that went missing in military hands under the Portillo 
administration.  Cerna dropped out of sight in April, but 
only now is it surfacing that he may have died at that time 
in a city hospital of poisoning.  The hospital report 
concluded that he accidentally poisoned himself by drinking 
muriatic acid, a conclusion that is raising eyebrows. 
Although the dead hospital patient had identification 
documents with Cerna\'s name and address, neither the hospital 
nor the morgue notified Cerna\'s family.  For that matter, 
many Guatemalans are wondering why Cerna\'s family did not 
report him missing and therefore conclude that Cerna may be 
alive and hiding.  An exhumation at Cerna\'s burial site has 
been ordered, and it is hoped (but not fully expected) that 
it will lead to a determination of whether the cadaver is 
indeed Cerna\'s.  Even for a Guatemalan public long-inured to 
jaw-dropping displays of incompetence among police, 
prosecutors and courts, the handling of the Cerna case is 
disturbing.  The Prosecutor\'s Office has announced an 
internal investigation into why its staff failed to pursue 
leads on Cerna\'s whereabouts. 
 
------------------------- 
Rios Sosa the 6th Beatle? 
------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Another episode of the military corruption soap 
opera starred the appearance in court of retired General 
Enrique Rios Sosa, the 56-year-old former Army Chief of Staff 
and Minister of Defense accused of diverting $4 million from 
the coffers of the National Mortgage Fund (CHN).  Rios Sosa 
is also the son of Efrain Rios Montt, the former president, 
who is accused by human rights activists of genocide against 
indigenous in the early 1980s.  Prosecutors failed to get the 
judge who temporarily took over the Rios Sosa case to recuse 
herself, and through some questionable maneuvers she 
proceeded to let Rios Sosa free on a $12,000 bail bond. 
Prosecutors allege she railroaded the hearing to preclude 
them from making their case.  A self-satisfied Rios Sosa 
(whose grinning visage made all the front pages November 30) 
reportedly chanted \"Peace and Love\" in English to mystified 
journalists as he departed the courtroom. 
 
-------------------- 
Politics at the MFA? 
-------------------- 
 
12. (C) Without much notice or fanfare, Juan Jose Cabrera 
joined the MFA last week as a vice foreign minister.  We were 
impressed by his hands-on responsiveness to us in getting our 
CNIES dip note turned around in time to meet our December 1 
deadline -- in his first week in office.  It is noteworthy 
that this very pleasant fellow, with no known prior 
diplomatic or international relations experience, moved to 
the MFA directly from Eduardo Gonzalez\'s office (Executive 
Secretary) in the Presidency.  Earlier this year we had heard 
 
SIPDIS 
that Gonzalez was one of the people behind the sniping 
against and anonymous criticism of FM Briz, who is widely 
expected to be Gonzalez\'s rival in the 2007 elections.  This 
makes us wonder whether Cabrera might be a \"political 
commissar.\" 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"23924","12/10/2004 18:31","04GUATEMALA3161","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA2868","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101831Z Dec 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 003161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, IO/SHA, AND DRL/MLA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, GT, UN 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN OHCHR OFFICE NEGOTIATIONS AT DELICATE 
STAGE 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 2868 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2965 
 
Classified By: PolOff Nicole Otallah for Reasons 1.5 (b). and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  The DCM and Polcouns met with Ambassador 
Carla Rodriguez, MFA Director of Multilateral Affairs, on 
December 9 to discuss the state of play of negotiations 
between the GOG and UN to establish a local Office of the UN 
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).  Following 
divided recommendations from Congressional Committees on 
November 11 (Ref A), the GOG has spent several weeks trying 
to negotiate changes that would overcome Congressional 
objections, and therefore make the office a reality.  Though 
the OHCHR and GOG are constantly moving closer to common 
ground on the agreement\'s language, they still need to tweak 
several points.  We recommend that the US Mission in Geneva 
urge the High Commissioner to show flexibility on final 
changes (see para 9).  Local European missions have 
informally indicated to us that they will send the same 
message to the OHCHR and PolOff will make the point with 
Project Coordinator for the Guatemala UN OHCHR, Birgit 
Gerstenberg, at a scheduled December 13 meeting.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (C) After the Foreign Relations and Human Rights 
Committee reported out contradictory recommendations 
regarding the establishment of a local OHCHR office on 
November 11 (Ref A, Foreign Relations against and Human 
Rights in favor), the GOG stepped in to negotiate changes to 
the agreement\'s text that would ensure that the agreement 
could gain Congressional approval.  On December 6, Vice 
President Edward Stein indicated to the Ambassador and DCM 
that the GOG has put a pause on negotiations with Geneva in 
order to let overheated negotiations on both sides cool down. 
 The OHCHR and the GOG have ironed out most of their 
differences, but frustration has grown while they decide on 
the final language for the agreement. 
 
3.  (C) On December 9, Ambassador Rodriguez told the DCM that 
the MFA received what they regarded as a confusing letter 
from Louise Arbour, the UN High Commissioner, which suggests 
that the OHCHR\'s latest version on the agreement for a local 
Guatemala office has already been accepted by the GOG.  To 
the contrary, the GOG had decided to take a break from the 
final negotiations and resume in early January with cooler 
heads.  The MFA is concerned that the OHCHR, in its published 
\"Annual Appeal 2005\" and its December 13 funding request 
meeting with donor countries may be misconstruing the status 
of the negotiations.  The GOG is still trying to reach an 
agreement that could win congressional approval -- it 
believes the December 1 text proposed by Louise Arbour would 
not garner that approval. 
 
4.  (C) The key problem seems to be in point 4 of Article V. 
Where the OHCHR would like the first two sentences to read: 
 
\"The High Commissioner shall report to the Commission on 
Human Rights in an addendum to her own report (Item IV), on 
the Office\'s activities and on the country\'s human rights 
situation.  The report shall also contain such comments and 
recommendations as deemed appropriate by the High 
Commissioner.\" 
 
5.  (C) The GOG would like the first two sentences of point 4 
in Article V to say: 
 
\"The High Commissioner shall report to the Commission on 
Human Rights in her report under item IV of the agenda on the 
Office\'s activities.  The report shall also contain such 
comments and recommendations as deemed appropriate by the 
High Commissioner to strengthen the promotion and protection 
of human rights in Guatemala.\"  (Rodriguez thought that this 
formulation of the second sentence gave the OHCHR sufficient 
leeway to report on the human rights situation, i.e., in 
making recommendations, the report would necessarily have to 
cover the human rights situation in Guatemala.) 
 
6.  (C) The MFA believes the latter formulation is more 
consistent with the mandate outlined in the preamble: 
 
\"Bearing in mind the interest of the Government of Guatemala 
to establish an OHCHR office in Guatemala, with a mandate to 
provide technical assistance to Guatemalan authorities in 
formulating and implementing policies and programs for the 
promotion and protection of human rights, monitor the 
evolution of the country\'s human rights situation and submit 
to the High Commissioner reports on the establishment of the 
Office and the activities it carries out pursuant to its 
mandate;...\" 
 
7.  (C) Rodriguez indicated that FM Briz had accepted the 
notion of being reported under item IV (items III, IX, and 
XIX were problematic in their own ways), and that the MFA was 
prepared to try to sell the renegotiated agreement on this 
basis over the expected objections of influential 
congressional critic Antonio Arenales Forno (who sits on both 
the Human Rights and Foreign Relations Committees and who is 
a former Guatemalan Ambassador in Geneva).  The MFA was 
clearly frustrated that the OHCHR\'s December 1 message made 
no acknowledgment of the GOG\'s proposal for Article V point 4 
(above).  Rodriguez also noted that OHCHR was claiming that 
intransigent donors were insisting that OHCHR tow the line. 
If this were not the case, MFA was wondering if donors could 
encourage more flexibility out of Arbour\'s office. 
 
8.  (C)  In informal consultations, local representatives 
from Norway, Sweden, and the Netherlands reported their 
belief that the OHCHR needs to show more flexibility about 
the conditions of human rights reporting from the Guatemala 
office. 
 
9.  (C) Comment:  We recommend that the US Mission to Geneva 
approach the OHCHR to urge flexibility on the wording of 
final language.  The OHCHR has achieved its principal goals 
by convincing the Guatemalans to include direct references to 
reporting in the agreement\'s text and by including the report 
in Article IV.  Donor countries have more interest in the 
swift establishment of a Guatemalan OHCHR office than 
insistence on specific terminology that is unlikely to affect 
the eventual functioning of such an institution.  PolOff will 
meet with the Guatemala UN OHCHR representative, Birgit 
Gerstenberg (who will remain in Guatemala until early 
February, despite the public closure of her office in 
November), on December 13 to communicate the same message. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23925","12/10/2004 18:32","04GUATEMALA3162","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA2964","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 003162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, GT, IR, UNGA 
SUBJECT: GOG ON IRAN RESOLUTION IN UNGA 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 02964 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2941 
     C. STATE 243652 
     D. GUATEMALA 2819 
 
Classified By: DCM D. Bruce Wharton, reason: 1.4 (d). 
 
1.  (C) Poloff spoke to Luis Carranza, Deputy Director for UN 
Affairs in the Guatemalan Foreign Ministry, to express 
appreciation for Guatemala\'s vote in 3rd Committee on the 
Turkmenistan resolution, but again note disappointment about 
Guatemala\'s abstention on the Iran resolution.  Poloff asked 
whether the GOG would consider changing their position and 
voting &yes8 on the Iran resolution during the UNGA plenary 
session.  Carranza said that he doubted that the GOG would 
vary its position on the Iran resolution (specifically, he 
said \"only in a very extreme situation\"). 
 
2.  (C) Carranza promised to advise the MFA leadership again 
of our explicit interest in the vote and will inform us if 
there are any developments.  Carranza ignored PolOff,s 
reference to the contrast between Guatemala,s vote and the 
votes of Belize, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Honduras in favor 
of the resolution. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23926","12/10/2004 18:33","04GUATEMALA3163","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 003163 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN, IO/PHO, AND AF/RSA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2014 
TAGS: KPKO, PREL, MOPS, GT, HA, BY, IV, SU, CF, UN 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN PARTICIPATION IN PEACEKEEPING 
OPERATIONS IS GROWING 
 
REF: A. USDAO GUATEMALA IIR 6 838 996 05 (DTG 061836Z 
        OCT 04) 
     B. USDAO GUATEMALA IIR 6 838 9986 05 (DTG 031812Z 
        NOV 04) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton, reason: 1.4(d) 
 
1.  (C) Summary:  In addition to deployment of a military 
police company to Haiti, the Guatemalan military has military 
observers in the Ivory Coast and Burundi, has finished 
training military observers for deployment to Sudan, and has 
promised to send a Special Forces company and a military 
police company to the Congo.  The Guatemalan military 
leadership views participation in peacekeeping operations as 
a means to increase military professionalization, provide a 
revenue source for military modernization, and reinforce 
reorientation of the military away from internal security 
missions.  Resource and personnel constraints may keep the 
Guatemalan military  from fully realizing its ambitions for 
participation in international peacekeeping efforts, but we 
should applaud and support this trend whenever and however 
possible.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) The October 2004 deployment of a company-size (70 
man) military police contingent to join the UN Mission For 
Stabilization of Haiti (MINUSTAH) represents Guatemala\'s 
second experience with peacekeeping operations (PKOs) in 
Haiti; Guatemala also participated in the  1994 Multinational 
Force and its UN successor.  This contingent is primarily 
responsible for security of MINUSTAH headquarters.  The 
Guatemalan military had been approached by the UN about 
sending an infantry battalion to Haiti in early 2005 as a 
replacement for the military police contingent (Ref A); 
current Guatemalan planning, however, only envisions rotation 
of the military police contingent in April 2005. 
 
3. (C) The Haiti follow-on contingent issue was intertwined 
with proposals to create a multinational Central American 
peacekeeping battalion that would include company-size 
contingents from at least Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, 
and Nicaragua.  This idea has been discussed in meetings of 
the Conference of Central American Armies (CFAC), but has 
apparently encountered political difficulties in some of the 
member countries.  With no more need for additional troops 
for Haiti, the Guatemalans are now exploring formation of a 
Central American battalion outside of CFAC auspices to avoid 
political and legal constraints related to CFAC sponsorship. 
 
4.  (U) Guatemala\'s return to peacekeeping was spurred by two 
events: the October 2003 simultaneous creation of an Army 
peacekeeping operations school and a PKO section in the 
Operations Department of the General Staff; and, the November 
2003 signing of an MOU between the UN and GOG, which 
committed Guatemala to the Standby List for PKOs.  The first 
course in the PKO school began in January 2004; the school 
offers courses designed for various personnel participating 
in UN-led PKOs, such as military police, military observers, 
staff officers, and commanders. 
 
5.  (SBU) The PKO school has just completed training of 15 
military observers for future deployment to the Sudan; 
Guatemala currently has three military observers each in the 
UN missions in the Cote D\'Ivoire (UNOCI) and Burundi (ONUB), 
respectively.  Guatemala is also planning to send a 100-man 
Special Forces and a 100-man military police contingent to 
the UN mission in the Congo (MONUC) in early 2005.  The 
mission of the Special Forces company will apparently include 
rescue of hostages. 
 
6.  (C) In conversations with Embassy officers, Guatemalan 
Chief of the Defense Staff Major General Bustamante has made 
it clear that he sees participation in PKOs as an important 
vehicle for increasing the professionalization of the 
Guatemalan military.  MG Bustamante noted that opportunities 
to work with more advanced military forces provide unequaled 
training opportunities for the Guatemalan military, and that 
the experience of equipping, training, and deploying 
Guatemalan forces to foreign theaters in itself provides 
valuable training. 
 
7.  (SBU) The Guatemalan military leadership also views 
participation in UN PKOs as a funding source, albeit a modest 
one, for military modernization.  Part of the UN funding will 
go to enhanced salaries for the Guatemalan soldier but a 
portion will be paid directly to the GOG.  The Guatemala 
military anticipates that these funds will be for 
modernization of the military, a line item in the GOG budget 
that is to be financed by sale of military property and/or 
foreign donations.  (Note: Since the GOG has decreed that 
surplus military property will be donated to other Guatemalan 
national, departmental, or municipal entities, foreign 
donations or soft loans appear to be the only viable funding 
source for military modernization.  End Note.) 
8.  (C) Comment:  There are resource and personnel 
constraints facing full realization of Guatemalan ambitions 
for PKO participation.  The Guatemalan military will be 
reimbursed by the UN for expenses in equipping its Haiti 
contingent but may face problems in advancing funds to 
similarly equip its units destined for the Congo, especially 
as it will be a larger contingent with a more complex and 
dangerous mission.  Future commitments, including rotations, 
may face similar funding problems.  On the personnel side, 
the current size of the Guatemalan military means that 
Guatemala may not be able to commit more than a 
battalion-size force to PKO participation, given the 1 to 3 
ratio needed to support foreign deployments, as well as the 
fact that close to one third of the Guatemalan military is 
currently involved in supporting joint police-military 
security patrols.  (The Guatemalan military has proposed to 
at least partially address the personnel issue by not 
counting deployed peacekeepers against the official personnel 
strength ceiling - an idea that may face opposition from 
civilian authorities, human rights groups, and/or 
international donors.) 
 
9.  (C) Comment continued:  Left unspoken, but presumably in 
the minds of at least some officers, increased participation 
in PKOs would constrain the GOG\'s ability to increase the 
number of military personnel involved in joint 
police-military patrols.  The Guatemalan military clearly 
chafes at this role, believing it is a drain on scarce 
military resources and worrying about fallout from possible 
military involvement should there occur an incident involving 
use of excessive force.  The military is also concerned that 
joint patrols represent an open-ended commitment, and one 
that will grow larger given - in the military view - the 
incompetence of the police. 
 
10. (C) Comment continued:  Guatemala\'s interest in and 
commitment to a growing role in international peacekeeping is 
very positive.  We should encourage it politically and 
support it logistically (as contemplated in the release of 
frozen MAP funds) whenever possible. 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED. 
HAMILTON 
"
"23927","12/10/2004 18:47","04GUATEMALA3164","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 003164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, PHUM, PGOV, ELAB, KCRM, SNAR, EAID, KPAO, ECON 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALAN UNION LEADER\'S DEATH:  MORE COMMON CRIME 
 
 
1.  (U) Julio Rolando Raquec, Secretary of the Federation of 
Workers in the Informal Economy (FSTIG),  died after being 
mugged several blocks from his Guatemala City residence by 
unidentified individuals on November 30.  Raquec sustained 
fatal injuries during the robbery and died later the same 
day.  According to the police report, Raquec and his wife 
indicated to the police that they had been attacked by 
unknown men, who shot Raquec four times while taking his 
money.  The wife believed that the aggressors were gang 
members who operated in the area. (Comment: Raquez lived in 
Zone 6, which is one of the most dangerous parts of the city 
and has been designated a \"red zone\" for violence by the GOG). 
 
2. (U) Jose Pinzon, leader of the umbrella union CGTG, 
reported to PolOff that Raquec had received several phone 
threats in May and June 2004.  However, Pinzon recognized 
that Raquec\'s death appears to have been a common criminal 
act.  The FSTIG union is small and not widely visible or 
personally known to PolOffs.  The Public Ministry assigned 
the case to the Special Unit for Homicides, though PolOff has 
not been able to discuss the case further with the assigned 
prosecutor. 
HAMILTON 
"
"24136","12/15/2004 16:26","04GUATEMALA3198","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE240980","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

151626Z Dec 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 003198 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/MTA/MST, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
USTR FOR GLORIA BLUE 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, GT 
SUBJECT:  GUATEMALA NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE 2005 
 
REF:  (A) STATE 240980 
 
      (B) OLSON-BLUE E-MAIL 12/15/04 
 
Embassy Guatemala\'s submission for the 2005 National Trade 
Estimate follows: 
 
TRADE SUMMARY (data marked XX to be supplied in Washington) 
 
The U.S. trade deficit with Guatemala was $XX million in 
2004, a decrease of $XX million from 2003.  U.S. goods 
exports in 2004 were $XX billion, up XX percent from the 
previous year.  Corresponding U.S. imports from Guatemala 
were $XX billion, up XX percent.  Guatemala is currently 
the XX largest export market for U.S. goods. 
 
The stock of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in 
Guatemala in 2004 was $XX million, up XX percent from 2003. 
 
IMPORT POLICIES 
 
Free Trade Agreement 
 
The United States and four Central American countries (El 
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua) concluded 
negotiations on the U.S.-Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) in December 2003.  The United States and 
Costa Rica finalized negotiations for Costa Rica\'s 
participation on January 25.  The United States and the 
Dominican Republic concluded market access negotiations in 
March 2004 to integrate the Dominican Republic into the 
CAFTA. The United States and the five Central American 
countries signed the Agreement in May 2004.  The Agreement 
is pending ratification from all Congresses. 
 
The CAFTA will not only liberalize bilateral trade between 
the United States and the region, but also will further 
integration efforts among the countries of Central America, 
removing barriers to trade and investment in the region by 
U.S. companies.  The CAFTA will also require the countries 
of Central America to undertake needed reforms to alleviate 
many of the systemic problems noted below in areas 
including customs administration; protection of 
intellectual property rights; services, investment, and 
financial services market access and protection; government 
procurement; sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) barriers; 
other non-tariff barriers; and other areas. 
 
Tariffs 
 
Guatemala\'s tariffs on most goods from outside the Central 
American Common Market are currently within the zero to 15 
percent range, though there are exceptions of up to 40 
percent for alcoholic beverages and up to 20 percent for 
precious and semiprecious stones, various types of 
vehicles, watches, and firearms and munitions.  Other 
exceptions include agricultural commodity imports in excess 
of any applicable tariff rate quota (TRQ).  The average 
applied rate on all products is approximately 5 to 6 
percent.  Once CAFTA goes into effect, about 80 percent of 
U.S. industrial and commercial goods will enter Guatemala 
duty free, with the remaining tariffs being eliminated 
within ten years. 
 
The CAFTA will eliminate tariffs on virtually all 
agricultural products within a maximum of fifteen years 
(dairy in 20 years and rice and poultry in 18).  Textiles 
and apparel will be duty-free and quota-free immediately if 
they meet the Agreement\'s rules of origin, promoting new 
opportunities for U.S. and Central American fiber, yarn, 
fabric and apparel manufacturing.  The Agreement requires 
transparency and efficiency in administering customs 
procedures, including rules of origin.  Under the CAFTA, 
Guatemala commits to ensure procedural certainty and 
fairness, and all parties agree to share information to 
combat illegal transshipment of goods.  The agreement 
includes a dispute resolution mechanism that provides an 
alternative to Guatemala\'s problematic judicial system. 
 
Non-tariff Barriers 
 
The government of Guatemala committed to implement the WTO 
Customs Valuation Agreement by November 2001.  The Central 
American countries approved a common Customs Valuation 
regulation in June 28, 2004, which enabled Guatemala to 
begin implementation of the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement 
on August 10, 2004. 
 
STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING AND CERTIFICATION 
 
Guatemalan law requires that food products sold in the 
domestic market be tested, registered and labeled in 
Spanish, although stick-on labels are permitted.  Products 
sold in bulk are exempt from the labeling requirement 
unless they are to be sold at the retail level as an 
individual unit.  Enforcement of product registration and 
labeling requirements has been inconsistent but is 
improving. 
 
Under the CAFTA, Guatemala agreed to apply the science- 
based disciplines of the WTO Agreement on SPS measures, and 
will move toward recognizing export eligibility for all 
plants inspected under the U.S. food safety and inspection 
system.  The United States and Central America initiated an 
active working group dialogue on SPS barriers to 
agricultural trade that met alongside the CAFTA market 
access negotiations.  The objective was to use the impetus 
of active trade negotiations to seek difficult changes to 
the countries\' SPS regimes.  Through the work of this 
group, additional commitments to resolve specific 
unjustified measures restricting trade between Guatemala 
and the United States have been agreed.  The SPS Working 
Group will continue its work on resolution of outstanding 
issues even after the negotiations concluded. 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
 
Guatemala is not a party to the WTO Government Procurement 
Agreement.  Currently, Guatemala\'s Government Procurement 
Law requires most government purchases over $113,000 to be 
submitted for public competitive bidding.  Contracts can be 
awarded when there is only one bidder.  The government 
occasionally declares certain projects a matter of national 
emergency, thereby avoiding the competitive bidding 
process.  Foreign suppliers must submit their bids through 
locally registered representatives, a bureaucratic process 
that can place foreign bidders at a competitive 
disadvantage.  Additionally, U.S. companies have long 
alleged that significant corruption exists in the public 
procurement process and is a barrier to entry.   In March 
2004, the new Berger Administration made mandatory the use 
of Guatecompras, an Internet-based electronic system to 
publicize its procurement needs, which is improving 
transparency in the government procurement process. 
 
Under the CAFTA, Guatemala will grant U.S. suppliers non- 
discriminatory rights to bid on contracts from most 
government entities, including key ministries and state- 
owned enterprises.  This removes current burdensome 
requirements to use local representation in government 
procurement bids.  The CAFTA requires fair and transparent 
procurement procedures, such as advance notice of purchases 
and timely and effective bid review procedures.  The CAFTA 
anti-corruption provisions ensure that bribery in trade- 
related matters, including in government procurement, is 
specified as a criminal offense under Central American and 
U.S. laws. 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR) PROTECTION 
 
 Legislation passed in 2003 reinstated IPR protections to 
levels similar to those applied in the United States. 
However, the Guatemalan Congress approved in November 2004 
new legislation that effectively eliminates data protection 
provisions for pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals. 
The President has not signed this law yet.  Effective 
enforcement of existing laws remains a problem. 
 
However, the CAFTA provisions will strengthen Guatemala\'s 
IPR protection regime to conform with, and in many areas 
exceed, WTO norms and will criminalize end-user piracy, 
providing a strong deterrence against piracy and 
counterfeiting.  The CAFTA will require Guatemala to 
authorize the seizure, forfeiture, and destruction of 
counterfeit and pirated goods and the equipment used to 
produce them.  It will also mandate both statutory and 
actual damages for copyright infringement and trademark 
piracy.  This will serve as a deterrent against piracy, and 
ensures that monetary damages can be awarded even when it 
is difficult to assign a monetary value to the violation. 
 
Patents 
 
Guatemala\'s 2000 Industrial Property Law also made 
improvements to the protection afforded to patent holders, 
increasing the term of protection for a patent to 20 years 
from the date of filing the patent application.  It also 
increased the number of products and services that are 
considered patentable, including living organisms, 
commercial plans and chemical compounds or compositions. 
This law provided patent protection for pharmaceutical and 
agricultural products for the first time and established a 
mailbox system to process cases filed since 1995.  The most 
recent but not yet enacted legislation has a troublesome 
definition of \"new chemical entity\" that could undermine 
not only the protection of test data but also the ability 
to patent pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals, 
depending on how the law is interpreted if it comes into 
force.  The legislation currently in place for protection 
of test data and trade secrets submitted to a government 
for the purpose of product approval is consistent with the 
requirements of CAFTA:  test data is protected against 
unfair commercial use for a period of 5 years for 
pharmaceuticals and 10 years for agricultural chemicals. 
 
Copyrights 
 
Piracy of copyrighted material, including videos and 
software, remains widespread, and enforcement of existing 
legislation remains a concern.  Some progress has been 
achieved in reducing the incidence of pay television piracy 
and in concluding valid licensing agreements with copyright 
holders.  Guatemala has ratified the WIPO Copyright Treaty 
(WCT) and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty 
(WPPT).  CAFTA enforcement provisions are designed to help 
reduce copyright piracy. 
 
Trademarks 
 
Exclusive rights for trademarks are granted on a first-to- 
file basis, thus permitting third parties to register and 
gain exclusive use of well-known or famous trademarks.  A 
dispute resolution system has been established in the event 
that a well-known or famous trademark is granted to a third 
party.  The local Internet domain name registrar does not 
accept applications for well-known and famous names from 
applicants who are not the trademark holders as frequently 
as it once did.  Additionally, when receiving an Internet 
domain name registration, the domain name owner is required 
to submit the registration to the WIPO online dispute 
resolution system in the event of a challenge by a third 
party. CAFTA enforcement provisions are designed to help 
reduce trademark piracy. 
 
SERVICES BARRIERS 
 
Currently, international telephone traffic must be routed 
through the facilities of an enterprise licensed by the 
Guatemalan Superintendence of Telecommunications.  U.S. 
companies have raised allegations of anti-competitive 
behavior, including unilateral changes of interconnection 
rates, by the country\'s dominant fixed line telephone 
service provider, Telgua, which is a subsidiary of Telmex 
of Mexico.  Guatemala\'s courts have ruled against Telgua in 
those cases where a verdict was reached, but the 
anticompetitive practices continue.  The CAFTA will require 
that Guatemala further open its telecommunications market 
to competition on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
 
Foreign banks may open branches or subsidiaries in 
Guatemala subject to the conditions of the Monetary Board, 
including capital and lending requirements based 
exclusively on the balance sheet of the local entity. 
Branches and subsidiaries must be inscribed in the 
Mercantile Registry, as is the case with any business. 
 
Guatemalan law forbids the operation of foreign insurance 
companies, except via locally established subsidiaries, or 
the supply by foreigners or foreign companies of many 
professional services reserved for professionals with 
locally recognized academic credentials.  Many 
professionals must have graduated from a recognized 
university and must be registered in a professional 
association.  Notary publics must be Guatemalan nationals. 
Guatemala\'s National University can validate foreign 
degrees but often requires additional course work or 
examinations.  Under the CAFTA, as with banks, U.S. 
financial service suppliers would have full rights to 
establish subsidiaries, joint ventures or branches for 
insurance companies.  The right to provide professional 
services will be granted on a reciprocal basis depending on 
the requirements in individual U.S. states. 
 
INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
 
Guatemala\'s 1998 investment law generally provides for 
national treatment of foreign investment.  However, 
specific restrictions remain in several sectors of the 
economy, including auditing, insurance and forestry, 
although these restrictions are not always enforced. 
Complex and confusing laws, regulations, red tape, and 
corruption constitute practical barriers to investment. 
When the CAFTA is implemented, the agreement will establish 
a more secure and predictable legal framework for U.S. 
investors operating in Guatemala. 
 
Under the CAFTA, all forms of investment will be protected, 
including enterprises, debt, concessions, contracts and 
intellectual property.  U.S. investors will enjoy in almost 
all circumstances the right to establish, acquire and 
operate investments in Guatemala on an equal footing with 
local investors.  Among the rights afforded to U.S. 
investors are due process protections and the right to 
receive a fair market value for property in the event of an 
expropriation.  Investor rights will be backed by an 
effective, impartial procedure for dispute settlement that 
is fully transparent.  Submissions to dispute panels and 
panel hearings will be open to the public, and interested 
parties will have the opportunity to submit their views. 
 
OTHER SIGNIFICANT BARRIERS 
Corruption 
Past allegations of official corruption, security concerns 
and an anti-business attitude under the previous 
administration (there was a change in administration in 
January 2004) may have weakened investors\' confidence and 
affected investment and trade decisions related to 
Guatemala.  Anti-corruption provisions in the CAFTA aim to 
help alleviate these problems in many areas related to 
trade and investment, including making it a criminal 
offense to bribe a public official in any manner related to 
trade. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"24276","12/17/2004 17:35","04GUATEMALA3211","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA3071|04GUATEMALA3188","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 003211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/17/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, KCOR, PREL, KIPR, GT 
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM GUATEMALA (2) 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 3071 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1  (U)  This is the second in our planned biweekly series of 
discursive messages on what\'s ticking in Guatemala. 
 
Berger Doing Well in One Poll 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  (C)  Compared to media in other countries, Guatemala\'s 
media do not seem particularly interested in keeping tabs on 
public opinion of how the president is doing.  We recently 
sat down with Felipe Noguera, an Argentine pollster who for 
the last fourteen years has been hired by local magnate 
Dionisio Gutierrez to track Guatemalan public reactions for a 
select, private audience.  As expected, crime and security 
continue to vie with economic issues (jobs, inflation, cost 
of living, etc.) for the public\'s concern.  The bottom line 
for the Berger administration was positive:  the president 
went from an approval rating of 82% in February to 44% in 
July to 62% in November -- a surprising up tick for Berger 
compared to his predecessors.  Noguera indicated that this 
strong showing could be maintained or even strengthened if 
the public perceived Berger making progress in the short-term 
on crime, followed by health care, education and public 
works.  We could not help but notice that military downsizing 
-- arguably the Berger administration\'s biggest achievement 
-- was not even a blip in Noguera\'s soundings. 
 
UNE\'s Dirty Laundry 
------------------- 
 
3.  (U)  Jaws are still agape over the acrimonious exchange 
of accusations between two UNE leaders (and erstwhile 
friends):  former presidential candidate Alvaro Colom and 
outgoing president of Congress Rolando Morales.  Now that 
their simmering dispute has boiled over in public, Morales 
has left UNE, claiming he was slandered by Colom\'s 
accusations of corruption (reftel para 6). 
 
4.  (U)  Although Colom made a big splash with sensationalist 
allegations against Morales of influence peddling, payroll 
padding, and wiretapping his telephone calls, he backed away 
from some of these charges when summoned by prosecutors for a 
deposition.  At that point, Colom limited his attack to 
repeating allegations made by Carlos Quintanilla, a Colom 
friend and supporter who owns the company hired by Morales to 
provide private security guards to the Congress.  Quintanilla 
claims that Morales ordered all payments to Quintanilla 
suspended until Quintanilla agreed to pay him kickbacks of 
50,000 quetzales (a little over $6,000) per month. 
 
5.  (C)  The two surprised everyone by agreeing to appear 
together on a radio show.  Morales denied the extortion 
attempt and the wiretapping, and he questioned the 
relationship between Colom and Quintanilla, noting that 
Quintanilla had paid for a recent trip to Spain by Colom.  On 
the question of congressional payroll padding, Morales 
claimed that it was Colom, as UNE secretary general, who had 
recommended the hiring of 84 \"advisors.\"  Morales\'s steadfast 
and indignant denials that he had taken a lover on a junket 
to Indonesia took a pathetic turn when he lamely conceded 
that \"sure, we went to Morocco, but never to Indonesia.\" 
Morales managed to get in a few digs at Colom\'s wife, 
reinforcing the impression held by many that she is unduly 
meddling in UNE affairs, promoting her proteges and 
protecting her business interests. 
 
6.  (U)  With Morales\'s exit from UNE, Colom (who finished 
second in the 2003 presidential election) has one less 
potential rival to his leadership of the party.  The unseemly 
mudslinging, however, did serious damage to both leaders, who 
must be betting that voters will have forgotten this mess 
before the next presidential election in 2007.  It prompted 
the exit from of at least one other congressional deputy, 
Victor Hugo Toledo, reminding us that this year alone UNE 
lost seven of its 33 congressional deputies, beginning with 
Conchita Mazariegos, who told us that, appalled, she left UNE 
(and founded BIEN) after it became clear to her that the FRG 
had channeled campaign funds to UNE.  Guatemalan political 
parties are short-lived; at this rate, UNE could be no 
exception. 
 
PGN Stalemate 
------------- 
 
7.  (C)  The Constitutional Court appears to have stymied 
President Berger\'s effort to rid himself of the last FRG 
holdover from the previous administration.  The Solicitor 
General (PGN) needs to have the president\'s confidence since, 
as the government\'s top legal counsel, he is expected to 
defend state interests and advocate administration policies. 
By a curious quirk of history, however, the PGN\'s terms of 
office fell out of sync with presidential terms.  The current 
PGN, Luis Rosales, is a former FRG congressional deputy who 
in 2002 was named PGN for a four-year term by Alfonso 
Portillo, who was then president but is now thoroughly 
discredited and on the lam in Mexico. 
 
8.  (C)  Berger and others in his administration clearly 
believe that Rosales, the FRG holdover, is not actively 
pursuing the president\'s priorities and may indeed be 
sabotaging them.  When Berger sent Rosales a long list of 
questions about his handling (or mishandling) of a long list 
of civil cases involving the state, Rosales correctly 
interpreted the questionnaire to be a preliminary to his 
dismissal.  He then obtained from the Constitutional Court an 
injunction barring the government from firing him.  Although 
the Court\'s order has legal scholars scratching their heads, 
it has apparently bought Rosales some time while highlighting 
the need to update the PGN\'s legal mandate. 
 
Military Corruption Cases 
------------------------- 
 
9.  (U)  We mentioned in our last letter the mysterious case 
of Col. Raul Cerna, the missing former finance chief of the 
Presidential military staff (EMP) and key witness in efforts 
to track down the $115 million or more that went missing in 
military hands under the Portillo administration.  While 
Guatemalans are still placing bets among themselves over the 
fate of Cerna, authorities have exhumed a corpse from a local 
cemetery.  The press reported that a dentist identied the 
remains as Cerna\'s, but, to be sure, a DNA sample has been 
sent to Spain to see if it matches samples provided by 
Cerna\'s son and father. 
 
10.  (SBU)  The Third Court of Appeals vacated the 
controversial decisions taken by judge Silvia de Leon de 
Miranda in the case of Enrique Rios Sosa, the 56-year-old 
former Army Chief of Staff and Minister of Defense accused of 
diverting $4 million from the coffers of the National 
Mortgage Fund (CHN).  The judge is widely believed to be in 
the sway of the FRG party run by Rios Sosa\'s father, former 
president Efrain Rios Montt.  The judge, after excluding the 
appropriate prosecutors from the hearing, ordered Rios Sosa 
released on $12,000 bond.  Her decision was widely viewed as 
preferential treatment for Rios Sosa, and prosecutors 
complained to the Supreme Court, which essentially refused to 
question the judge\'s handling of the case but left the door 
open for an appellate court decision.  Ironically, the Third 
Court of Appeals found that the judge had acted precipitously 
against Rios Sosa, not in his favor.  In the court\'s opinion, 
prosecutors had not yet presented sufficient evidence against 
Rios Sosa to warrant even the minimal bail set by judge De 
Leon.  Other observers, however, believe that was the point: 
to rush the case through before the evidence was ready and 
thus earn an acquittal.  The Dec. 17 press reports that the 
Supreme Court, upon receiving \"a more complete report,\" is 
now looking at taking action against Judge Silvia. 
 
PDH on a Rampage 
---------------- 
 
11.  (U)  Human Rights Ombudsman (PDH) Sergio Morales has 
scored a couple more dubious victories, getting the 
Constitutional Court (CC) to strike down taxes on gasoline 
and electricity.  This all follows closely his successful 
effort to restore electricity subsidies for \"poor\" users who 
consume less than 300 KWH per month, a pool that includes 
some Embassy officers.  As a result of the CC ruling against 
the gasoline distribution tax, the GOG is scrambling to cover 
a $250 million shortfall for next year.  The CC ruled that 
the imposition of both the value added tax and a distribution 
tax on fuel violated the Constitution\'s prohibition of 
\"double taxation.\"  There is room for lawyers to argue this 
point.  The government\'s current thinking is to raise import 
duties to cover the shortfall until legislation can be passed 
to create a new single tax.  The executive has delegated 
authority from the Congress to raise customs duties but must 
receive the blessing of Central Americas Council of Economic 
Ministers (COMIECO).  At the PDH\'s behest, the CC also struck 
down a tax on electricity imposed by the Mixco municipality 
to cover the bill for its public lighting, recently enhanced 
in hopes of combating street crime.  We gather that the 
solution to this problem, together with the problem of 
curbing subsidies, will have to await new legislation being 
prepared by the Ministry of Energy and Mines. 
 
12.  (C)  The PDH is appointed by Congress and reports to it. 
 Morales, who is widely believed to have political ambitions, 
has carved out an agenda for the PDH that goes well beyond 
human rights into supposed \"social and economic rights,\" and 
it is in this latter mandate that he acts as a consumer 
advocate.  Even on conventional human rights issues he can be 
reckless in his statements, as he was in the wake of the 
Nueva Linda August 31 eviction when he groundlessly claimed 
there were \"mass graves.\"  Unable to stomach him any longer, 
President Berger on December 16 declared to the press that 
Morales was \"mediocre, populist and myopic,\" noting that it 
was the middle and upper classes who benefit from Morales\' 
ill-considered and \"bad faith\" actions. 
 
Miners vs. Environmentalists:  Advantage Miners 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
13.  (C)  While the energy side of the Ministry of Energy and 
Mines suffers the PDH\'s ventures into the \"human rights\" of 
energy pricing, the mining side is holding its own and 
starting to build some momentum, but it isn\'t always easy. 
Vice Minister Carolina Roca had hardly a moment to enjoy the 
resounding success of her international symposium on 
balancing mining and environmental interests (previewed in 
our last letter) before activists blockaded a road in Solola 
Department to prevent transport of a huge sixty-ton crusher 
drum belonging to Canadian-American firm Glamis Gold.  Glamis 
had received permission to remove temporarily a couple 
pedestrian overpasses blocking progress on the road to the 
company\'s San Marcos site, when a crowd formed to stop the 
work.  Local authorities reportedly were quickly assured that 
all was in order and the equipment was headed elsewhere (the 
locals are said to be jumpy, in part because a rumor of 
dubious provenance asserts that mining in Solola risks 
draining stunningly beautiful Lake Atitlan).  Days later, 
however, the problem persisted, reportedly due to activists 
bussed in from elsewhere.  Moreover, protestors were 
vandalizing the equipment.  Roca told us that the government 
had decided this could not continue, and arrest warrants were 
being issued.  Violence is always a possibility, but the 
government is determined that the project move forward. 
 
14.  (SBU)  With anti-mining attention focused on the West 
and San Marcos, Canada\'s Skye Resources announced in 
Vancouver December 14 that it was being awarded an 
exploration contract covering the forty-year old (and 
abandoned) nickel concessions of Exmibal in the Eastern 
department of Izabal.  Skye apparently jumped the gun:  Roca 
had told us the local announcement would come on Dec. 16. 
Preventing Exmibal\'s reopening has for decades been the 
rallying cry of some of the more radical environmental NGOs, 
and they will see its reactivation as an affront by the 
government when they hear about it.  We believe they do not 
yet know that the ministry also intends to open for public 
tender in January a number of new areas for petroleum 
exploration, along with renewing concessions that are due to 
expire.  We reported earlier that Roca, rumored to become the 
new minister, would have her hands full with a crowded and 
controversial ministerial agenda.  More recent rumors suggest 
that she is now slated to become chief revenuer at the SAT. 
 
Sosa Saved by Contracted Validation of his Monetary Policy 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
15.  (C)  Guatemala\'s Central Bank (BanGuat) contracted UCLA 
professor, National Bureau of Economic Research collaborator, 
former World Bank Chief Economist for Latin America and 
well-known Chilean Chicago graduate Sebastian Edwards for 
\"advice\" on Guatemala\'s monetary policy.  Edwards recently 
delivered his results, with no surprises:  he concluded that 
Guatemala faced no crises but that BanGuat could do better 
with a little more flexibility in addressing exchange rate 
fluctuations while maintaining a \"perfected\" inflation rate 
target as its central focus.  There was, at first glance, 
something for everybody in the conclusion.  Businessmen and 
government critics of BanGuat were told that they were right 
to be concerned with the quetzal\'s appreciation and that 
exogenous inflation (such as that caused by oil prices) 
should not be counted against the monetary policy target. 
The big winner, however, was Central Bank President Lizardo 
Sosa, who has been under pressure to resign by Berger.  We 
gather that Berger, in turn, was acting at the behest of Plan 
of Government Commissioner (and former Finance Minister) 
Aitkenhead, who has been pressing for looser monetary policy 
to cause the quetzal to depreciate and monetize some of the 
fiscal deficit.  In the end, Edwards validated Sosa\'s core 
argument that inflation must be the principal target, while 
exchange rate policy must be limited to stabilizing 
fluctuations, not fighting the long-term trend. 
 
16.  (C)  The press reports that efforts to remove Sosa have 
ceased, at least for now.  Edwards\' report successfully 
undercut Berger\'s ability to portray Sosa\'s policies as 
errant.  We also hear that Finance Minister Bonilla, Berger\'s 
choice to replace Sosa, intervened in the end with the 
President to say she would not accept the job if Sosa were 
forced out, as the damage to BanGuat\'s autonomy and excellent 
reputation would cost the country dearly.  If so, our hats 
are off to Bonilla -- not because we have strong feelings 
about Sosa\'s abilities (his VP is superb and runs the place) 
but because BanGuat is one of few local institutions that is 
fine as it is and should not be politicized. 
 
IPR and Generics Still Out There 
-------------------------------- 
17.  (C) We\'re still spending hours per day on the effort to 
convince President Berger that he has to veto recent 
legislation that effectively eliminates data protection for 
pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals (reftel para 5; 
Guatemala 3188).  Vice President Stein, Commissioner Mickey 
Fernandez, and a host of others appear to understand clearly 
that a failure to veto would likely doom the CAFTA. 
Fernandez tells us that El Salvador\'s President Saca raised 
this issue (at USTR\'s instigation) with Berger and apparently 
made an impression.  Berger and senior administration 
officials were planning to meet to decide what to do late 
December 16 or sometime December 17.  The Ambassador has 
repeatedly warned that anything short of a veto is not going 
to fly. 
HAMILTON 
"
"24448","12/21/2004 21:40","04GUATEMALA3241","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA479","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 003241 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, MASS, SNAR, ASEC, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: MILITARY CONFERENCE ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 479 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  The Guatemalan Ministry of Defense and the 
U.S Southern Command co-sponsored a December 7-10 conference 
in Antigua, Guatemala, to develop an action plan for the 
regional Human Rights Initiative (HRI) Consensus Document. 
Civilians worked alongside military officers to design a plan 
to systematize the Guatemalan military\'s observation of human 
rights in four key areas:  civil-military relations; training 
and education; the human rights doctrine; and internal 
controls to prevent abuses.  This initiation is off to such a 
good start, we are exploring how we might stand up a similar 
program for the police.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U) The HRI, which has been sponsored by SOUTHCOM since 
1997, began with military officers from 33 countries and 
human rights NGOs working together to develop a regional 
model for military human rights programs, contained in the 
&Consensus Document.8  Currently, SOUTHCOM provides support 
to the armed forces of those nations whose Ministries of 
Defense have decided to implement the Consensus Document. 
During an initial visit to Guatemala in February, SOUTHCOM 
and the OAS affiliated, San Jose-based Center for Education 
and Training for Human Rights (CECADH) pushed for 
implementation of the Consensus Agreement in Guatemala 
(reftel).  The Guatemalan Defense Ministry and SOUTHCOM 
signed the Consensus Document on October 13 and scheduled the 
December 7-10 conference to develop a detailed working plan 
for implementation of the ideals encompassed by the agreement. 
 
3. (U) Following opening remarks by the Ambassador and 
Guatemalan Vice President Stein, the conference began with 
the division of military and civil society attendees into 
working groups to hammer out meaningful performance goals and 
plans of action, as well as timelines for achieving each 
target outlined.  Participants worked on four major issues: 
improving civil-military relations and interaction; training 
and educating the military on international principles of 
human rights and international humanitarian law; developing a 
human rights doctrine; and establishing internal controls to 
prevent future human rights abuses.  The sixty conference 
participants included military officers from the Army, Navy, 
and Air Force, and representatives from COPREDEH (President\'s 
Commission on Human Rights), the Mack Foundation, and the 
Human Ombudsman\'s Office (PDH). 
 
4.  (U) Among numerous goals, the Guatemalan Defense Ministry 
committed to the following: 
 
--- to implement regulations to assure that human rights 
violations are promptly reported to civil authorities; 
 
--- to provide appropriate civil institutions full access to 
military documents and personnel files in investigations of 
human rights violations and to create an electronic database 
of such information to facilitate those investigations; 
 
--- to hold workshops to provide human rights training and 
analyze cases of previous human rights violations and correct 
procedures; 
 
--- to revise all military manuals and print 10,000 booklets 
with an updated human rights doctrine 
 
--- to create a website to disseminate the human rights 
doctrine to all levels of military; 
 
--- and to create a database to register military personnel 
convicted of human rights abuses. 
 
5.  (U) Comment:  As the Ambassador noted in his remarks, 
human rights require constant vigilance.  Though the 
Guatemalan military had a long history of disregard for human 
rights, the Defense Ministry\'s willingness to sign the 
Consensus Document, open the door further to civilian 
involvement, and work to develop clear guidelines for 
adherence to principles of human rights and international 
humanitarian law, signals another step in the right 
direction. 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment Continued:  Currently, we observe far more 
human rights abuses and common crime committed by the 
National Civil Police (PNC) than the military.  In fact, 
there have been no known human rights abuses committed by 
military in recent years.  Several PNC officers in attendance 
at the conference expressed interest to MILGP Commander in 
implementing the same type of training and internal controls 
that were developed during the SOUTHCOM event, a prospect we 
are exploring. 
HAMILTON 
"
"24452","12/21/2004 23:20","04GUATEMALA3244","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE245841","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 003244 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, KCRM, EFIN, KHLS, KPAO, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 245841 
 
1.  The following is Embassy Guatemala\'s submission for the 
2004 Annual Terrorism Report: 
 
Begin text: 
 
There were no significant acts of international terrorism in 
Guatemala in 2004.  The Government of Guatemala has supported 
the war on terrorism in international fora such as the UN and 
OAS and cooperates fully with the United States.  Guatemala 
signed the Inter-American Convention Against Terrorism but 
has not yet ratified it.  In 2004, Guatemala redoubled 
efforts to cooperate with Mexico on border security through 
the bilateral High-Level Group for Frontier Security 
(GANSEF).  The Guatemalan Government also created and filled 
a high-level counterterrorism czar position to coordinate 
interagency efforts on counterterrorism issues. 
 
Severe resource constraints, corruption, and an ineffective 
criminal justice system are some of the impediments facing 
Guatemala in its struggle against transnational crime threats 
such as drug trafficking and alien smuggling.  Guatemala\'s 
northern border with Mexico lacks effective coverage by 
police or military personnel, and controls at its southern 
and eastern borders with El Salvador have been relaxed as 
part of the Central American integration process.  Guatemala 
lacks the technology and manpower to effectively monitor 
transit of possible international terrorists.  Nevertheless, 
Guatemalan authorities provided strong cooperation to U.S. 
requests for assistance in the investigation of possible 
terrorism leads. 
 
Guatemalan authorities have responded favorably to requests 
for enhanced security of official U.S. property and personnel 
on an as-needed basis.  Guatemalan law enforcement 
authorities do not have wiretapping authority, but the 
government is studying the issue to determine if 
constitutional stipulations on privacy apply to this area. 
Law enforcement authorities can initiate physical 
surveillance of terrorist suspects, but the police have 
limited capabilities.  Military intelligence personnel were 
involved in counterterrorism investigations in the past, but 
the military downsizing has reduced military intelligence 
capabilities, and the reform of military doctrine has 
eliminated any internal security roles for the Guatemalan 
military.  Terrorism suspects -- like detainees suspected of 
any other type of crime -- can only be held for six hours 
before being charged. 
 
Guatemala was removed from the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) list of Non-Cooperative Countries and Territories 
(NCCT) in July 2004 after the FATF determined that Guatemala 
had made sufficient progress in eliminating deficiencies in 
Guatemala\'s anti-money laundering regime.  These measures 
have included the creation of a Financial Intelligence Unit, 
passing comprehensive banking legislation, and bringing the 
offshore banking sector under the effective supervision of 
the Financial Intelligence Unit. 
 
Guatemala has taken a number of initiatives with regard to 
terrorist financing.  Article 391 of the Guatemalan Penal 
Code sanctions all preparatory acts leading up to a crime, 
and terrorist financing can be considered an offense under 
this Article.  Technically, both judges and prosecutors could 
issue a freeze order on terrorist assets, but no test case 
has validated these procedures.  There is no known credible 
evidence of terrorist financing in Guatemala, and the 
Guatemalan Government along with the financial sector, has 
been very cooperative in looking for such funds.  Specific 
legislation to address terrorist financing is currently being 
considered by the Guatemalan Congress. 
 
Guatemalan civil aviation and port authorities have been very 
responsive to U.S. requests for assistance in investigating 
potential terrorism leads.  The Guatemalan Government is 
currently working to enhance overall maritime and aviation 
security and counterterrorism capabilities in order to remain 
in compliance with rising international standards.  However, 
organized crime and smuggling rings continue to operate in 
Guatemala\'s principal ports and airports, and, together with 
corruption, pose an ongoing security threat. 
 
Guatemala is a party to 10 of the 12 United Nations 
conventions and protocols related to terrorism and to one OAS 
counterterrorism convention. 
 
End text. 
HAMILTON 
"
"24453","12/21/2004 23:37","04GUATEMALA3246","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04GUATEMALA2985","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 003246 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, ASEC, MASS, SNAR, GT, UN 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH GUATEMALAN HUMAN RIGHTS 
ACTIVISTS 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 2985 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2804 
     C. GUATEMALA 2845 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  The Ambassador met on December 14 with 
Guatemala\'s Human Rights Coalition Against Clandestine 
Structures (CDHCEC, formerly known as \"Coalition for 
CICIACS\") to discuss the general human rights situation.  The 
CDHCEC harshly criticized what they viewed as the low 
priority the Berger Administration gives human rights issues. 
 On CICIACS, they argued that the GOG should have pushed the 
original agreement forward despite two negative Congressional 
Committee reports and the Constitutional Court\'s ruling 
against it.  On the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR) office, they were encouraged (albeit skeptical) to 
hear that the GOG was close to signing an agreement.  End 
Summary. 
 
General Perspective on the GOG 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) On December 14, Helen Mack (Myrna Mack Foundation), 
Iduvina Hernandez (Security and Democracy), and Orlando 
Blanco (COS) told the Ambassador, the DCM, and poloffs they 
believed that, in the first year of the Berger 
administration, the GOG had focused its efforts on 
prosecuting corruption cases of former government officials 
to the exclusion of other important topics (i.e., human 
rights).  The leaders claimed that prosecutors were employing 
a double standard.  They claimed the prosecutors in the Peten 
had arrested ten peasant leaders and charged them with 
terrorism for their roles in leading social protests. 
Fourteen leaders of demonstrations by former paramilitary 
(\"ex-Pacs\"), however, had only been charged with disrupting 
public order -- and only one of them had been arrested.  The 
Ambassador requested details on the cases of those arrested 
in the Peten, and the CDHCEC leaders agreed to provide the 
information, so the Ambassador could raise the alleged double 
standard with Chief prosecutor Juan Luis Florido.  (Comment: 
When poloff tried to obtain this information from CDHCEC 
members the following day, she was told the information was 
not yet ready.) 
 
CICIACS 
------- 
 
3.  (U) Mack reviewed the CDHCEC\'s concerns that Vice 
President Edward Stein\'s recent letter to the UN SYG on 
CICIACS had dropped any references to a mandate for CICIACS 
to investigate attacks against human rights defenders.  If 
CICIACS was going to focus exclusively on organized crime and 
no longer had an explicit human rights angle in its mandate, 
then CDHCEC members saw no reason to continue lobbying for 
the initiative themselves.  They complained bitterly that the 
GOG was not doing enough to investigate anonymous threats 
made against human rights defenders.  The Ambassador noted 
the difficulty of investigating threats even under the best 
of circumstances, and they acknowledged that impunity was a 
widespread problem, with the government unable to make 
inroads on all sorts of crime.  The Ambassador noted that 
Stein\'s letter may have omitted an explicit reference to 
human rights in deference to the Constitutional Court\'s 
ruling that CICIACS was not a human rights agreement.  The 
Ambassador noted that CICIACS, if successful in prosecuting 
and dismantling organized crime, would undeniably have 
positive human rights implications and therefore merited the 
active support of the human rights community. 
 
4.  (U) When the Ambassador asked what additional actions the 
CDHCEC thought the GOG could or should have taken to push 
forward CICIACS following the Constitutional Court\'s August 
ruling, Mack said the Court\'s ruling was not binding and the 
GOG could have maintained and defended the original CICIACS 
agreement.  The Ambassador reminded Mack that, in the 
immediate aftermath of the Court decision, she and her 
coalition had privately acknowledged that the original 
CICIACS proposal was legally and politically unviable. 
 
OHCHR 
----- 
 
5.  (U) The CDHCEC conveyed frustration with the GOG\'s delay 
in renegotiating its agreement with the UN High Commissioner 
for Human Rights to open an office in Guatemala.  They were 
encouraged (albeit skeptical) to hear from the Ambassador 
that the GOG and OHCHR had drawn very close to agreement on a 
new text.  Mack said she believed the OHCHR could play a key 
role in lobbying for implementation of GOG commitments in the 
UN Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime (ratified 
by Guatemala in April 2004). 
 
The CC motion against the Ex-Pac Payments 
----------------------------------------- 
 
6.   (U) On December 8, the Constitutional Court issued 
another provisional decision suspending payments to the 
ex-Pacs (Ref B), based on the injunction filed by human 
rights activists.  The Ambassador asked Mack, Hernandez, and 
Blanco about their security, as the ex-Pacs have threatened 
those who have opposed the payments.  They said that the GOG 
had provided 1-2 police officers to protect their offices 
during business hours.  Ex-Pac leaders had visited several of 
the organizations.  CDHCEC members met with the ex-Pacs and 
explained their reasons for opposing payments to the ex-Pacs 
for their paramilitary service during Guatemala\'s internal 
armed conflict.  At the end of these meetings, however, the 
ex-Pac leaders threatened the CDHCEC members, noting that 
\"they could not be responsible for what happened to them\" if 
they continued to oppose the payoffs. 
 
TIP & Article 98 
---------------- 
 
7.  (U) The Ambassador enlisted the collaboration of the 
CDHCEC groups in lobbying for improved legislation on TIP 
(Ref C). According to Mack, they had supported existing 
proposals for TIP, as well as improved legislation on 
international adoptions.  Mack asked if the Embassy would 
encourage the GOG to send the Rome Statute to Congress and 
lobby for its ratification.  The Ambassador explained that we 
were not in a position to do since we ourselves had serious 
objections to ICC jurisdiction and withdrew our signature 
from the Rome Statute.  He reviewed our efforts to reach 
Article 98 agreements with countries all over the world. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The CDHCEC members are frustrated by their lack of 
access to the GOG.  Mack noted that Presidential Human Rights 
Commissioner Frank LaRue had not returned several of her 
phone calls.  Far from pandering to the human rights 
community, the beleagured Berger administration had not even 
met with the CDHCEC or the office of the Human Rights 
Ombudsman (PDH) about CICIACS (or the OHCHR) to consult on 
CICIACS strategy following the Constitutional Court\'s 
decision in August.  That may change -- after this meeting 
with CDHCEC, the Ambassador encouraged VP Stein and LaRue to 
reach out to them, and we understand a reunion is in the 
works. 
 
9.  (SBU) As Orlando Blanco was leaving the Embassy, he 
apologized to the DCM for the CDHCEC presentation being so 
\"negative\" but attributed it to \"frustration.\"  The Berger 
Administration\'s honeymoon is certainly long over for the 
human rights groups.  However, their criticism of the Berger 
team was distinct from that made against the previous 
administration.  They criticize the present government for 
not being sufficiently proactive on human rights issues. 
They made no allegations, however, as they had against the 
Portillo kleptocracy, that senior members of the current 
Cabinet are linked to the \"clandestine groups\" that they are 
dedicating to combating. 
HAMILTON 
"
"24582","12/23/2004 18:51","04GUATEMALA3262","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE271552","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

231851Z Dec 04

 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 003262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
S/ES-O 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, GT 
SUBJECT: SEMI-ANNUAL REQUEST FOR NAMES, TITLES AND CONTACT 
NUMBERS FOR LEADING GOVERNMENT AND POLITICAL FIGURES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 271552 
 
The following is the current information on Post\'s leading 
government and political figures: 
 
COUNTRY:  Guatemala 
DATE:  December 23, 2004 
 
HEAD OF GOVERNMENT 
--LAST NAME:  BERGER Perdomo 
--FIRST/MIDDLE NAMES:  Oscar Jose 
--CONVENTIONAL USAGE: Mr. President 
FORMAL TITLE:  President of the Republic of Guatemala 
OFFICE TELEPHONE NOS.:  011-502-2239-0002 
AFTER-HOURS OFFICIAL NOS.:  011-502-2239-0000 
RESIDENCE TELEPHONE NOS.:  011-502-2367-4254 
CELL PHONE NOS.:  011-502-5712-9956 
COMMENTS:  English language ability:  Limited.  Office 
telephone number is answered by the President\'s Private 
Secretary. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
VICE PRESIDENT 
--LAST NAME:  STEIN Barillas 
--FIRST/MIDDLE NAMES:  Eduardo 
--CONVENTIONAL USAGE:  Mr. Vice-President 
FORMAL TITLE:  Vice-President 
OFFICE TELEPHONE NOS.:  011-502-2238-4258 
AFTER-HOURS OFFICIAL NOS.:  011-502-2239-0000 
RESIDENCE TELEPHONE NOS.:  011-502-2337-2773 
CELL PHONE NOS.:  011-502-5990-1361 
COMMENTS:  English language ability:  Excellent.  Office 
telephone number is answered by the Vice-President\'s Private 
Secretary. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOREIGN MINISTER: 
--LAST NAME:  BRIZ Abularach 
--FIRST/MIDDLE NAMES:  Eduardo 
--CONVENTIONAL USAGE:  Mr. Minister 
FORMAL TITLE: Minister of External Relations 
OFFICE TELEPHONE NOS.:  011-502-2348-0100 
AFTER-HOURS OFFICIAL NOS.:  011-502-5216-7146 
RESIDENCE TELEPHONE NOS.:  011-502-2369-3757 
CELL PHONE NOS.:  011-502-5412-0553; 011-502-5510-1155 
COMMENTS:  English language ability:  Limited.  Office 
telephone number is answered by the Minister\'s Assistant. 
After hours telephone number is for emergencies only. 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"24587","12/23/2004 20:24","04GUATEMALA3265","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE269517","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS GUATEMALA 003265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KWMN, PHUM, SMIG, EAID, SNAR, GT 
SUBJECT: CASA ALIANZA IN GUATEMALA 
 
REF: A. STATE 269517 
 
     B. GUATEMALA 2845 
 
1. We strongly support the work of Casa Alianza\'s Guatemalan 
operation and are pleased that their work continues unabated 
in light of the issues raised in ref (A).  As we reported in 
the ref (B) Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Update, Casa Alianza 
is a critical component of Guatemala\'s anti-TIP activities. 
The National Civilian Police (PNC) depend on Casa Alianza\'s 
intelligence to conduct raids and on Casa Alianza\'s shelter 
facilities to care for rescued victims.  No other 
organization is willing or able to fill Casa Alianza\'s role 
in Guatemala. 
 
2. We maintain an on-going relationship with Casa Alianza 
Guatemala.  Both in the immediate aftermath of the Bruce 
Harris crisis and over the past week, we discussed the issue 
with local director Arturo Echevarria and other Casa Alianza 
staff.  They noted that many of their contacts called to 
express support rather than concern immediately following the 
news of the Bruce Harris case.  Press coverage of the case 
here focused on Harris as an individual rather than on Casa 
Alianza as an institution.  Although reactions here have not 
harmed the reputation of the local institution, staff fear 
that the case will adversely affect fundraising in the United 
States, the major source of Casa Alianza Guatemala\'s 
resources. 
 
3. Local staff confirm that there are no allegations of 
similar misconduct against any Casa Alianza Guatemala 
employee.  The institution has a strict prohibition on 
non-professional relationships between staff and clients, and 
this policy was reviewed and reaffirmed by all employees 
following the Harris case. 
HAMILTON 
"
"24646","12/27/2004 16:59","04GUATEMALA3270","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04MEXICO9362","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 003270 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, EAID, OREP, PREL, SMIG, CVIS, MASS, GT, MX, CA 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA/MEXICO BORDER ISSUES, STAFFDEL MEACHAM 
 
REF: MEXICO 9362 
 
1. Summary:  SFRC Staffdel Meacham visited Guatemala to 
discuss a broader North American security architecture and 
Guatemala\'s role as the southern border state of that area. 
Based on meetings with the country team, Ministry of Foreign 
Relations, Migration, and the Ministry of Defense, Staffdel 
Meacham and embassy staff undertook a broader review of the 
current role of Guatemala as a \"buffer\" between Central/South 
America and the NAFTA space and how that role can be expanded 
to improve U.S. security.  End Summary. 
 
2. Following his trip to Mexico (reftel), Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee Latin American specialist Carl Meacham 
visited Guatemala December 9-11 as part of a study on common 
security measures with the United States, Mexico, and Canada. 
 Unlike relationships with North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA) partners, no formal security arrangements 
exist with Central American nations.  Guatemalan 
interlocutors stressed that Guatemala played a significant 
role in Mexican border security and, by extension, that of 
all of North America.  A senior Ministry of Defense official 
noted that the length of the Mexico-Guatemala border and the 
terrain which it traverses make a strictly defensive posture 
by Mexican security agencies untenable.  A senior Immigration 
official added that security demands increased cooperation 
both between the relevant security agencies in Guatemala and 
between those agencies and their Mexican and United States 
counterparts. 
 
3. In particular, the visit to a Guatemala/Mexico border 
crossing point illustrated the openness of Mexico\'s southern 
border.  In open view of the two governments\' officials, 
goods and people were transported by raft across the river in 
a highly-organized and heavily-used pattern.  Officials on 
both sides of the border told us that they had no formal 
information-sharing practices and little official or 
unofficial contact. 
 
People, Practices, and Equipment 
-------------------------------- 
 
4. All GOG representatives stressed the lack of resources to 
combat smuggling of persons and goods into and through 
Guatemalan territory, specifically citing the lack of 
transportation and communications equipment.  Nonetheless, 
upon further discussion, each GOG representative noted that 
human capital was the most critical component to assure 
border security.  Each service -- including Immigration, the 
armed forces, and the National Civilian Police (PNC) -- 
labors under the task of recruiting and retraining quality 
employees to undertake their basic missions and to combat 
corruption within their ranks.  Each of these services need 
resources to expand recruitment and training in order to 
increase the number and the efficacy of their operations. 
 
5. In addition to the need to expand the operations of the 
different services, GOG representatives noted the need to 
increase cooperation between the services, and between the 
operational services and the judicial system.  According to 
these representatives, Immigration and the PNC currently only 
focus on immediate cases at hand.  They are not trained to 
interview and investigate in a manner that could obtain 
useful evidence for prosecution by the Attorney General\'s 
office, nor are they trained to develop intelligence to 
attack organized crime on a systemic level.  One 
representative specifically noted the lack of wiretap 
authority to generate intelligence. 
 
6. The previously mentioned transportation and communications 
equipment is critical to the operational aspects of border 
security (Guatemala has only one helicopter and five pick-up 
trucks to patrol the entire border with Mexico).  In 
addition, Guatemala\'s Immigration Service lacks the equipment 
to keep accurate and retrievable records.  Computers and 
database archives are particularly necessary in order to 
manage formal migration.  An illustration of the equipment 
needs is to be seen in deportations of Central Americans from 
the U.S.  Upon arrival in Guatemala, no photographic or 
biometric information is collected that could be used either 
to prevent their reentry into the U.S. or to aid future law 
enforcement efforts locally. 
 
Vetting Human Assets, Reorientation of Military 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
7. Several of the GOG interlocutors stressed the need to 
maximize regional security by developing specific vetted 
cadres within the relevant services.  Furthermore, they 
noted, many of the relevant tasks can currently only be 
undertaken by the Guatemalan armed forces.  Rather than a 
military expansion -- precisely the opposite of the current 
government\'s objectives -- they discussed a possible 
reorientation of its missions and priorities, and inquired 
about U.S.-funded assets to help achieve them.  That the 
armed forces currently join patrols with the PNC in certain 
high-crime areas is an example of the reorientation of the 
standard military mission. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. In the immediate term, the NAFTA partners need to engage 
Central America in general and Guatemala in particular to 
institutionalize border security arrangements, particularly 
between the specific agencies operating border control 
points.  As a valuable buffer zone, it is in the United 
States\' national interest to help Guatemalan security 
agencies develop human capacity to improve border security, 
in addition to the provision of transportation, 
communications, and information systems equipment such as 
biometric recording, database archives, and wiretap equipment 
(should wiretap authority be granted legally).  In the longer 
term, we need to continue our MPP objectives of developing a 
liberal democratic society, including respect for the rule of 
law and an end of impunity in regard to corruption.  End 
comment. 
 
9. Meacham did not have the opportunity to clear this message 
before departing Guatemala. 
 
 
HAMILTON 
"
"24649","12/27/2004 18:10","04GUATEMALA3272","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED","04GUATEMALA2165","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

271810Z Dec 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 003272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AGRICULTURE FOR NANCY GARCIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, ASEC, PHUM, PREL, CVIS, SNAR, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA\'S WISH LIST FOR MIGRANTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 2165 
 
1. Summary:  Guatemala\'s MFA sent the Embassy its latest 
proposal for the U.S. Government to extend legal status to 
its large population of undocumented migrants resident in the 
U.S.  While we have repeatedly advised the GOG that many of 
these proposals are politically or legally untenable, we 
believe that we should revisit the idea of a Central American 
Migrants\' Agreement modeled on the agreements we currently 
have with Mexico.  End Summary. 
 
2. The Guatemalan Ministry of Foreign Relations (MRE) has the 
lead on all migratory issues, including the coordination of 
an inter-institutional group to address legal reform.  Within 
this purview, the MRE has developed a proposal for the U.S. 
government regarding the subject of migrants residing in the 
United States.  President Berger holds this subject in the 
highest interest and regularly broaches the subject in public 
and private meetings on unrelated topics. 
 
3. Under cover of a letter from Vice FM Marta Altolaguirre, 
the MFA sent the Embassy a three-page proposal and gave a 
copy to SFRC staffer Carl Meacham, who was here December 
9-11.  The GOG estimates the number of Guatemalan migrants in 
the U.S. to be over 1.5 million, out of a national population 
of fewer than 12 million.  For this reason, the GOG regards 
the safety and stability of these migrants to be of the 
highest priority and proposes the following five point plan 
to the USG: 
 
A. Regularization of status; i.e. Legal Permanent Residency 
(LPR), for Guatemalan migrants with six or more years in the 
United States, two or more years of employment, and a record 
of paying taxes in the United States, and to grant them the 
right to bring family members to the U.S. 
 
B. Temporary Worker status for Guatemalan migrants with fewer 
than six years of residency, for renewable three-year 
periods, and to allow access to health, education, and 
banking services, and driver\'s licenses. 
 
C. A Temporary Agricultural Worker Program, based on a 
similar program that exists between Guatemala and Canada, 
administered through the Guatemalan Ministry of Labor, the 
International Organization for Migration, and Guatemalan 
consulates. 
 
D. Regularization of status (as in point A) for outstanding 
students, considering academic achievements as an equivalent 
to the employment and taxpaying history of workers. 
 
E. Reduction of deportations. 
 
4. Comment:  We have stressed repeatedly that domestic 
considerations do not allow for programs as described in 
points A and D.  We have noted that point B appears to track 
closely with the outline of President Bush\'s proposal to 
match willing employers with migrant workers and continue to 
encourage our GOG contacts to follow the progress of this 
initiative.  Point C also appears to track closely with our 
H-2B program, enjoyed by 3,000 Guatemalans each year. 
Although our H-2B program is twenty times as large as the 
Canadian program, Altolaguirre likes the government and IOM 
involvement in the Canadian program, believing that it better 
protects migrant rights.  As to point E, we have noted on 
many occasions to all of our contacts that, although 
deportations occasionally make for lurid news coverage, less 
than one percent of the undocumented Guatemalan population in 
the United States are deported each year.  Even if migration 
came to a complete halt, it would take more than a century to 
deport the existing population at current deportation levels. 
 
5. Comment continued:  We continue to help the GOG understand 
that points A, B, D, and E are simply not possible, and point 
out that many USG initiatives, such as the H-2B program, 
already address some GOG concerns.  The status of Guatemalans 
in the U.S., however, remains an issue of great importance to 
the GOG, and a no- or low-cost U.S. program would be very 
welcome.  In August we proposed a Central American Migrants\' 
Agreement (reftel), modeled on agreements with Mexico to 
provide information to immigrants through existing programs 
run by the Departments of Labor and Agriculture, and 
publicized through consulates in the U.S.  We believe that 
now would be an excellent time to revisit this issue in 
regard to the Central Americans and look forward to the views 
of Washington addressees. 
HAMILTON 
"
"24753","12/29/2004 21:58","04GUATEMALA3288","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","04GUATEMALA3161","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

292158Z Dec 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 003288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, IO/SHA, AND DRL/MLA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/29/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, GT, UN 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ACCEPTS OHCHR RESIDENT OFFICE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 3161 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hamilton; Reason 1.5 (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The GOG and the U.N. Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have agreed to 
establish an OHCHR Resident Office in Guatemala.  We believe 
the agreement, although later than desired, reflects well on 
the GOG and will help secure advances in human rights.  The 
final language of the accord ensures that the OHCHR Resident 
Office has the authority to report freely and accurately on 
human rights in Guatemala.  End summary. 
 
Reaching agreement on OHCHR Resident Office 
------------------------------------------- 
2. (C) The Ministry of Foreign Relations (MRE) informed us 
that they reached agreement December 22 with the United 
Nations\' Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR) for that U.N. agency to establish a Resident Office 
in Guatemala.  Foreign Minister Jorge Briz intends to travel 
to New York to sign the agreement on January 10, as suggested 
by the High Commissioner\'s representatives.  The GOG would 
then send the Accord to Congress for approval and then to 
President Berger for signature and formal ratification. 
 
3. (U) As noted in reftel, the lack of agreement regarding 
the mandate and activities of a resident OHCHR Office in 
Guatemala and delayed the agreement by several months.  The 
OHCHR Resident Office can still, however, take advantage of 
the institutional knowledge and facilities formerly dedicated 
to the U.N. Verification Mission to Guatemala (MINUGUA), 
which formally closed its doors in November.  The basic 
dispute regarding the establishment of the OHCHR Resident 
Office involved the scope of that office\'s activities and 
reporting requirements on the state of human rights in 
Guatemala. 
 
Establishing a mandate 
---------------------- 
4. (U) The pending accord between the Office of the High 
Commissioner and the GOG states that the OHCHR Resident 
Office will observe and report on the human rights situation 
in Guatemala for the purpose of advising GOG authorities in 
the formulation and application of policies and programs to 
promote and protect human rights in Guatemala.  In addition 
to advising the GOG on policy and assisting in the 
development of educational and capacity-building programs, 
the Resident Office will engage GOG authorities regarding 
human rights violations or other abuses when, in the OHCHR\'s 
judgment, the application of the Guatemalan legal process is 
not compatible with internationally accepted norms. 
 
5. (U) Although the OHCHR Resident Office\'s primary 
activities are focused on cooperation with the GOG, the 
accord specifically notes that it will also maintain the 
right and responsibility to form cooperative relationships 
with international organizations, civil society, and 
individuals and non-governmental organizations (NGO) with 
human rights interests.  The Resident Office is intended to 
act as a center for dialog to promote confidence between all 
sectors involved and interested in questions of human rights. 
 
6. (U) In regard to the concern about the focus of reports, 
the Resident Office in Guatemala will not issue public 
statements that identify specific individuals or 
organizations as legally responsible for human rights 
violations, but will report in a free and on-going manner 
directly to the High Commissioner in Geneva.  The High 
Commissioner will, in turn, prepare a formal report on the 
Guatemalan human rights situation for the U.N. Human Rights 
Commission, and will share this report with the GOG before 
its formal and public presentation.  (Note:  These reporting 
requirements are in line with the requests made by the GOG. 
End note.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
7. (C) The GOG sought changes in the text of the accord in 
order to appease Congressional critics who objected to the 
apparently wide-ranging mandate.  That said, we believe that 
this compromise provides enough leeway to allow the OHCHR 
office to conduct its activities without hindrance.  The 
accord specifically notes that the Resident Office will 
receive information from any source, public or private, and 
will maintain the confidentiality of the source.  The 
existence of an independent OHCHR Resident Office in 
Guatemala is important, both to maintain a clear and 
unimpeded focus on the issue and to provide needed technical 
support to a GOG that is motivated but lacking in expertise 
and funds.  The final language of the agreement to establish 
the office assures the full power and mandate of the OHCHR 
Resident Office and reflects well on the GOG. 
HAMILTON 
"
"25101","1/7/2005 21:07","05GUATEMALA47","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 GUATEMALA 000047 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2015 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ECON, ETRD, KCOR, KIPR, KCRM, ASEC, SNAR, EAID, GT 
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM GUATEMALA (3) 
 
REF: 04 GUATEMALA 3211 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton, Reason: 1.4 (d). 
 
1.  (U) This is the third in our planned biweekly series of 
discursive messages on what\'s ticking in Guatemala. 
 
Generics: Moving to Plan B after Xmas Setback 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) President Berger signed into law Decree 34-2004 on 
December 22, effectively eliminating data protection for 
pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals.  This despite a 
furious lobbying effort by the Ambassador, Country Team, and 
a direct call from USTR Zoellick, informing Berger and his 
cabinet of the negative consequences for CAFTA ratification. 
Berger committed to the Ambassador and Amb. Zoellick that, 
although he politically could not veto the legislation, he 
would send fresh legislation restoring data protection along 
with a CAFTA ratification package to the Congress for speedy 
approval in mid-late January.  Investment and Competitiveness 
Commissioner Fernandez told us late Jan. 5 that the 
government had decided that new legislation would be drawn 
directly from CAFTA text, presumably to demonstrate that 
Guatemala is giving only the protection that is absolutely 
necessary and not being forced into anything more.  All of 
this is easy to say, but things won\'t necessarily go as 
quickly and smoothly as planned in a Congress that shows 
little discipline and has yet to discuss CAFTA seriously.  In 
any event, supporting this process is our new best option. 
 
3.  (C) The press was quick to criticize the U.S. following 
the press release of USTR\'s position that we could not 
forward the CAFTA for ratification with Guatemala moving away 
from its commitments.  Supposed public health advocates and 
representatives of the local pharmaceutical copying industry 
congratulated the government for its action, claiming the 
U.S. was using CAFTA to eliminate access to generics in 
general through data protection legislation.  Nobel Peace 
Prize laureate and newly minted generics entrepreneur 
Rigoberta Menchu joined the fray with some particularly 
unfortunate rhetoric (e.g., \"blackmail,\" \"FTA with an 
anti-human face,\" \"U.S. policies that increase poverty and 
unemployment\").  The Ambassador responded by hosting a group 
of seven representatives of major media outlets in an effort 
to educate a seriously misinformed press.  He spent 
additional time with the press on the record at several 
public events where he was approached on the issue. The 
initial outreach appears to have paid off, as subsequent 
articles have shifted a little towards balanced.  EconCouns 
has since been on two radio talk shows and taped a follow-up 
with representatives of generics producers.  More are 
scheduled to clarify facts and drive home our central theme 
that generics and data protection can thrive together, just 
as they do in the U.S.  The host of the first show concluded 
helpfully that it was a \"myth\" that CAFTA would eliminate 
generics.  In private, we continue to press the GoG to follow 
through with its commitment to both a legislative fix and 
CAFTA ratification as soon as possible.  DUSTR Allgeier will 
visit next week to reinforce the message directly with Berger. 
 
Generics Reveal Dysfunction in the Presidency 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) The headache over generics has highlighted the 
organizational weakness of the Berger presidency, something 
Guatemalans increasingly notice and include in their chatter. 
 Berger can seem like a bold leader with vision when seized 
with a good idea, such as slashing the size of the military 
and airing the details of its budget.  But when he starts off 
with a wrong-headed notion, in this case that data protection 
is somehow creating a health care problem, it can be almost 
impossible to get through to him with facts and a different 
opinion.  Economy Minister Cuevas threw in the towel several 
months ago.  A host of others have tried, including 
Commissioner Fernandez, Ambassador Castillo, and, most 
significantly, Vice President Stein.  Tourism Commissioner 
Kaltschmitt, who has an agro-chemical joint venture with 
Monsanto and understands the subject thoroughly, told us that 
he tried as well, only to get a very Guatemalan (jovially 
vulgar) brush-off from his childhood friend.  What Berger is 
clearly missing is a strong and competent chief of staff to 
vet ideas and initiatives where appropriate throughout the 
Cabinet and distill the elements required for informed 
presidential decisions.  That could have prevented the Health 
Minister\'s half-cocked (if not larcenous) crusade from 
threatening to derail the CAFTA.  Berger may also need to 
train himself to listen to a competent and hardworking COS, 
but that won\'t happen until he has one.  The imminent 
transfer of Energy and Mines Minster Roberto Gonzalez to the 
Presidency may help. He seems the sort of person who might 
roll up his sleeves and bring a more systematic approach to 
running the Presidency. 
 
Good Early News on the Fiscal Front 
----------------------------------- 
 
5.  (C) Investment and Competitiveness Commissioner Mickey 
Fernandez told EconCouns Jan. 4 that he had just returned 
from going over preliminary CY-04 budget figures with Finance 
Minister Maria Antonieta \"Toni\" Bonilla.  The news was \"much 
better than expected\":  the fiscal deficit for the year 
looked to be in the range of 1.1% of GDP, well below the 
target of 1.7% of GDP.  Many observers had considered 1.7% 
too optimistic.  Fernandez said that better-than-expected 
revenue receipts was the main factor behind the good news, 
without going into any further detail.  He laughed when 
EconCouns noted that this \"surprise\" was one we had been 
anticipating for months. 
 
6.  (C) The Guatemalan finance team of Bonilla, Government 
Plan Commissioner Aitkenhead, and former chief revenuer 
(newly Superintendent of Banks) Willy Zapata has consistently 
painted a pessimistic scenario for revenues due to a court 
ruling overturning the IEMA alternative minimum tax and only 
limited success with a mid-year tax reform package.  Part of 
this reflects the caution and conservatism that characterizes 
the team, two of whom (Bonilla and Zapata) have spent much of 
their professional lives as central bankers and fully act the 
part.  There is also, however, a bit of gamesmanship in the 
conservatism.  The mantra of taxpayers, led by the business 
elite, has been one of no more taxes until 1) everyone pays 
the current ones and 2) government waste, fraud and 
mismanagement are stanched.  Setting low revenue expectations 
and then exceeding them shows that Berger\'s team is having 
some success (which, indeed, they are) in meeting the 
taxpayers\' first demand.  Reducing the military and 
prosecuting corrupt former officials does the same with the 
second.  We had been witnessing a strong performance in 
improving collections over the course of the year and were 
counting on 2004 revenues exceeding those for 2003, despite 
the loss of the IEMA (04 Guatemala 1765).  We will look into 
this in further detail when the numbers become available. 
 
Closing in on Julio Giron? 
-------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) Ex-President Portillo\'s former Private Secretary 
Julio Giron was back in the news on Jan. 3, together with a 
picture of a half-million dollar check made out to cash and a 
deposit slip and endorsement showing that the funds had been 
deposited in Giron\'s account in TotalBank, Coconut Grove. 
The check was drawn on a Miami ABN-AMRO Bank account of 
Comcel Guatemala, the Millicom-affiliated cellular telephone 
service provider.  The press noted that the date of the 
check, Oct. 19 1999, was less that three weeks before 
Portillo\'s election.  Months later, Comcel received cellular 
band B without a public tender and was exonerated from a 10% 
royalty payable to the vestigial parastatal telephone company 
Guatel.  Comcel\'s current general manager confirmed the 
authenticity of the check but said he had no information on 
what it was for as documents from the era had been retired. 
Attorney General Juan Luis Florido announced that a special 
prosecutor would be named to investigate the matter. 
 
8.  (C) We first learned of this case in 2002 when helping 
anti-corruption prosecutor Juan Pablo Rios work through an 
elaborate kiting and money-laundering scheme using the 
moribund state mortgage bank (CHN) and a series of banks and 
exchange houses to direct carloads of cash (probably phantom 
military payrolls) to the U.S. accounts of Guatemalan 
government and organized crime figures (02 Guatemala 2901). 
Rios also gave us a copy of the Comcel/Giron documents 
described above, plus similar documents covering two 
additional half-million dollar Comcel payments to Giron in 
November 1999 and January 2000.  Yet another set of documents 
indicates that Comcel paid a million dollars to Cesar Medina 
Farfan, a Portillo crony implicated in the \"Panama 
Connection\" case, in June 2000.  The million was transferred 
to Giron\'s account the next day, according to a copy of a 
debit notice.  All of these document copies have been shared 
with U.S. law enforcement.  The good news here is this case 
may finally start to go somewhere within the Guatemalan 
judicial system.  Prosecutor Rios, for all of his energy and 
manifest goodwill, was justifiably unwilling to show all that 
he had to his superiors while the Portillo government was 
still in power due to the links with some of the most 
dangerous names in organized crime.  We gave Attorney General 
Florido copies of these checks about six months ago (on 
receiving the documents, his comment was \"it\'s beginning to 
look a lot like Christmas!\"), which leaves us wondering why 
he waited until now to leak.  Florido and leaks have a 
history together. 
 
Holiday Season Travel 
--------------------- 
9.  (U) With the end-of-year shift of focus to holiday 
celebrations, public security loomed large as a topic of 
conversation and government attention.  The government 
mobilized additional police and military personnel (as it has 
done in previous years) to cope with the holiday crowds and 
increased traffic.  Police also increased drunk driving 
checkpoints at the same time that the government lifted 
alcohol sales restrictions (i.e. the late night cutoff on 
alcohol sales) for Christmas Eve, Christmas, New Year\'s Eve, 
and New Year\'s Day. 
 
10.  (SBU) In response to criticisms about highway security, 
most notably robberies of Salvadorans visiting Guatemala, 
President Berger took a pre-Christmas drive from the 
Salvadoran border to the capital to inspect police and 
military security measures.  The police have established 
fixed checkpoints and roving patrols on the three principal 
routes from El Salvador.  The Army\'s Third Brigade 
headquartered in Jutiapa has two thirds of its personnel 
devoted to highway security (with the remainder participating 
in joint police-military patrols in the capital) using fixed 
highway checkpoints, foot patrols along certain highway 
routes, and detachments stationed at, or near, border entry 
stations.  However, despite the security measures, Guatemalan 
authorities were embarrassed when a Salvadoran Vice Minister 
was robbed on the highway during the holiday season.  And 
despite GOG pleas, Salvadoran groups are continuing their 
publicity campaign warning against travel to Guatemala. 
HAMILTON 
"
"25189","1/10/2005 20:38","05GUATEMALA56","Embassy Guatemala","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUATEMALA 000056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/IL, WHA/EPSC, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ELAB, EAID, PGOV, PREL, PHUM, GT 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA GSP PETITIONS 
 
 
1. (U) Summary and introduction:  In this cable, post 
provides its comments on the petition submitted December 13, 
2004, to USTR by the Washington Office on Latin America 
(WOLA) and the U.S./Labor Education in the Americas project 
(US/LEAP) to remove Guatemala from the list of GSP and CBI 
beneficiaries.  The paragraphs below are keyed to the points 
in the WOLA/USLEAP petition, some of which were reiterated in 
a subsequent petition filed by the International Labor Rights 
Fund.  While the Constitutional Court\'s decision against 
administrative fines by the Labor Inspectorate was 
unfortunate, the Government of Guatemala (GOG) is acting 
decisively to remedy the situation.  That the GOG needs to 
address discrepancies in the labor code is clear; that they 
are doing so is equally clear. To punish a nation because its 
executive obeyed a high court\'s decision and then followed an 
established legislative procedure to remedy a situation is 
not the signal we wish to send.  Therefore, we strongly 
support Guatemala\'s continued inclusion in the list of GSP 
beneficiary countries.  End Summary. 
 
The GSP Petition Point by Point 
------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) The petition suggests that, \"As firmly established by 
the International Labor Organization, Guatemalan labor law 
simply fails to meet international labor standards.\"  In 
point of fact, the ILO conducted a study in 2003 that 
concluded that Guatemala has a framework of labor laws that 
give effect to the core labor principles embodied in the 1998 
ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work 
and its Follow-up.  The petition cites Observations and 
Direct Requests by the ILO\'s Committee of Experts on the 
Application of Conventions and Recommendations (CEACR) but 
fails to recognize that the ILO itself credited Guatemala for 
its Labor Code reform that \"took account of the observations 
made over a number of years by the (CEACR).\"  Guatemala 
continues to engage actively with the ILO and its CEACR to 
address all pending Observations and Direct Requests. 
 
2A. (U) The petition makes five points regarding the failings 
of Guatemala\'s labor law.  The Berger Government, not yet one 
year old, has been developing a labor reform package to 
improve the labor code on these and other points.  The 
package was pending before the Tri-partite Commission, 
however, when the Constitutional Court issued a decision that 
nullified many provisions of the 2001 reform (discussed below 
in point 2B).  The GOG continues to work to address the 
pending points from the 2003 ILO study as well as to address 
the reestablishment of the gains achieved in the 2001 reform 
and lost in the Constitutional Court decision. 
 
2A1. (U) The ILO noted that the wording of Guatemala\'s law 
could affect the right of public sector workers to strike. 
ILO conventions agree on the prohibition of strikes in 
essential services related to life, health, and safety of 
persons.  Guatemala\'s law reform, however, did not expressly 
repeal the existing prohibition on strikes in the public 
transport and energy sectors.  In reply to the CEACR\'s 
Observation (significantly an Observation, rather than a 
Direct Request), the GOG noted that they had implicitly 
repealed the prohibition by order while drafting a new reform 
package to formally resolve this interpretation of 
Guatemala\'s labor code.  We note that, since this observation 
was made, the GOG has never declared a strike illegal in 
those sectors. 
 
2A2. (U) The CEACR noted that in a strike vote, only cast 
votes should be counted in determining a majority.  The GOG 
recognized the validity of this point and included it in the 
draft reform package mentioned in paragraph 2A. 
 
2A3. (U) The petition says that Guatemala has a de facto ban 
on industrial unions, which allows employers, such as those 
in the apparel sector, to easily close their operations and 
move production to a non-unionized factory.  In fact, 
Guatemalan law says only that a sector-wide union must have a 
membership of one-half plus one of the workers in an 
industry.  Not one unionized factory in the textile and 
apparel sector has closed operations, either to move 
production to a non-unionized facility or for any other 
reason. 
 
2A4. (U) Guatemalan labor law does indeed require that trade 
union executive committee members be of Guatemalan origin and 
employed by the enterprise in question, points questioned by 
the ILO.  Ministry of Labor contacts told us that at the ILO 
meetings in Geneva in 2004, it was agreed by all parties that 
the issue be referred to the Tri-partite Commission, where it 
remains pending. 
 
2A5. (U) The petition notes that agricultural workers have 
not been able to exercise the right to strike during the 
harvest.  In point of fact, the Labor Code -- as the petition 
recognizes -- allows for agricultural workers to strike 
during harvest, but the major union representing commercial 
agricultural workers has not called for such a strike. 
 
2B. (SBU) The petition correctly notes the effective measures 
included in the 2001 reform package, that the ILO also 
praised.  The August 2004 Constitutional Court ruling did 
overturn key articles of the package, which was later 
interpreted to leave the Ministry of Labor with a temporary 
vacuum of authority to assess fines on employers found not to 
be in compliance with Guatemalan labor law.  Following the 
court\'s decision, the Ministry continued to assess fines on 
non-compliant businesses.  Appellate court decisions, 
however, began to overturn the fines based on the larger 
Constitutional Court ruling.  For this reason, inspectors now 
take their findings to labor courts for court-ordered 
sanctions; a process that Ministry of Labor officials agree 
is cumbersome and inefficient, but only temporary. 
 
Faced with these Appellate Court interpretations, the 
Ministry of Labor was forced to accept the temporary block to 
its powers in late November 2004.  In January 2005, the 
Inter-Institutional Commission on Labor Rights, which 
includes the Ministries of Labor, Foreign Relations, and 
Economy, and other government agencies such as the Bank of 
Guatemala, began to address the issue in order to find a 
solution.  Currently, the discussions are based on a 
long-term approach including a new legal initiative and a 
short-term approach in which the executive re-empowers the 
Ministry of Labor by decree.  We have encouraged those 
involved to do both:  empower the Ministry immediately by 
decree and then address the broader legal issues through 
consultation and legislation.  Representatives of the textile 
and apparel employers\' organization, VESTEX, told us that 
they favor an immediate executive order to re-empower the 
Ministry of Labor, followed by new legislation through the 
standard process. 
 
The umbrella business confederation CACIF, which brought the 
challenge to the Constitutional Court, has repeatedly argued 
that it supports the concept of administrative sanctions so 
that businesses can move on without expensive litigation when 
they have clearly infringed the law.  The 2001 legislation, 
however, employs formulae for calculating fines based on the 
size of a company that CACIF representatives say can lead to 
excessive fines for minor infractions.  They claim they are 
willing to negotiate a new legislative initiative. 
 
2C. (SBU) The petition correctly notes that Guatemala had 
prepared an extensive further reform of the labor code, to 
address outstanding issues in regard to child labor, sexual 
harassment, domestic labor, and reinstatement; a point for 
which the GOG should be commended rather than rebuked.  The 
reform package was submitted to the Tripartite Commission for 
review, in accord with an ILO direct request.  The new 
reforms were still under review when the Constitutional Court 
issued its decision to overturn key articles of the 2001 
reform.  As the petition itself notes, since reforms nullify 
pre-existing statutes, there is no automatic return to the 
status quo.  For that reason, the new reforms cannot move 
forward until the situation with the 2001 reforms is 
resolved.  We also would like to add that there is a 
difference of opinion in the legal community here whether the 
reform nullified pre-existing statutes.  Chamber of Commerce 
representatives believe that the Constitutional Court\'s 
decision did, in fact, return Guatemala to status quo ante 
and that the Ministry of Labor can use those statutes as a 
basis for their activities. 
 
3. (SBU) The Ministry of Labor is currently involved in a 
review of its practices and procedures.  In doing so, the 
Ministry of Labor replaced more than thirty percent of its 
labor inspectors.  The review of existing staff and 
procedures, the retirement or firing for cause of many of its 
inspectors, and the hiring and training of new inspectors has 
strained the capabilities of the Ministry.  Furthermore, as 
noted above, the Constitutional Court decision of August 2004 
put many of the Ministry\'s activities in question.  For these 
reasons, the Ministry of Labor has had difficulty reaching 
its ambitious objectives.  The activities, however, have been 
beneficial to the Ministry as an institution, and the 
continued constructive engagement with labor rights 
activities, such as the U.S. Department of Labor-funded 
Cumple y Gana program, the Commission for Verification of 
Corporate Codes of Conduct (COVERCO), the tri-partite 
Alternative Resolution of Labor Disputes\' Commission (RAC), 
and others have improved the morale and efficiency of the 
Ministry. 
 
4. (SBU) The petition cites a 2002 U.N. report that covers 
the years prior to 2002 as evidence that trade unionists 
continue to be the target of violence, including murder. 
While this was true when written, there were no murder cases 
related to trade union activity in 2003 or 2004.  The 
petition states that the murder of Julio Rolando Raquec is 
evidence that the \"brutal legacy of violence against trade 
unionists continues to this day.\"  While Raquec was the head 
of an organization under the larger umbrella of the General 
Center of Guatemalan Workers (CGTG), his murder was judged to 
be a clear case of common crime by the police, prosecutors, 
his own family, the head of the CGTG, and indeed, by Raquec 
himself, who was able to make a report to officials before he 
died of his injuries.  He was shot four times by unknown men 
who robbed him.  Raquec\'s wife stated that she believed the 
aggressors were gang members who operated in the area. 
 
While we regret Raquec\'s death and do not dismiss the legacy 
of violence against trade unionists, the fact is that 
violence against trade unionists  -- for their union 
activities -- has diminished in recent years.  Police are 
much more active in both protection from and investigation of 
threats.  Additionally, the Attorney General\'s office has a 
Special Prosecutor for Crimes against Trade Unionists and 
Journalists. 
 
Regarding the case of Imelda Lopez de Sandoval, the Special 
Prosecutor does not have any information to link the events 
described in the petition to her union activities.  Also, the 
Special Prosecutor has no authority to investigate the 
Nobland (NB) case cited in the petition as the conflict is 
between rival groups of employees. 
 
5. (SBU) As noted in the petition, the GOG\'s enforcement of 
labor laws remains weak.  This does not take into account, 
however, efforts to improve the professionalism of the 
Ministry of Labor staff.  The Constitutional Court decision 
greatly restricted the efficacy of the Ministry\'s activities, 
but those activities continue.  The petition cites no 
evidence of government wrongdoing. 
 
The Ministry of Labor has an inspector dedicated to each of 
the cases cited in this section of the petition.  Virtually 
all of these situations are cases still pending before 
various courts.  In none of the cases have the employees 
called for a strike. 
 
6. (SBU) International textile quotas on China and India 
expired December 31, 2004.  For this reason, the entire 
textile and apparel industries in Guatemala and other 
countries have been experiencing difficulties.  We have met 
with GOG officials, industry representatives, and staff of 
the Korean Embassy (Note:  many of Guatemala\'s textile 
factories are Korean-owned.  End note.) to raise concern 
about the responsibilities of factory owners who may choose 
to leave Guatemala.  The GOG is continuing to engage factory 
owners and investors regarding their legal responsibilities. 
 
The petition correctly notes that, in the case of NB, the 
legal system did, in fact, protect the establishment of the 
union and achieve the reinstatement of fired workers.  The 
owner of the factory hired an independent consultant to 
review labor practices and when that consultant reported 
non-compliance, the company immediately began negotiations of 
a collective-bargaining pact.  We add that, although the pact 
has not yet been concluded, the parties have agreed to almost 
200 articles.  Only 12 articles remain outstanding.  The 
petition notes that all pending articles are in regard to pay 
and other forms of remuneration.  We note that one of the 
articles has to do with a salary increase, but that many of 
the others are demands for such items as school supplies for 
employees\' children, paid holidays for Father\'s Day and the 
anniversary of the founding of the union, and a party paid 
for by the company to celebrate the founding of the union. 
In short, several of the pending concerns have little to do 
with the employees\' labor rights.  The petition notes that 
management called off negotiations, but we would add that the 
union did not request a meeting during the last three months 
of 2004.  NB management and the union have scheduled 
negotiation sessions in January 2005. 
 
7. (SBU) We agree that child labor in Guatemala persists and 
warrants international attention and support, which Guatemala 
has received from the U.S. Department of Labor, USAID, and 
ILO/IPEC, amongst others.  The extent of the informal economy 
in Guatemala, as in all developing countries, inhibits the 
collection of reliable data as the petition demonstrates by 
citing two sources regarding the number of child domestic 
laborers.  One source determined that there are 17,350 
children in that status and the other source claimed 92,800. 
While we agree that even one child laborer is too many, the 
GOG and the donor community are engaged in many activities in 
the health, education, and social welfare sectors to minimize 
this unfortunate practice.  Enforcing labor laws in the 
informal sector is an immensely difficult proposition in any 
country, and the Guatemalan Ministry of Labor, as the 
petition agrees, has developed a reform package to the Labor 
Code to address these issues.  The Tri-Partite Commission is 
currently reviewing the reform proposal; again, as the ILO 
requested the GOG to do. 
 
Final Comments 
-------------- 
 
8. (U) The petition does not indicate GOG wrongdoing in any 
of the cases cited in Sections 5 or 6 -- stories of factories 
shutting down, owners exhausting the legal appeals available 
to them, or \"management engaged in anti-union activities 
including repeated threats to close the factory, blaming the 
union for lost business, sending workers to mandatory 
anti-union meetings, and trying to pit the workers against 
the union.\"  Post notes that in none of these cases did the 
aggrieved workers go on strike to protest. 
 
9. (U) The Constitutional Court\'s decision was unfortunate, 
untimely, and, in our opinion, on rather dubious legal 
justification.  Nonetheless, we do not believe that we should 
punish Guatemala because its executive paid attention to the 
legal decision of its independent judiciary.  The GOG is 
working to resolve the legal problems through a process that 
the ILO requested it follow.  The petition usefully raises 
attention to this matter, and we will continue to engage the 
GOG to resolve this and other matters.  Most of the points 
cited in the petition, and in particular those of child 
labor, are reflections of Guatemala\'s dire poverty.  We 
believe that the most effective way to address this 
underlying cause is to encourage continued economic growth. 
GSP benefits are the primary tool currently available to 
allow this to happen.  Thus, we strongly support Guatemala\'s 
continued inclusion in the list of GSP beneficiary countries. 
HAMILTON 
"
"25302","1/12/2005 17:49","05GUATEMALA81","Embassy Guatemala","CONFIDENTIAL","05STATE3750","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/11/2015 
TAGS: PHUM, GT, CU, UNCHR-1 
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON CUBAN CANDIDACY TO CHR WORKING GROUP 
ON SITUATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 3750 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Hamilton for reasons 1.4 (b) & (d) 
 
(C) Embassy Guatemala polcouns delivered reftel points to 
Ambassador Carla Rodriguez, U/S for Multilateral Relations in 
the Guatemalan MFA.  Rodriguez said the GRULAC met January 10 
in Geneva and had left for a follow-on meeting the issue of 
naming its candidate for the CHR Working Group on Situations. 
 She said the follow-on meeting had not been scheduled but 
thought it would be around January 20.  Rodriguez said 
Guatemalan Permrep Ambassador Lars Pira had consulted with 
the MFA, and the MFA had decided it could not be a candidate 
for the Working Group, in part because there were three 1503 
complaints pending against Guatemala.  Rodriguez indicated 
Guatemala and other GRULAC countries shared our concerns 
about Cuba\'s candidacy but were unable to identify a viable 
alternative. 
HAMILTON 
"