
"3158","6/18/2002 20:19","02TEGUCIGALPA1780","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001780 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PPC, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 06/17/22 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  CERRO LA MOLE RADAR--THE UNREQUITED PACT 
 
Classified by PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  In 1993, the U.S. entered into an 
agreement with GOH regarding the maintenance of the radar 
located at Cerro La Mole.  The U.S. agreed to pay 75% of 
all maintenance costs up to a limit of $400,000 per year, 
while the GOH agreed to pay 25% of the maintenance costs, 
in addition to the manpower needed to maintain the radar. 
To date, the U.S. has paid nothing under the agreement, 
while the GOH has paid for all maintenance costs of the 
equipment.  U.S. noncompliance with the agreement 
increasingly is becoming an issue in bilateral relations 
between the U.S. military and the Honduran Armed Forces 
(HOAF).  The radar equipment is part of an integrated 
counterdrug radar architecture in the region, and post 
seeks guidance on how to resolve the unsettled issue of 
the U.S.\'s obligations under the agreement. End Summary. 
 
 
 
 
-------------------- 
THE AGREEMENT ITSELF 
-------------------- 
 
2.  (U) In 1993 the U.S. and GOH signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding between the Government of the Republic of 
Honduras and the Government of the United States of 
America for the Expansion of the Radar Located in Cerro 
La Mole in the Caribbean Basin Radar Network (MOU).  The 
purpose of the MOU was to reaffirm the cooperation of the 
two governments in the international battle against 
narcotics trafficking by expanding the radar capability 
of the region as set forth in the Caribbean Basin Radar 
Network agreement (CBRN) signed by the U.S. and the GOH 
April 7, 1989.  The MOU was designed to integrate the 
Cerro La Mole radar (hereinafter referred to as \"the 
radar\") into the operations of the CBRN. 
 
3.  (U) The core provisions of the MOU are as follows: 
 
-The radar is owned and operated by the GOH. 
 
-The costs of operation and maintenance of the radar are 
to be borne by the GOH. 
 
-The U.S. will have unrestricted access to the data from 
the radar except in the case of a Honduran national 
emergency (GOH will notify the U.S. in such instance). 
Likewise, the U.S. will provide the HOAF access to data 
from the U.S. owned radar on Calentura Hill. 
 
-The U.S. and the GOH will develop a joint operations 
plan for the operation of the radar. 
 
-The U.S. will provide spare parts support and technical 
assistance valued at a maximum of $400,000 per year, with 
the GOH responsible for no less than 25 percent of the 
total spare parts/technical assistance costs each year. 
 
-Materials, equipment and services imported into Honduras 
by the U.S. in connection with the operation and 
maintenance of the radars are duty-free and exempt from 
taxes. 
 
-The GOH will provide land for installation of 
communication equipment needed to operate the radars. 
 
-The GOH has an option to purchase the U.S. installed 
equipment at a price set by the parties pursuant to the 
U.S. Foreign Military Sales Procedures during the 
effective dates of the agreement. 
 
-The financial obligations of the parties under the MOU 
are subject to the availability of authorized and 
appropriated funds of the parties. 
 
-The MOU is effective from the date the parties exchanged 
notes indicating that their respective constitutional 
requirements have been met and remains in force until 
April 7, 2009. 
 
-The MOU may be extended by written agreement of the 
parties, and may be terminated at any time by either 
party upon one-year written notice to the other party. 
Within the one-year period preceding the termination of 
the MOU, the U.S. may remove any U.S. installed equipment 
that the GOH has not purchased. 
 
--------------------- 
THE DIPLOMACY PROBLEM 
--------------------- 
 
4.  (C) The U.S. has not paid any of the maintenance 
costs for the radar, as required in the MOU.  Simply 
stated, this is a source of tension between the HOAF 
and the U.S. military personnel working in Honduras. 
Additionally, it creates a diplomatic uncertainty for the 
U.S. mission and the GOH.  The resulting discomfort stems 
from a variety of sources. 
-Presumably the MOU is a legally binding contract entered 
into by two sovereign nations.  The U.S. has a 
responsibility to abide by its terms. 
 
-The U.S. military conducts a significant number of 
engagement activities with the HOAF in Honduras. 
Relations between the two militaries are adversely 
affected by the fact that the U.S. has not performed 
under the MOU. 
 
-It is difficult to enforce proper end use of U.S. 
training and equipment when HOAF officials repeatedly 
point to the U.S.\'s failure to abide by a properly 
executed MOU. 
 
-The MOU issue is repeatedly raised by the HOAF and, 
therefore, takes up an inordinate amount of time and 
manpower. 
 
-------------------- 
THE DRUG WAR PROBLEM 
-------------------- 
 
5.  (U) More and more frequently, Honduran waters are 
used by narcotraffickers for transshipment of drugs from 
Columbia to the U.S.  The U.S. regularly asks the GOH to 
assist in the drug war.  The radar at Cerro La Mole is a 
part of an integrated counterdrug radar architecture in 
the SOUTHCOM area of responsibility.  According to U.S. 
military officials here in Honduras, there is essentially 
a \"hole\" in the U.S. radar capability in the Western 
Hemisphere.  The Cerro La Mole radar would, if 
functional, fill that void and foster counterdrug efforts 
in the region.  In this sense, the radar could serve a 
useful purpose in support of U.S. interests in the 
region. 
 
--------------------- 
THE FINANCIAL PROBLEM 
--------------------- 
 
6.  (U)  The funding for payment of the U.S. obligation 
to provide 75% of the radar maintenance cost apparently 
exists--at least in theory.  $400,000 is budgeted each 
fiscal year and routed to Air Combat Command.  However, 
it is apparently unlawful to utilize these funds for the 
maintenance of the radar for two reasons.  First of all, 
counterdrug money cannot fund recurring maintenance costs 
of equipment not owned by the U.S.  Secondly, Air Combat 
Command is prohibited from paying recurring maintenance 
costs of assets that do not belong to the U.S.  As a 
result, the $400,000 is turned back unused each year. 
 
---------------------- 
THE POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS 
---------------------- 
 
7.  (U) Post seeks guidance as to the appropriate 
resolution of this ongoing issue.  There are several 
potential solutions: 
 
-Keep the pact in place and take the steps necessary to 
make the funding available for its intended purpose-- 
thereby honoring the original bargain.  It is difficult 
to predict the cost of this option, but it is safe to say 
that the GOH has not spent anything close to the amount 
that would require the U.S. to pay $400,000 per year for 
the relevant MOU time frame. 
 
-Negotiate a lump-sum buy-out of the U.S. obligation 
under the MOU.  This might cost anywhere between $400,000 
and $3.6 million, according to our military sources. 
 
-Pursuant to the terms of the MOU, notify the GOH of the 
U.S.\'s intention to terminate the MOU--then follow 
through. 
 
-Take the official position that, due to the funding 
predicament, Article IX of the MOU eliminates the U.S.\'s 
responsibility for maintenance costs under the MOU. 
Taking this stance, one must argue that U.S. financial 
obligations have always been legally non-existent. 
 
-Enter into negotiations with the GOH in order to 
extricate the U.S. from the MOU.  Post\'s recommendation 
briefly described below is one way of accomplishing this 
option. 
 
--------------------- 
POST\'S RECOMMENDATION 
--------------------- 
 
8.  (C)  Post maintains that it is in the best interest 
of the U.S. to amicably resolve the U.S. obligations 
pursuant to the MOU.  Post recommends that we negotiate 
an end to the MOU, while at the same time ensuring that 
both U.S. and Honduran interests are addressed.  One 
possible solution is to offer to GOH the opportunity to 
participate in the Cooperating Nations Intelligence 
Exchange System (CNIES).  CNIES is a system based in Key 
West and operated by the Joint Inter-Agency Task Force 
East (JIATFE).  It provides images of portions of the 
Western Hemisphere.  CNIES is a system in which the GOH 
is very interested, and post believes that if it were 
possible to provide the GOH access to CNIES, the GOH 
might well agree to relinquish any claims against the 
U.S. under the MOU.  This option would solve the U.S.\'s 
dilemma with respect to the MOU, and at the same time 
would provide beneficial information (particularly in 
terms of counter-drug efforts) to the GOH.  Additionally, 
it is noteworthy that this option would cost the U.S. 
virtually nothing. 
 
ALMAGUER 
"
"3231","7/2/2002 15:01","02TEGUCIGALPA1927","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE90733|02TEGUCIGALPA1811|02TEGUCIGALPA1876","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 001927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/C DAVID LUNA AND JOHN BRANDOLINO, FOR AID 
EXO/WHA JOHN SMITH AND FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, KCRM, KSEP, PGOV, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTICORRUPTION EFFORTS AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN 
HONDURAS 
 
REFS:  (A) 02 STATE 90733 
       (B) TEGUCIGALPA 01811 
 
1.  This cable responds to the action requested in 
Reftel. 
 
2.  SUMMARY:  Over the course of the last three years, 
there has been considerable activity in the battle 
against corruption in Honduras, in which the government 
of Honduras (GOH), civil society and the private sector 
have been involved.  Anticorruption efforts are a Mission 
Program Plan priority for Post, and they are an important 
cornerstone of U.S. diplomatic undertakings in Honduras. 
As a result of these efforts, public awareness has been 
heightened and the GOH has taken steps to both identify 
and address the problem of corruption.  While the fight 
against corruption rages on, there are concrete successes 
attributable to USG technical assistance and bilateral 
diplomatic efforts.  We provide here brief descriptions 
of the various anticorruption projects and activities, 
along with summary assessments of their achievements. 
 
3.  Many of the anticorruption efforts described herein 
are components of various Hurricane Mitch assistance 
programs funded by the May 1999 supplemental--the 
projects are drawing to a close.  Without the additional 
funds, Post will be hard-pressed to continue work in 
furtherance of its anticorruption goals.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
EFFORTS FUNDED BY INL HURRICANE MITCH FUNDS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
INL SECURITY MINISTRY ANTICORRUPTION PROJECT 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  The Public Security Ministry (MoPS) project involved 
three (3) primary components--training, technical 
assistance and the provision of equipment and software. 
To accomplish the anticorruption initiative, the project 
focused on the investigation of financial crimes, as well 
as the development and implementation of a case-tracking 
system.  Courses were taught in investigative techniques, 
report writing and interviewing methods, financial crimes 
auditing and various computer skills.  Hands-on technical 
assistance was provided in the field.  Both computer 
hardware and software was donated so that investigators 
and prosecutors can participate in the National Automated 
Case Management and Information System (NACMIS). 
Additionally, technical assistance was given to the 
Financial Crimes Unit (FCU) to help them develop 
specialized modules to support financial crimes in the 
NACMIS. 
 
5.  As a result of the project, the FCU\'s ability to 
investigate, prosecute and track public corruption and 
financial crime cases is considerably greater.  Moreover, 
the GOH now has the capacity to link this computer system 
with the judicial sector system.  Project funding was 
$150,000 and was managed by ICITAP. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
INL PROCURADOR GENERAL ANTICORRUPTION PROJECT 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
6.  The Honduran Procurador General performs functions 
similar to those performed in the U.S. by the Office of 
the Inspector General and the Office of the Solicitor 
General.  This three-pronged project included the 
provision of training, technical assistance and 
equipment/software.  The project focused on the 
investigation of tax-related financial cases, as well as 
the development and implementation of a case-tracking 
system.  The same types of courses as were taught in the 
MoPS project were also taught in this project.  As in the 
MoPS project, the donation of hardware and software made 
it possible for the Procurador General\'s Office to tap 
into the NACMIS system.  The benefits of the 
anticorruption initiative include a heightened ability to 
handle cases involving tax evasion and the capacity to 
tie into the future judicial computer system.  Project 
funding was $150,000 and was managed by ICITAP. 
 
-------------------------------- 
INL PUBLIC MINISTRY/IABF PROJECT 
-------------------------------- 
 
7.  The Inter-American Bar Foundation (IABF) has a 
$400,000 grant of INL funds (administered by out USAID 
mission)to provide technical assistance and training to 
the Public Ministry (MP--Attorney General\'s Office). The 
project focuses on strengthening the capability of the 
Public Ministry to detect, investigate and prosecute 
public corruption cases (in particular, to prosecute 
successfully under the recently implemented oral 
accusatory judicial system).  The project has three 
components--to increase the effectiveness of the MP in 
the fight against corruption, to form an inter- 
institutional alliance against corruption and to 
strengthen the Citizen Advisory Council (CAC) as an 
anticorruption tool. 
 
8.  First, the project involved the selection of six 
active corruption cases for which prosecutors in the MP\'s 
Anticorruption Unit received specialized training in 
investigative techniques.  Additionally, inter- 
institutional committees were formed to coordinate 
efforts and avoid duplication of services.  Along with 
the MP, the Comptroller General\'s Office, the Directorate 
of Administrative Probity and the Honduran IRS 
participated.  The goal of this training is to teach 
prosecutors how to develop a corruption case from the 
initial investigation through prosecution and trial.  A 
broad-based interagency case-study approach is used to 
encourage agency cooperation.  An inter-institutional 
alliance against corruption was formed, and a final 
report regarding its formation is forthcoming.  The CAC 
(intended to make recommendations for the repeal and 
modification of various immunities enjoyed by public 
officials) has been only marginally successful.  The 
CAC\'s progress is at a standstill, so alternative 
solutions are being pursued. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
INL DIRECTORATE OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROBITY PROJECT 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
9.  The Public Affairs Section (PAS) carried out a two- 
year $150,000 anticorruption project in conjunction with 
the Directorate of Administrative Probity (DPA).  The DPA 
serves as the GOH\'s chief ethics watchdog and performs 
some functions that are similar to those performed by the 
Office of Government Ethics.  Approximately $86,000 was 
spent on technology, including a digital copier, 
computers, printers, Oracle database software, licenses 
and technical support and training for DPA staff. 
 
10.  The remainder of the funding was spent on training 
seminars and conferences, both in Honduras and the U.S. 
The training and conferences focused on financial 
government administration, anticorruption in government 
and the private sector, and government ethics.  PAS 
hosted five (5) workshops with presenters recruited by 
State\'s International Information Programs (IIP) Office 
of Speakers and Specialists.  The speakers\' areas of 
expertise included government ethics, anticorruption and 
financial oversight. 
 
------------------------------ 
INL MIGRATION COMPUTER PROJECT 
------------------------------ 
 
11.  This $217,000 project, currently in the contracting 
phase, is designed to provide computers, modems and other 
hardware to the GOH Office of Migration.  The equipment 
will augment the GOH\'s ability to transmit migration 
information between offices efficiently, and generally 
enhance the record-keeping capabilities of the Migration 
Office.  Moreover, the project to issue Machine Readable 
Passports in Honduras (funded through the 2001 INL Letter 
of Agreement) will dovetail with the Migration Office\'s 
new hardware, making migration and border controls in 
Honduras better than ever.  Post anticipates that both 
projects will be in place before the end of FY 2002. 
 
--------------------------------- 
USAID COMPTROLLER GENERAL PROJECT 
--------------------------------- 
 
12.  One of the objectives of USAID\'s Transparency 
Program is to strengthen the capability of the 
Comptroller General of the Republic (CGR) and promote 
enhanced awareness of the importance of audits in 
general.  Several goals have been accomplished, 
including: 
 
-USAID\'s contractor conducted training (most notably to 
the Audit Unit for Projects of International 
Organizations), while overseeing systematic concurrent 
audits of Hurricane Mitch reconstruction projects. 
-The Regional Inspector General certified the CGR to 
perform audits for U.S.-funded programs. 
 
-A Web site for the CGR was designed 
(http://www.cgrh.net/) and assistance was given in the 
publication of final audit reports on the site. 
 
-A much-needed Audit Recommendation Follow-Up System was 
developed in order to promote early and impartial 
resolution of recommendations. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
ASSISTANCE TO THE NATIONAL ANTICORRUPTION COUNCIL 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
13.  USAID\'s Transparency Program provides support to the 
National Anticorruption Council (NAC), which was created 
by former President Carlos Flores, reinforced by 
President Maduro and is chaired by Roman Catholic 
Cardinal Oscar Andres Rodriguez.  The objective of the 
NAC is to develop and implement a national anticorruption 
strategy and action plan.  USAID provided financial 
support for civil society events, and financed a public 
opinion survey about corruption, governmental integrity 
and accountability issues.  Results were publicly 
presented and used as a basis for the NAC\'s National 
Anticorruption Strategy.  USAID serves the NAC in an 
advisory role, with emphasis on diagnosing the 
anticorruption problem in Honduras. 
 
14.  U.S. funds for the project total $291,665 and are 
managed by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 
Recently, USAID delivered a letter to the Cardinal 
reaffirming its support for NAC\'s activities.  Other 
international donors also support the NAC, including 
Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden, the Interamerican 
Development Bank (IDB), the UNDP and the World Bank. 
 
----------------------------------- 
USAID MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
----------------------------------- 
 
15.  USAID supports accountability and transparency at 
the local level through its Municipal Development Program 
(MDP).  The MDP installs formal internal controls on 
municipal accounting/management systems, trains the 
community to oversee the performance of local governments 
and their use of resources, involves citizens in decision 
making processes and in oversight functions, and 
strengthens management systems at the local level. 
 
16.  Using Hurricane Mitch reconstruction funds, Post 
signed a Cooperative Agreement (CA) with the Municipal 
Development Foundation (FUNDEMUN), under which FUNDEMUN 
designs and implements a strategy for social auditing to 
follow-up processes and activities for reconstruction 
projects. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
TRANSPARENCY AND GOVERNANCE WORKING GROUP 
----------------------------------------- 
 
17.  The GOH, civil society and, subsequently, the 
Consultative Group for the Reconstruction and 
Transformation of Honduras (whose members include the 
leading members of the G-15), established a Transparency 
and Good Governance Working Group to address issues of 
government accountability, transparency and corruption. 
Its priorities include immunities laws, social auditing 
and the NAC. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
USAID/GOH/IDB PROCUREMENT INSPECTION PROJECT 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
18.  USAID joined with other donors to establish an $11.5 
million independent donor mechanism, which provides 
management oversight to the operations of the GOH\'s line 
ministries and independent GOH agencies in their 
implementation of Hurricane Mitch reconstruction 
programs.  This effort is part of a larger IDB program to 
strengthen the Honduran procurement system. 
Specifically, there will be selective inspections of the 
procurement and contracting processes, covering 
technical, administrative, financial and control aspects. 
 
-------------------- 
OTHER USAID PROJECTS 
-------------------- 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
INTER-AMERICAN CONVENTION AGAINST CORRUPTION 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
19.  Through its Transparency Program, USAID intends to 
promote monitoring of the standards set forth in the OAS 
Inter-American Convention against Corruption (IACAC).  In 
particular, USAID will encourage the assessment of the 
Honduran legal framework against the IACAC standards. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
CIVIL SOCIETY/PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN 
--------------------------------------- 
 
20.  USAID\'s work with government control entities is 
enhanced by effective public information campaigns, which 
increase citizen awareness of the importance of vigilance 
over the GOH\'s administration of public resources, 
knowledge about what kinds of problems to look for, and 
clear instructions regarding what to do if corruption is 
identified.  Moreover, one of the objectives of USAID\'s 
Transparency Program is to develop a public awareness 
campaign strategy.  USAID published a booklet featuring 
the IACAC illustrated with cartoons that relate to the 
Honduran experience.  The booklet will soon be available 
for distribution. 
 
21.  USAID and the Center for the Investigation and 
Promotion of Human Rights (CIPRODEH) created a 
transparency Web site (www.e-demoKratia.org), printed 
bulletins called \"Transluz,\" and presented workshops on 
transparency in the budget process.  In 2001, the 
Ministry of Defense published its budget for the first 
time.  In 2002, the GOH published the budget broken down 
by Ministry in a groundbreaking effort to achieve better 
transparency.  Taken together, USAID transparency efforts 
since May of 2000 have totaled $8,294,000. 
 
--------------------------------- 
MISCELLANEOUS EFFORTS AND STRIDES 
--------------------------------- 
 
-------------------------- 
A NEW MONEY LAUNDERING LAW 
-------------------------- 
 
22.  In February of 2002, the Congress passed new money 
laundering legislation, which took effect on June 4, 
2002.  The law expands the criminal definition of money 
laundering to encompass any non-economically justified 
sale or movement of assets, and strengthens the powers of 
prosecutors to investigate and prosecute suspected 
offenses.  Additionally, the new law makes the financing 
of terrorism a criminal offense and provides for the 
creation of a financial information unit to track 
suspicious transactions. 
 
23.  Officials at the Attorney General\'s Office and the 
National Banking Commission are drafting regulations 
applicable to the new financial information unit.  In 
April, the U.S. Department of Treasury sent a money 
laundering expert to Honduras to conduct a needs 
assessment for a USG-funded technical assistance package. 
According to the Treasury expert, funding for this 
project will cost about $250,000 over two (2) years. 
 
----------------------------- 
STOCKHOLM DECLARATION OF 1999 
----------------------------- 
 
24.  The Stockholm Declaration of 1999 as authored by the 
Mitch donors, includes as a goal: \"Reconstruct and 
transform Central America on the basis of an approach 
integrated with Transparency and Governance.\"  The 
Honduran Follow-Up Group on the Stockholm Principles (G- 
15) was formed by the U.S., Germany, Canada, Spain, 
Japan, the Netherlands, the U.K., Sweden, Italy, the IDB, 
the IBRD, International Monetary Fund (IMF), UNDP, the 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) 
and the E.U.  G-15 members coordinate various efforts and 
programs, and the GOH encourages donor coordination. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
GOH POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY PROGRAM 
-------------------------------------- 
25.  Transparency and accountability are becoming much 
more high-profile issues in Honduras.  As a result, both 
transparency and accountability are included in the GOH\'s 
fifteen-year Poverty Reduction Strategy Program (PRSP), 
which contains guidelines to transform the country over 
the next fifteen (15) years.  Notably, since Hurricane 
Mitch, the GOH and civil society have taken important 
steps to develop the PRSP in a participatory manner. 
 
------------------------- 
A NEW GOH PROCUREMENT LAW 
------------------------- 
 
26.  In September 2001, a new government procurement law 
went into effect.  This new legislation in intended to 
increase transparency and reduce corruption. 
 
--------------------------------- 
A FORTHCOMING GOH CODE OF ETHICS? 
--------------------------------- 
 
27.  The GOH is in the process of developing a code of 
ethics for public employees.  Post hopes that, in fact, 
an effective code of ethics will be implemented-- 
including rules regarding conflicts of interest and 
feasible processes for the investigation and prosecution 
of such cases. 
 
---------------------------- 
OTHER PRIVATE SECTOR EFFORTS 
---------------------------- 
 
28.  There are several private sector efforts worth 
mentioning: 
 
-The Honduran Council for Private Enterprise (COHEP) 
sends a representative to the meetings of the NAC. 
 
-The private sector led the NAC\'s investigation on the 
causes of corruption and its prevention. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC DIPLOMACY EFFORTS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
29.  Septel (Tegucigalpa 01876) reported Ambassador Frank 
Almaguer\'s June 21 speech given to the International 
Development and Ethics Association (IDEA) in which he 
outlined the U.S. anticorruption policies.  The speech 
dominated the news in Honduras for days, and clearly has 
had a significant impact.  This is the most recent of a 
number of public diplomacy efforts that serve the 
anticorruption effort. 
 
30.  There was an interactive dialogue on WHANET that 
dealt with anticorruption and money laundering, in which 
representatives from the MP participated. 
 
31.  Post arranged for an individual from the DPA to 
participate in the International Visitor Program on 
anticorruption in the government and private sector. 
 
32.  With the support of PAS, the Ambassador has become a 
champion of Honduran anticorruption efforts.  This is the 
result of a multitude of public diplomacy efforts, 
including: 
 
-Post regularly distributes USG policy statements on 
anticorruption to the Honduran press--for example, A/S 
Reich\'s speech on Latin American policy and 
anticorruption efforts. 
 
-The Ambassador frequently publicly addresses various 
anticorruption issues (e.g. money laundering, judicial 
reform, transparency in governance) by way of speeches at 
various events, press releases, radio and television 
interviews and other media.  As a result, anticorruption 
has become a popular topic for public debate and public 
awareness has been significantly heightened. 
 
-Post has worked hard to convey the message that 
anticorruption efforts are an important component of the 
war on terrorism--that money laundering, arms and 
narcotics trafficking and government corruption all 
create an environment in which terrorism can thrive. 
 
ALMAGUER 
"
"3470","8/8/2002 13:31","02TEGUCIGALPA2272","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE144853","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS, PHUM, PREL HO 
SUBJECT:  HUMAN RIGHTS VERIFICATION FOR JOINT OPERATION WITH A CD 
UNIT FROM THE 7TH SPECIAL FORCES GROUP 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 144853 
 
(U) Embassy Tegucigalpa verifies that the Department of State 
possesses no credible information of gross violations of human 
rights by the following units: The 16th Infantry Battalion from 
El Bijagual, Olancho; Army Military Training Center (CAME), El 
Bijagual, Olancho ; 115th Infantry Brigade, Juticalpa, 
Olancho;15th Infantry Battalion, Trujillo; 5th Infantry 
Battalion, Mocoron; 1st Special Forces Battalion, La Venta, Fco. 
Morazan; 2nd Airborne Battalion, Tamara, Fco. Morazan; 4th 
Infantry Battalion, Choluteca; 11th Infantry Battalion, Salamar, 
Valle; 1st Cav Regiment, Choluteca; 105 Infantry Brigade, San 
Pedro Sula, Cortes; 7th Infantry Battalion, Cucuyagua, Copan; 
12th Infantry Battalion, Santa Rosa de Copan, Copan; 3rd Infantry 
Battalion, Naco, Cortes. 
 
 
ALMAGUER 
"
"3484","8/9/2002 16:51","02TEGUCIGALPA2555","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FPR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/11/2012 
TAGS: MASS, MCAP, PARM, PGOV, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS TO INVESTIGATE NACO ARMS THEFT 
 
REF: USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 091651Z AUG 02 
 
Classified By: POLCHIEF FRANCISCO PALMIERI, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On August 28, the Honduran Armed Forces 
(HOAF) designated Army Auditor General Colonel Rodolfo Reyes 
Argueta to investigate the alleged robbery of 230 of 790 
AKMS-type assault rifles from the arms cache in Naco.  The 
weapons were stored under court injunction in a Honduran 
military facility, and were discovered missing on July 31 
during a spot check conducted by a prosecutor from the Task 
Force against Organized Crime.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
SETTING THE BATTLE SCENE 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) The small town of Naco hosts the 4th Logistical 
Base (CALE) and a large cache of weapons and artillery.  In 
1985, Longlac Enterprises, a Panamanian-registered arms 
importer, sent weapons to Honduras on deposit for use by the 
HOAF.  After years of poor storage and neglect, the cache 
became a serious hazard, and in 1993 an explosion killed two 
people.  In 2001 the GOH destroyed the unstable weapons, and 
moved the remaining weapons to a more secure storage facility 
- to eliminate the threat to the nearby population and to 
reduce the risk of pilferage. 
 
3.  (C) Meanwhile, Longlac sold the cache of arms to 
Miami-based Samco Global Arms.  For several years, there has 
been a complicated legal battle over the ownership of the 
weapons and who is responsible for removing them.  Currently, 
the Honduran courts control the storage facility and the 
inventories.  The legal battle became even more complicated 
when Samco sued the GOH in Miami and the GOH counterclaimed. 
(COMMENT: Post is concerned that the weapons might fall into 
the hands of arms traffickers or terrorists, and we have 
advised the GOH of the U.S. willingness to assist in the 
destruction or disposal of the remaining cache once ownership 
is established. END COMMENT.) 
 
---------------------- 
MISSING ASSAULT RIFLES 
---------------------- 
 
4.  (C) On July 31, 2002, the prosecutor from the Task Force 
against Organized Crime conducted a spot check, accompanied 
by a Court Clerk from the Fourth Circuit of the Honduran 
Criminal Court, a DAO military attache, and a team of arms 
experts from the Defense Intelligence Agency.  The prosecutor 
conducted the spot check using an inventory attested to by 
affidavit of the Chief Judge of the Fourth Criminal Court of 
San Pedro Sula and the Commander of the CALE dated July 31, 
2001.  Moreover, the affidavit certified that the cache was 
being stored under court order and that the keys to the 
storage facility were maintained in the custody of the Court. 
 
5.  (C) Among other arms and ammunition, the inventory 
included 790 AKMS assault rifles that are Chinese-made AKMS 
type 56-1-copies of the Soviet folding stock AKMS.  The 
recent spot check revealed that 230 of the AKMS are missing, 
presumably stolen.  (NOTE:  The Honduran press erroneously 
reports that there are \"more than 500 AK-47s\" missing.  See 
Reftel for more detailed information about the missing 
weapons.  END NOTE.) 
 
------------------- 
HOAF INVESTIGATION? 
------------------- 
 
6.  (U) On August 28, the high command of the HOAF designated 
Army Auditor General Colonel Rodolfo Reyes Argueta and 
\"Captain of Justice\" (comparable to the U.S. JAG) Fernando 
Ruiz Figueroa to investigate the alleged theft of the arms. 
Post has no information on either of the individuals that the 
HOAF appointed to investigate the theft. 
 
7.  (C) COMMENT:  Post concurs with DAO,s assessment in 
Reftel that the theft was an inside job involving military 
personnel.  While the military guards are the likely 
suspects, it is highly probable the HOAF officers were also 
involved.  Embassy staff will monitor what progress (if any) 
is made in this investigative effort of the HOAF, but is 
pessimistic that the investigation will move forward.  The 
GOH and HOAF do not enjoy a good track record with respect to 
rooting out and addressing corruption.  END COMMENT. 
PIERCE 
"
"3599","8/28/2002 16:08","02TEGUCIGALPA2439","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281608Z Aug 02
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002439 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AID GC, DOJ/OFL 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR L/DL; INFO WHA/EX 
 
PERSONAL INFORMATION 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KLIG, KTIA, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT: REPORT OF FOREIGN ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDING 
 
 
>>>This cable replaces Tegucigalpa 2341"
"3600","8/28/2002 20:40","02TEGUCIGALPA2444","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN, EB/TRA 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 08/28/12 
TAGS: EAIR, MARR, PREL, ECON, ECIN, HO 
SUBJECT:  SOTO CANO AIRBASE TO BECOME COMMERCIAL AIRPORT? 
 
Classified by PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d) 
 
1.  (U) Summary:  On August 15, President Maduro 
announced his intention to convert the Soto Cano military 
airstrip into an international airport for commercial 
use.  The Comayagua business community embraces the 
concept, which seeks to transform the area into a new 
commercial center with an eye toward bolstering a 
flailing economy.  Maduro reiterated that the airstrip 
will continue to be used for military purposes and 
suggested that U.S. authorities have already agreed to 
the conversion--although no one at the Embassy has 
discussed the matter with the Administration. At a 
Comayagua Chamber of Commerce forum, Minister of 
Government and Justice Jorge Ramon Hernandez Alcerro and 
President of Congress Pepe Lobo extolled the benefits of 
a conversion, giving this initiative high-level political 
support.  End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
THE U.S. PRESENCE 
----------------- 
 
2.  (U) Since 1982 the U.S. military has shared the 
airbase at Soto Cano (commonly known by Hondurans as 
Palmerola--the name of the town previously located on the 
site) with the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF).  Currently, 
Joint Task Force Bravo (JTF-Bravo) is the guest of the 
HOAF on the base; houses more than 600 U.S. troops; and 
employs more than 700 Hondurans.  Through salaries, 
contracts, tourism and donations, JTF-Bravo contributes 
approximately $17.5 million annually to the economy 
(primarily in the Comayagua valley). 
 
3.  (SBU) JTF-Bravo\'s initial mission was to deter 
Nicaraguan aggression--thereafter its duties included 
regional counternarcotics, humanitarian and civic 
assistance operations.  Recently, USCINCSO appointed JTF- 
Bravo as the central coordinating authority for U.S. 
military operating within the region--including Honduras, 
Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua and 
Panama.  JTF-Bravo conducts joint, combined and 
interagency operations, and supports contingency 
operations throughout the assigned area to enhance 
theater-wide operational security and reinforce regional 
military cooperation. 
 
4.  (SBU) JTF-Bravo is the first responder to crises in 
the region, and it conducts operations in support of 
counternarcotics and counterterrorism missions. 
Moreover, it conducts and supports recovery and 
evacuation operations in Central America (CENTAM). 
Additionally, the task force is charged with providing a 
C-5 capable airfield (the only one of its kind in 
Honduras), base support for joint combined exercises and 
unit training, theater deployable surgical team, all- 
source intelligence, operational footprint for immediate 
reaction forces, and maintains pre-positioned stocks for 
theater-wide military operations.  Secondarily, JTF-Bravo 
conducts and supports humanitarian civic assistance and 
military civic action operations, supports USAID and 
provides base support for joint combined exercise 
training, exercises, and unit training. 
 
------------------------- 
CONVERSION IN THE OFFING? 
------------------------- 
 
5.  (U) In mid-August, President Maduro announced that he 
is considering the conversion of the airstrip at Soto 
Cano, enabling the facility to be used by commercial 
airlines.  He was careful to make clear that the airstrip 
would continue to be used for military operations. (Note: 
Since the HOAF shares the base with the U.S. military, 
the airstrip is also used by the HOAF. End Note.)  Maduro 
indicated that he wants an airport for the city of 
Comayagua (the one-time capital of Honduras, adjacent to 
Soto Cano) in order to strengthen the economy of the 
Comayagua valley and create a new center for commercial 
activity in Honduras. 
 
6.  (U) Maduro emphasized that if commercially available, 
the airport could be extensively used for carrying cargo 
for exportation--including mangos and other 
produce(especially oriental vegetables, which require 
special handling), tilapia, and cleaning products 
produced in the area.  Moreover, he opined that 
commercialization of the facility would increase the 
potential for industrial development in the region-- 
including \"maquilas,\" which are currently found primarily 
in the San Pedro Sula area.  He also mentioned the 
possibility of constructing a four-lane highway from 
Comayagua to Puerto Cortes (on the north coast) and 
between Tegucigalpa and Comayagua.  (Comment: A new 
international airport in Comayagua and highway to the 
capital could prompt U.S. air carriers to provide cargo 
and passenger services in central Honduras.  Currently, 
such service is restricted at Toncontin Airport in 
Tegucigalpa due to limits on the size of planes that can 
safely land there.  However, post notes that construction 
of a four-lane highway between Comayagua and Tegucigalpa 
is highly unlikely in the near future given the high cost 
and technical difficulties of building such a road.  End 
Comment.) 
7.  (U) The Comayaguan business community strongly favors 
the conversion of the base airport to accommodate 
commercial flights.  The Comayagua Chamber of Commerce 
and local authorities have developed specific plans for 
such a conversion at Soto Cano. 
 
----------------------------- 
SUFFICIENT POLITICAL SUPPORT? 
----------------------------- 
 
8.  (U) On August 22, the Comayagua Chamber of Commerce 
hosted a forum in which the potential airport project was 
discussed by local authorities and business people.  Both 
Minister of Government and Justice Jorge Ramon Hernandez 
Alcerro and President of Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo 
Sosa attended the event and expressed support for the 
project.  Hernandez Alcerro described the project as the 
realization of a vision for the future first conceived by 
the Spanish conquistadors.  He suggested that the region 
is a natural commercial center due to both geography and 
local economic interests.  He pointed out that the 
project would complement the Plan Puebla-Panama regional 
economic integration and would further the goal of 
uniting the region with a \"backbone\" for commercial 
transportation.  (Comment:  The public support of high- 
level, powerful political figures such as Hernandez 
Alcerro and Lobo is indicative of the robust backing that 
exists for the creation of a new international airport, 
either in Comayagua or closer to Tegucigalpa.  End 
Comment.) 
 
9.  (U) Lobo said that he had no doubt that such a 
project would be a success.  Lobo stated that he is 
confident that the natural resources, the climate and the 
infrastructure of the Comayagua valley are conducive to 
the success of a commercial airport component at 
Palmerola.  Additionally, he pointed out that it would 
contribute to decentralization(a goal of Maduro), which 
would relieve Tegucigalpa\'s problems with water shortages 
and unmanageable population growth.  Lobo pledged that 
Congress would consider the project proposal and do 
whatever is necessary to achieve the project objectives. 
The Comayagua Chamber of Commerce is seeking a meeting 
with President Maduro in the near future in order to 
pursue the airport issue in depth. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
10.  (C) It is difficult to say what the ramifications of 
a commercial airport would be to JTF-Bravo.  The initial 
readout of Post staff is that such a conversion would 
probably have little effect on the U.S. military presence 
at Soto Cano.  In fact, an expansion of the runway 
facilities could benefit JTF-Bravo by making it possible 
for larger, fixed-wing aircraft to use the airbase.  All 
parties involved recognize that the U.S. military is 
present at the invitation of the Honduran government, and 
it is yet to be determined whether or not the U.S. 
Department of Defense would have any objections to the 
commercialization of the base airport. 
 
11. (C) Presumably, a commercial terminal would be built 
separate and apart from the military facilities. 
Moreover, any such project would need to include careful 
planning in order to not impede the military functions 
that must be carried out at Soto Cano--both U.S. and 
Honduran.  A variety of security and safety issues would 
be raised, including the appropriate level of air traffic 
control that would be needed.  Additionally, a combined 
military-civilian airport raises security concerns and 
costs--particularly in light of heightened worldwide 
airport security that has been implemented since 
September 11. 
 
12.  (C) Finally, there remain internal political issues 
to be sorted out--including longstanding competition 
between Tegucigalpa and Comayagua.  Powerful business 
interests in Tegucigalpa have not yet weighed in on the 
issue publicly, and there is a heavyweight political 
presence in the capital city and in San Pedro Sula that 
can be expected to vehemently oppose shifting commercial 
power to the Comayagua valley.  Tegucigalpa Mayor Miguel 
Pastor has already announced his opposition to the plan. 
Post anticipates that domestic political and commercial 
competition will affect the manner in which Maduro\'s 
airport plans proceed. 
 
ALMAGUER 
"
"3616","8/30/2002 20:16","02TEGUCIGALPA2472","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02Reftel:State157638","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002472 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, L, T, P, D, IO, S/WCI, S/P 
 
STATE FOR PM/B, CWG/PM, PM/AT 
 
OSD PLEASE PASS OGC/ALLEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 08/29/12 
TAGS: PREL, KTIA, PGOV, HO, KICC, UNGA 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS LIKELY TO CONCLUDE ART. 98 AGREEMENT, 
COLOMBIA ASKS RIO GROUP TO DISCUSS ISSUE AT UNGA 
 
Reftel: State 157638 
 
Classified by PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d) 
 
1. (U) This cable contains an action request. Please see 
paragraph 4. 
 
2. (C) During his August 28 meeting with Honduran Foreign 
Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso, WHA A/S Otto Reich 
reviewed the importance of an ICC Article 98 bilateral 
agreement to the U.S. and reviewed the draft model text 
for a bilateral agreement.  The FM told A/S Reich that 
Honduras would work closely with the U.S. to address U.S. 
concerns.  Reich also underscored the importance of the 
Article 98 agreement to President Ricardo Maduro in a 
separate meeting the same date.  Maduro understood the 
logic of the U.S. position and indicated his preliminary 
support.  In addition, A/S Reich covered the issue in his 
August 28 meeting with Minister of Defense Fred Breve and 
in a conversation with National Security Advisor Ramon 
Medina Luna.  MFA officials assured Emboffs that Honduras 
would be likely to conclude such an agreement with the 
U.S.  (Note:  Ambassador presented reftel demarche to the 
FM last week. End Note.) 
 
3. (C) Separately, the FM alerted A/S Reich that Colombia 
has proposed that the Rio Group meet to discuss and study 
Article 98 agreements.  The FM said that the Colombians 
might want a consensus Rio Group position on proposed 
U.S. bilateral agreements under Article 98 of the Rome 
Treaty.  Other MFA officials opined privately that the 
Colombians were most likely seeking regional political 
cover before proceeding with a bilateral agreement with 
the U.S.  The Hondurans said that there was an effort to 
organize a meeting of Rio Group FMs on this issue at the 
UNGA. 
 
4. (U) ACTION REQUEST FOR PM/AT: The MFA queried us as to 
why we did not think that the existing 1954 U.S.-Honduran 
bilateral agreement already provided sufficient 
protections from ICC extradition requests for U.S. troops 
based in or visiting Honduras.  Post will explore this 
issue with Joint Task Force-Bravo lawyers, but requests 
State\'s PM/AT provide input on the appropriate U.S. 
response. 
 
5. (C) COMMENT: MFA officials went to great lengths to 
assure Emboffs that GOH would conclude an Article 98 
agreement with U.S.  They understand fully the importance 
of this issue to the U.S.  We will push the GOH to be 
among the first Latin American countries to sign an 
agreement but upcoming UNGA travel schedules of key MFA 
officials may impede a quick GOH review of the proposed 
text and delay final GOH approval.  End Comment. 
 
ALMAGUER 
"
"3649","9/5/2002 15:07","02TEGUCIGALPA2494","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEGUCIGALPA 002494 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INR/B, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, EB/OMA 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, USTR, EXIM, OPIC, USED IDB, USED 
WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EAID, EINV, ETRD, PGOV, SENV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras Asks for Help on Paris Club and HIPC 
 
 
1. (U) Summary and Action Request.  The Honduran government 
has requested support of the USG (and other donors) to 
extend to June 2003 in its Paris Club debt service deferral 
and changes in the methodology used for HIPC and Paris Club 
debt relief and funding of the GOH\'s Poverty Reduction 
Strategy.  Washington agencies are requested to provide 
guidance for a response.  End Summary and Action Request. 
 
2. (U) In an August 5 letter signed by the Minister of the 
Presidency, the Minister of Finance and the President of the 
Central Bank, the Honduran government updated the 
international donor community Ambassadors on the actions 
taken by the Maduro administration to date to improve 
government finances and meet conditionality of its Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility program with the IMF.  In the 
letter, the Ministers indicated that after analyzing the 
implications of the deterioration in government finances in 
2001 and the miscalculations in the Flores government\'s 2002 
budget, the GOH took a number of steps designed to improve 
tax collection, reduce public spending and make the 
government more efficient.  In the letter, the GOH 
emphasizes that it will continue to work towards fiscal 
responsibility and seeks to negotiate a new three-year 
agreement with the IMF in October. 
 
3. (SBU) The letter included an attachment outlining some of 
the difficulties the GOH has encountered in meeting the 
obligations in its Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRS) 
and the HIPC debt relief requirements.  The attachment ends 
with an appeal to the donor countries to support the GOH\'s 
requests for Paris Club debt service deferral through June 
2003, for lowering the amount of debt relief assigned to pay 
for poverty reduction projects, and for its efforts to reach 
an agreement with the IMF on a new three-year PRGF program 
by the end of 2002.  An informal translation of the letter 
is provided in para 5.  An informal translation of the 
lengthy attachment on the Poverty Reduction Strategy is 
provided in para 5. 
 
4. (U) Begin informal translation of August 5 letter. 
 
Dear Ambassador Almaguer, 
 
The purpose of the following letter is to make you aware of 
the actions that the Government of Honduras, under the 
Maduro administration, has taken during 2002 to stabilize 
Honduras\' medium-term macroeconomic outlook in light of 
serious public finance problems. 
 
As the IMF confirmed during its visit in May 2002, public 
finances significantly deteriorated in 2001 leading to 
Honduras\' non-fulfillment in December 2001 of the 
macroeconomic targets that had been agreed by the IMF and 
the previous Honduran government.  The central government 
deficit was six percent of GDP in 2001, while the 
consolidated public sector debt was three percent.  These 
deviations resulted in an unexpected situation for the new 
government, especially since the close relationship between 
the IMF and the previous government until the end of 2001 
had raised expectations that Honduras\' fiscal situation was 
within the norms established under the IMF agreement.  This 
situation severely limited our capacity to act over the last 
year. 
 
To complicate matters, the previous government\'s budget for 
2002, which was approved by the National Congress in 
December 2001, did not include important spending 
obligations and overestimated projected income for 2002 by 
about 1.5 percent of GDP.  Our belief that there were 
miscalculations was confirmed by the marked difference 
between actual and projected tax collections. 
 
Conscious that this situation was totally unsustainable and 
with the intention of orienting the country towards a medium 
and long-term vision of fiscal stability, the Honduran 
government implemented and is in the process of implementing 
a number of corrective measures, including: 
 
-- Issuing Executive Decree PCM-005-2002 which contains a 
series of austerity measures to reduce public spending and 
save the government an approximately usd 12.3 million in 
spending. 
 
-- Passage in Congress of the Financial Stabilization Law 
which expands the tax base, reduces tax exemptions, 
contemplates sanctions for tax evasion (including the 
temporary closure of business), reduces import taxes to 
discourage contraband, harmonizes tariffs with the rest of 
the region and simplifies payment procedures for tax payers. 
Unfortunately, prolonged development of the law and 
discussion in the National Congress caused its 
implementation to be delayed until July, thus delaying 
improvement in tax receipts before then. 
 
-- After a long and difficult negotiation, the Honduran 
government agreed to phase-in increases, over a four-year 
period, in public school teacher salaries that were due in 
2002.  Beginning in 2006, new salary increases will be 
granted based on increases in the minimum wage.  This 
agreement will help reduce steep annual salary increases for 
public school teachers and will allow the discussion of 
teacher\'s salaries to be included in the government\'s 
unified salary policy in 2006. 
 
-- In July 2002, Honduran authorities began closing 
businesses (note: temporarily) that were not paying sales 
tax.  This is the first time that businesses have been 
closed for sales tax evasion and we hope this measure will 
help instill a culture of honoring tax commitments in 
Honduras. 
 
-- In the second half of 2002, the Honduran government will 
begin implementing new administrative procedures to improve 
tax collection.  We will also conduct a study to re-engineer 
the public sector.  The results of the study will allow for 
greater efficiency and quality of service in the public 
sector and at the same time reduce its size. 
 
-- We will soon submit to the National Congress a modern and 
equitable Income Tax Law that will complement the expansion 
of the tax base and the administrative simplification 
process.  We will also review the Tax Code. 
 
-- The Ministry of Finance presented to the National 
Congress for consideration a report on budget performance 
for 2001 and the first six months of 2002.  The revised 
budget was also published in the two Honduran daily 
newspapers with the highest circulation. 
 
-- A new budget formulation policy was designed for 2003, 
consistent with the IMF\'s budget transparency code, which 
will eliminate global expenditures (note: large budget line 
items which previously were left to the discretion of the 
Honduran president to assign to different ministries). 
 
-- By December 2002, a comprehensive, coherent and 
consistent civil service reform law will be submitted to the 
National Congress. 
 
To complement the government\'s fiscal measures, the 
government has made progress in other important areas to 
create an environment that encourages economic growth, 
including: 
 
-- The Honduran government has improved its institutional 
framework by proposing to create the Supreme Accounts 
Tribunal, instituting a new selection process for Supreme 
Court Justices, implementing the new Criminal Procedures 
Code, making government procurement more efficient and 
transparent, transferring management of government 
procurement to organizations like the United Nations 
Development Program and the World Food Program, who are 
improving prices and reducing the potential for corruption, 
and working with the Anti-Corruption Commission. 
 
-- With the help of the World Bank and the IDB, the 
government is committed to increasing private sector 
participation in public services and infrastructure projects 
and has begun the public bid process for a new cellular 
system contract, selected port services, national mail 
service and electricity distribution. 
 
-- The Poverty Reduction Fund Law was approved and 
legislative reforms to strengthen the financial system are 
close to being approved in the National Congress. 
 
-- The Central Bank of Honduras has instituted open market 
operations to orient the market towards an interest rate 
more consistent with the decreasing inflation rates 
experienced in recent years and obtain monetary base growth 
rate in line with the expectations of GDP growth for 2002. 
 
-- The recently approved Monetary Program for 2002 includes 
measures to eliminate during July and September the 
obligatory investments in government securities by financial 
institutions, equivalent to three percentage points of local 
currency obligations, and update the minimum capital 
requirements for financial institutions.  In conformity with 
the Monetary Transparency Code, an external audit of Central 
Bank operations was completed for the first time. 
 
-- Reforms to the Insurance Deposit Law have been introduced 
to the National Congress and immediate actions were taken to 
confront two longstanding bank insolvency problems.  Assets 
and deposits were also transferred from one problematic bank 
to a stable institution.  Technical assistance has been 
solicited from the World Bank to help the Deposit Insurance 
Institution value the two intervened banks and formulate a 
strategy for their sale over the next year.  In the short- 
term, the IMF and the World Bank will assist in an analysis 
of the financial system that will serve as the basis for 
further consolidation of the financial sector. 
 
-- Implementing regulations for the Securities Market Law 
have been issued to improve the functioning of Honduras\' 
securities markets.  Technical assistance has been 
contracted with IDB funds to issue implementing regulations 
for the Insurance Law.  The Private Pension Fund Law will be 
discussed soon in the National Congress. 
 
-- A program will begin in September with IDB funds to 
improve the technical capacity of bank auditors in the 
National Banking and Insurance Commission.  Basic and 
advanced CAMEL training for Banking Commission officials, 
with assistance from the IMF\'s resident advisor in the 
Banking Commission, is also underway. 
 
-- The National Competitiveness Council, under the 
leadership of the Vice President, was created to encourage 
private investment in sectors that have the greatest 
potential to generate economic growth. 
 
-- By the end of 2002, a project will be underway to 
restructure the different institutions in the public sector 
and reduce duplicative functions by government agencies, 
eliminate excess jobs and in general terms improve the 
provision of services by the public sector to guarantee 
efficiency and efficacy in the assignment of financial 
resources, public spending and better service to the public. 
Before beginning this project, measures will be taken by the 
end of the year to reduce the size of the public sector. 
 
The measures described above clearly demonstrate that the 
Honduran government is committed to fulfilling its medium 
and long-term macroeconomic goals by maintaining balanced 
public finances, creating an environment to achieve high and 
sustainable economic growth necessary to reduce poverty, 
improving the efficiency and quality of public spending, 
widening the coverage and reach of programs to reduce 
poverty and social spending, eliminating the domestic 
financing needs of the public sector and maintaining a 
monetary and exchange rate policy in accord with the 
requirements of economic growth and competitiveness for the 
productive sectors. 
 
The Honduran government presented to the IMF a proposal to 
establish a joint work plan for the rest of 2002: 
 
-- The Honduran government reiterates its commitment to 
continue coordinating and working with the IMF in 
preparation for negotiations by October 2002 of a new three- 
year program beginning in 2003. 
 
-- The Honduran government confirms its decision to define 
achievable goals within a reasonable timeframe to reduce the 
public wage bill as a percentage of the GDP. 
 
-- The Honduran government is committed to take additional 
measures to strengthen tax collection, either through 
technical assistance by hiring auditing firms and/or 
reducing public spending, to achieve a non-inflationary and 
sustainable deficit with foreign resources available at 
concessional rates. 
 
We hope that the IMF, international donors and other 
multilateral institutions accompany the Honduran government 
down this difficult road.  We are convinced that maintaining 
a balanced budget is fundamental to achieving equitable 
economic growth, reducing inflation and generating resources 
to combat poverty. 
 
Recognizing that it is important that international 
bilateral donors and multilateral institutions are informed 
about Honduras\' current fiscal situation and the actions the 
Honduran government has taken and will take to resolve the 
fiscal situation, attached are copies of the reformulated 
2002 budget, a document reiterating the Honduran 
government\'s medium-term fiscal goals and a detailed 
analysis of the current fiscal situation. 
 
End informal translation of letter. 
 
5. (SBU) Begin Informal Translation of Attachment. 
 
Introduction 
 
A crucially important element for any country is to have a 
clear vision of its medium and long term goals, along with a 
strategy for the design and implementation of the means and 
actions that will allow the country to gradually close the 
gap between the current situation and the long-term vision. 
 
In this sense, in 2001, the Government of the Republic of 
Honduras developed the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 
which represents in and of itself both a commitment and a 
shared effort between the Government and Honduran society. 
At the same time, this strategy will serve as a general 
framework so that the country promotes investment in 
projects that are oriented towards the goal of reducing 
poverty. 
 
In this regard, a concern of the current administration is 
maintaining a macro-economic environment that promotes a 
sustainable economic growth.  Macroeconomic stability is one 
of the fundamental pillars of the strategy, without it, the 
country will not be able to generate the necessary funds to 
implement the priority investments defined within the 
framework of the PRS. 
 
We should note that the main premises that make up the PRS 
are sustained economic growth, with equity, macroeconomic 
stability, and sustainable government finances. 
 
Within this conceptual framework, we present the medium and 
long-term vision of the non-financial public sector (NFPS), 
an analysis of the current situation in order to determine 
the existing gap between the two situations, and the fiscal 
policy measures that the current Government will implement 
to close that gap and provide the optimal fiscal framework 
to sustain the PRS. 
 
Medium and long-term vision (plan) for the non-financial 
public sector 
 
To achieve the necessary conditions to reduce poverty, the 
plan that the non-financial public sector needs to have 
centers on four primary aspects: 
 
a) Maintain balanced public finances in order to avoid 
inflationary pressures and reduce market distortions, thus 
guaranteeing the growth of a more solid private sector. 
 
b) Generate the necessary financial resources to carry out 
the programs designed to reduce poverty and social costs, as 
delineated within the Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
 
c) Improve the efficiency and quality of public spending, 
increasing the extent and reach of the programs designed for 
social sectors. 
 
d) Reduce the amount of public financing using domestic 
resources as much as possible to guarantee that the private 
sector will have funds available to finance its productive 
activities and generate economic growth and employment. 
 
This plan is based on the principle that the primary 
generator of economic growth should be the private sector 
and the role of the public sector should be focused on 
social activities with the goal of poverty reduction, 
establishing a regulatory framework for the development of 
the private sector and maintaining the macro economic 
stability of the country. 
 
Nevertheless, we need to keep in mind the fact that the non- 
financial public sector is made up of diverse players which 
we can group as: central government, social security 
institutes, government owned companies and municipalities; 
each one of these should define their own objectives so that 
they may accomplish the goals set out in the global plan. 
 
Central Government 
 
The objectives of the central government should be: 
 
a.  Finance the deficit solely with foreign assistance 
available at concessional terms to assure the availability 
of domestic resources to meet the needs of the private 
sector. 
 
b. Increase savings in the current account to raise the 
funds required for the execution of infrastructure and 
social benefits programs. 
 
c.  Control the growth of salaries in administrative 
positions and functions that have no positive impact on the 
delivery of services to social sectors.  This group has had 
the most pressing impact on government spending in recent 
years.  In this way coverage of services can be amplified 
without provoking inequality in public financing. 
 
Social Institutes 
 
The objectives that social institutes should set according 
to the established plan are: 
 
a.  Continue generating a surplus of 1.5 to 2% of GDP 
 
Public Companies 
 
a.  Public companies should generate surpluses of 0.5 to 1% 
of GDP 
 
b.  Establish competitive tariffs for services to citizens, 
using existing tariffs in other countries in the region as 
an example. 
 
c.  Improve and expand service coverage. 
 
d.  Control spending growth, especially related to salaries 
and payrolls. 
 
Municipalities 
 
Taking into consideration that the process of 
decentralization will put municipalities into a more 
preponderant role in the country\'s destiny.  Based on the 
experiences of other countries in similar situations, 
municipalities should work from a balanced budget in such a 
way as the total expenditures are entirely financed by the 
municipalities own income plus transfers received from the 
central government. 
 
Expected Results 
 
The results expected upon completion of the outlined 
objectives: 
 
a. Reach a consolidated net deficit for the non-financial 
public sector of 0.0% GDP. 
 
b. The net deficit of the central government should be no 
more than 2% of GDP 
 
c.  Finance the central government deficit entirely with 
available concessional foreign funding 
 
d.  The rest of the non-financial public sector should 
generate a surplus equal to 2% of GDP. 
 
e.  Reach annual inflation levels of 2 to 3% 
 
f.  Generate real economic growth no less than 5% per year 
g.  Maintain stability in the monetary exchange market, 
guaranteeing the Lempira maintains its competitiveness. 
 
h.  Generate a substantial reduction in extreme poverty, 
keeping with the goals and indicators as defined in the 
Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
 
Actual Situation and estimates for 2003-2007 
 
In order to determine the need to take measures aimed at 
achieving the objectives set out in the plan of the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy, an analysis of the current situation is 
presented which shows the different parts 
 
Central Government 
 
At the central government level, we have seen a decrease in 
income through 2001, falling from 19.4% of GDP in 1999 to 
18.2% of GDP in 2001.  For this reason, the government 
presented to Congress the Financial Stabilization and Social 
Protection law.  It is hoped these measures will increase 
income to the Central Government to 20.2% in 2002.  After 
2002, income will remain relatively stable with revenues 
reaching 20.1% of GDP in 2007. 
 
On the expenditure side, there has been marked growth in the 
last few years, reaching 25.6% of GDP in 2001 and an 
estimated 27.2% of GDP for 2002. 
 
The main source of spending growth is the public sector wage 
bill which has grown consistently in the last four years 
reaching 10.5% of GDP in 2002.  Due to this fact and since 
the projections have been elaborated under the assumption of 
salary adjustments based solely on inflation, for 2007 we 
won\'t have reached sustainable salary and payroll levels 
related to GDP (less than 9%.) 
 
As a result of these tendencies in income and spending, it 
is estimated that the central Government could meet its 
objectives congruently with the public sector plan presented 
earlier and with the fundamental principles of the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy up to 2005, at which time the central 
Government would generate a savings in their current account 
equal to 1.3% of GDP and a net deficit of 1.6%. 
 
Additionally, it should be taken into consideration that for 
the years 2003-2005 the projections indicate that the 
central government will have to refinance the deficit by 
emitting bonds (though this is not congruent with the 
objective of reducing the crowding out of the private sector 
and maintaining inflation at low levels) or by requesting 
new external loans. 
 
According to these projections, the country will be counting 
on money inflows on the order of $230 million yearly, a 
figure the World Bank has established as adequate to 
maintain a reasonable level of indebtedness for the country. 
Therefore, financing this gap by additional external loans 
could generate problems in the ability to sustain the 
foreign debt. 
 
Remainder of the non-financial public sector 
 
In the rest of the non-financial public sector we see a 
definite tendency towards a decline in income, after 
reaching 14.5% of GDP in 1999 to an estimated 12.3% of GDP 
in 2007.  This behavior stems from the continued 
deterioration of incomes from the most important public 
enterprises without any adjustment to the prices of their 
services. 
 
This factor has been partially compensated by a declining 
trend in expenditures by public enterprises, principally due 
to the lack of investment; but after 2002, expenditures are 
expected to increase considerably due to planned investments 
in HONDUTEL and SANAA. In spite of being necessary for 
modernizing and improving customer service this investment 
had been postponed in previous years. 
 
In terms of surplus, we see that the rest of the non- 
financial public sector could present a surplus of around 2% 
of GDP, established as a goal of the PRS, until 2006.  This 
surplus has shown a downward trend since 2000.  This trend 
will continue until 2003, when the trend will reach the 
point of inflection and turn towards moderate stability. 
 
Overall, the decreases in revenue by the rest of the NFPS 
will not be compensated by the revenues to the Central 
Government, resulting in declining revenues for the 
consolidated NFPS.  Simultaneously, the expenses for the 
rest of the NFPS, as for the Central Government, show a 
downward trend; but not sufficient to counteract the drop in 
revenues.  The NFPS is expected to be in deficit for 2001- 
2005.  By 2005, the NFPS should reach its goal of a balanced 
financial account.  (Chart shows deficit beginning late 
2000, dipping and bottoming out in 2001 to 2003 then 
reducing the deficit to zero in 2005 and then a surplus 
after that. 
 
Conclusions 
 
From our analysis, it is evident that the measures taken 
during the course of the current year are insufficient to 
generate the conditions of fiscal sustainability required to 
achieve the objectives of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
 
Some of the most relevant factors that the Honduran 
Government face are the salary pressures generated by the 
Medical Statute and Teachers Statute (Congressional statutes 
requiring exorbitant salary levels for doctors and 
teachers).  These factors have contributed significantly to 
the constant increase in spending in the last few years.  It 
is also necessary to strengthen the tributary administration 
by reducing fiscal evasion and creating a plan for a 
reversal of the downward trend in income for the rest of the 
NFPS. 
 
Taking the necessary measures to confront the difficult 
fiscal situation that faces the country is an undeniable 
fact, especially if we consider the deviation between the 
projections presented in this document and the macro- 
economic framework of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
 
 
             Comparative Table of the Deviations 
                   with respect to the PRS 
              Deficit of the NFPS as a % of GDP 
 
     Year      Projections    PRS       Deviation 
 
     1999           0.6        1.5       -0.9 
     2000           0.1         1        -0.9 
     2001          (2.6)      (0.8)      (1.8) 
     2002          (2.5)      (0.6)      (1.9) 
     2003          (2.5)      (1.9)      (0.6) 
     2004          (1.7)      (0.7)      (1.0) 
     2005          (0.2)      (0.3)       0.1 
 
Note: Positive numbers represent a surplus and negative 
number represent a deficit. 
 
Complementary measures in the implementation process 
 
In order to correct the deviations and close the existing 
gap between the current fiscal situation and the medium-term 
plan presented, the current Honduran Government has 
identified additional methods for the short term in the 
following areas: 
 
    Measures for strengthening tax revenue 
    Reengineering Government Program 
    Additional revenue enhancement measures 
 
Means of strengthening tax revenue 
 
In this area, the Honduran Government will emphasize the 
enlargement of the tax base by exchanging information with 
municipalities, large contributors and Ministries and 
Decentralized Institutions.  Also, the government will 
ll 
conduct prompt audits to detect businesses that are not 
registered (additionally eliminating the penalties for not 
registering) and businesses that fail to pay taxes, and to 
take steps that will instill a new tax-paying culture in the 
country.  The recent initiative of closing businesses that 
evade paying sales taxes is a clear example of this. 
Additionally, we will be receiving technical assistance and 
initiating a program of external audits to complement these 
measures to combat tax evasion. 
 
As a complement to the actions leading to the expansion of 
the contributor base, we will be submitting an equitable and 
modern Income Tax Law to the National Congress for approval, 
emphasizing tax simplification as well as the transformation 
from a Sales Tax to a Value Added Tax effective 2004, 
consistent with the best tax practices worldwide. 
 
Additionally, the DEI (note: Honduran tax authority) will be 
restructured in order to strengthen the tax administration 
and make it more efficient.  The DEI will be restructured 
according to type of taxpayer, consolidating administrative 
functions and clearly defining collection operations for 
small businesses.  To complement this, new automated systems 
for information exchange and the administration of the 
taxpayer accounts are being established. 
 
Reengineering Program 
 
The objectives of the government-reengineering program are: 
 
    Evaluate the composition of the quality and technical 
  capacity of government personnel to determine a uniform 
  evaluation and position classification system with 
  respective requirements for qualification. 
 
    Identify the processes and procedures employed in the 
  performance of duties and provision of services and 
  improvements needed to increase quality and efficiency. 
 
    Define and implement plans to reduce and rationalize 
  each agency\'s funding. 
 
    Complete an institutional restructuring that will allow 
  for a reduction in the number of agencies that comprise up 
 up 
  the Public Sector and modernize their functions. 
 
We have elaborated the terms of reference and budget for the 
re-engineering project.  With the support of the World Bank, 
we will solicit an international bid in the near future, 
with progress expected by the end of the year. As a 
preliminary step, we have identified the necessity to reduce 
by 21% (equivalent to 5,000 jobs) the number of governmental 
administrative positions. 
 
Additional revenue measures 
 
In addition, the Government will be designing a set of 
measures designed to improve tax collection that will be put 
into effect in January 2003. 
 
Required support 
 
With everything shown here, it can bee seen that Honduras 
has advanced considerably in its objective to achieve fiscal 
sustainability and the medium-term plan for the public 
sector, through the design and implementation of measures 
for improvement of tax collection, modernizing spending and 
improving the efficiency and effectiveness of public 
spending. 
 
It is worth noting that the current Government is aware of 
the need for a civil service framework law, which is why it 
maintained a firm position during the negotiations with the 
teachers.  The government expects similar pressures from 
other unionized groups in the Public Sector will arise 
(Social Security and HONDUTEL).  Facing this, the Honduran 
Government considers reducing the expectations the other 
labor groups have in regards to salary increases to be a 
fundamental step.  Similarly, we have initiated the process 
of drafting a Civil Service Framework Law, for presentation 
to the National Congress.  This law will emphasize 
compensation systems based on inflation and efficiency. 
 
To reach the medium and long-term plan for public finances 
and in order to achieve the objectives established in the 
Poverty Reduction Strategy, the Honduran Government requests 
the support of its allies and multilateral organizations in 
the following ways: 
 
  1.   Receive an extension on Paris Club debt deferral until 
     June 2003, at which time we hope to reach the HIPC 
     completion point. 
 
  2.   Allow the traditional relief received from the Paris 
     Club to be used for budgetary relief, as has been done since 
     1991 when the framework was negotiated in the Paris Club for 
     the first time, and that the debt relief received under the 
     HIPC initiative be used to finance projects in the Poverty 
     Reduction Strategy. 
 
  3.   Include the costs that the government incurs in 
     increasing the coverage of services in the areas of health, 
     education and security as part of the expenses to be 
     financed with HIPC relief funds for a three-year period, 
     after which they will become a part of the normal expenses 
     anticipated by the Government and financed with domestic 
     funds. 
 
  4.   Support the efforts of the Honduran Government to 
     improve its public finances and achieve a three-year 
     agreement with the International Monetary Fund by the end of 
     this year. 
 
End informal translation of attachment. 
 
ALMAGUER 
"
"3657","9/7/2002 0:52","02TEGUCIGALPA2516","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE169228","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002516 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, EAIR, KSEP, OTRA, PREL, UNGA 
SUBJECT: VIP HONDURAN TRAVEL TO UNGA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 169228 
 
1. Per reftel request, Poloff contacted Honduran Foreign 
Ministry on September 6 to verify information for Honduran 
government officials traveling to the UN General Assembly. 
The MFA clarified that the Honduran delegation coming from 
Honduras has been reduced to two officials.  These are 
Foreign Minister Guillermo ((Perez-Cadalso)) Arias and 
Director General of Foreign Policy Mario Fortin. 
 
2. Information on round trip travel for FonMin is keyed to 
reftel.  DG Fortin will travel with FonMin. 
 
A. Scheduled commercial service 
 
B.,C., and D. 
Depart 9 September, 2002, Tegucigalpa, Honduras, American 
Airlines (AA) 954 
Arrive Miami Airport 17:36 Hours 
Depart 9 September, 2002, Miami, AA 970 
Arrive LaGuardia 22:19 Hours 
 
Upon return from the UNGA, the FonMin\'s itinerary is 
Depart 20 September, 2002, LaGuardia, AA 1129, 17:35 Hours 
Arrive Miami Airport 20:39 Hours 
Depart 24 September, 2002, Miami, AA 953, 11:15 Hours 
 
E. The GOH officials will not carry firearms and will not 
have official escorts. 
 
3. FonMin ((Perez-Cadalso)) Arias lost his leg in an accident 
and uses a prosthesis on his left leg.  This prosthesis and a 
number of metal pins in both legs have caused him delays in 
U.S. airports due to security reasons in the past.  Post 
appreciates Department\'s assistance to minimize disruption in 
FonMin\'s travel. 
PIERCE 
"
"3658","9/7/2002 1:05","02TEGUCIGALPA2517","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE170283|02TEGUCIGALPA2516","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002517 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, EAIR, KSEP, OTRA, PREL, UNGA 
SUBJECT: ADDITIONAL VIP HONDURAN TRAVEL INFORMATION 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 170283 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2516 
 
Per ref A requesting information to facilitate travel by VIPs 
to UNGA, Post is providing passport information for the head 
of the Honduran delegation, Foreign Minister Guillermo 
Augusto ((Perez-Cadalso)) Arias.  Honduran FonMin 
Perez-Cadalso\'s passport number is 001842.  He uses a 
diplomatic passport.  His DOB is 30 May 1950. Ref B provides 
itinerary. 
PIERCE 
"
"3679","9/10/2002 15:16","02TEGUCIGALPA2523","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE125639|02STATE126082|02STATE133355|02STATE167230|02STATE169228|02TEGUCIGALPA2116|02TEGUCIGALPA2140|02TEGUCIGALPA2516|02TEGUCIGALPA2517","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002523 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNP, IO/PPC, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
USUN FOR BLACKSHAW 
NSC FOR BANBURY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, AORC, PHUM, ECON, OTRA, HO, UNGA, UN 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS GENERALLY SUPPORTIVE OF U.S. GOALS FOR 
57TH UNGA; WILL SUPPORT WEDGWOOD HR COMMITTEE CANDIDACY 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2517 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2516 
     C. STATE 169228 
     D. STATE 167230 AND PREVIOUS 
     E. FLECK/LANG E-MAIL AUGUST 6 
     F. STATE 133355 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 2140 
     H. TEGUCIGALPA 2116 
     I. STATE 126082 
     J. STATE 125639 
 
1.  EmbOffs have demarched MFA officials several times in 
August/September on U.S. goals for the 57th UNGA and the GOH 
will be generally supportive.  Post has the following 
comments about the GOH positions on key issues raised in ref 
F, in addition to those included in ref E e-mail: 
-- On counterterrorism cooperation, President Ricardo Maduro 
has been very supportive of the USG, and the GOH has worked 
closely with the Embassy on the issue of terrorist assets. 
Unfortunately the GOH has not provided a counterterrorism 
coordinator (ref I), nor has it taken any concrete steps 
since September 11 to become a party to the seven outstanding 
international conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions 
(1971 and 2002) against terrorism, except for signing the 
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the 
new OAS convention (ref J).  The GOH has still not sent the 
UN its counterterrorism report in response to UNSCR 1373. 
-- On Middle East Peace, the GOH, which has diplomatic 
relations with both Israel and Egypt, is likely to seek a 
middle road on the issue. 
-- The GOH is very interested in the Millennium Challenge 
Account, a topic of discussion during WHA A/S Reich\'s August 
28-29 trip to Honduras. 
-- On candidacies, the MFA informed the Embassy September 9 
that the GOH would support the candidacy of Ruth Wedgwood to 
the UN Human Rights Committee (ref D).  The GOH had 
previously informed the Embassy that it would support the 
candidacy of Susan McLurg to the ACABQ (see ref H).  The GOH 
also has a candidate for the UN Human Rights Committee. 
 
2.  Post notes that contrary to ref G, Honduran President 
Ricardo Maduro will not attend UNGA.  The GOH will be 
represented by Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso 
Arias, as detailed in refs A and B. 
PIERCE 
"
"3681","9/10/2002 16:51","02TEGUCIGALPA2530","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002530 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR: ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EFIN, EIND, PREL, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: A/S REICH DISCUSSES TRADE AND INVESTMENT WITH THE 
HONDURAN GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE SECTOR LEADERS; STRONG 
SUPPORT FOR USCAFTA 
 
 
1.  Summary.  WHA A/S Otto Reich, accompanied by WHA/CEN 
Director Paul Trivelli, Ambassador, DCM, USAID Director and 
EconCouns, discussed trade and investment issues over lunch 
with Honduran government officials and private sector 
leaders on August 28.  Both A/S Reich and the Honduran 
participants, led by Vice President Vicente Williams, 
confirmed their commitment in moving quickly on negotiations 
for a U.S.-Central America free trade agreement, once 
consultations with the U.S. Congress are completed.  The 
Hondurans expressed great interest in A/S Reich\'s 
discussions in Nicaragua of Nicaragua\'s 35 percent tariff on 
Honduran imports.  The Hondurans emphasized that there is 
increasing pressure to impose a retaliatory tariff and 
requested the USG to use its good offices to help resolve 
the issue.  VP Williams also discussed the Maduro 
administration\'s efforts to combat corruption and improve 
Honduras\' investment climate.  End summary. 
 
2.  WHA A/S Otto Reich, accompanied by WHA/CEN Director Paul 
Trivelli, Ambassador, DCM, USAID Director, EconCouns and 
EconOff (notetaker), attended a lunch with select GOH 
officials and private sector leaders to discuss trade and 
investment issues, especially a U.S.-Central America free 
trade agreement (USCAFTA).  A/S Reich confirmed the USG\'s 
intent to pursue free trade negotiations with Central 
America and emphasized the importance of resolving border 
conflicts to improving regional economic integration and 
combating corruption in creating an attractive investment 
climate.  WHA/CEN Trivelli noted that in order to build U.S. 
congressional support for a USCAFTA, the GOH also needs to 
make progress in addressing outstanding investment disputes 
involving U.S. citizens. 
 
3.  Honduran participants included Vice President Vicente 
Williams, who leads presidential commissions on the Plan 
Puebla-Panama initiative and regional integration, Minister 
of Industry and Trade Juliette Handal, Minister without 
Portfolio for Investment Camilo Atala, Maquila Association 
President Jesus Canahuati, FIDE (Foundation for Export 
Promotion) President Norman Garcia, Honduran-American 
Chamber of Commerce (Amcham) representative Jackie Foglia 
and Ronald Barahona from COHEP, the private sector umbrella 
group. 
 
4.  Much of the discussion revolved around Nicaragua\'s 35 
percent retaliatory tariff on Honduran imports over a 
Caribbean maritime border dispute.  The Hondurans emphasized 
that the tariff poses a major obstacle to CentAm free trade 
negotiations with the U.S. and regional integration efforts. 
The Hondurans argued that U.S. involvement in the issue 
would be key to its resolution and requested the USG to use 
its good offices to that end.  (Note: There is increasing 
pressure in Honduras\' private sector and Congress to impose 
retaliatory measures.  End note.) 
 
5.  In preparing for free trade talks with the U.S., 
Minister Handal noted that there has been an unprecedented 
level of cooperation and good will among CentAm trade 
ministers since President Bush announced USG interest in a 
free trade agreement with Central America on January 16. 
CentAm trade officials have worked closely with each other 
during preparatory meetings with U.S. trade officials and 
have agreed to a common framework for the negotiations. 
Minister Handal shared concerns about U.S. subsidies 
expressed by the private sector (especially the agro- 
industrial sector).  She expects that the Honduran 
agriculture interests will push for exclusion of these 
products from the negotiations, and flagged that U.S. 
agriculture subsidies will have to be addressed in the 
discussions. 
 
6.  On private sector participation, Minister Handal noted 
the ministry\'s need for private sector market analysis in 
preparing for the negotiations.  Speaking for Honduras\' 
textile industry, Jesus Canahuati stated that Honduras\' 
maquila sector is well organized for upcoming trade talks 
and that there is already routine communication with the 
U.S. textile industry and regional textile associations.  He 
mentioned that a USCAFTA is essential for Honduras\' textile 
industry to be able to compete after quotas are eliminated 
in 2005.  Canahuati is also working with COHEP on organizing 
the negotiating positions of other Honduran industries 
(especially agriculture) and fostering communication within 
the region.  Ultimately, they would like to create common 
region-wide negotiating positions for each sector. 
 
7.  The Amcham representative highlighted the lack of 
information in the private sector and civil society in 
general regarding USCAFTA and remarked that Amcham has a 
project underway to educate the public on the benefits of 
free trade.  (Note:  The regional Amchams signed an 
agreement with the Central American System for Economic 
Integration (SIECA) on August 21 for approximately USD 
65,000 to carry out a series of focus groups to identify 
USCAFTA concerns and embark on a public relations campaign 
to support the free trade talks.  End note.) 
 
8.  FIDE President Norman Garcia, who works closely with VP 
Williams on Honduras\' participation in the Plan Puebla- 
Panama (PPP) initiative and creation of the Competitiveness 
Council, noted that the USCAFTA complements the 
infrastructure projects contemplated in the PPP initiative. 
Garcia stated that the PPP and USCAFTA are opportunities to 
improve regional economic integration and investment climate 
issues region-wide, to the benefit of foreign investors. 
9.  Picking up on a key issue during A/S Reich\'s visit, VP 
Williams highlighted the Maduro administration\'s efforts to 
reform the judicial system and combat corruption.  VP 
Williams singled out the implementation of the Criminal 
Procedures Code and the new selection process for Supreme 
Court Justices as significant achievements for the GOH.  He 
also noted that the Maduro administration successfully 
pushed through the Financial Stabilization Law, which 
increases the tax base and includes tougher punitive 
measures for tax evasion (like the temporary closure of 
businesses), passed a law simplifying procedures to 
incorporate a business and initiated a project that will 
increase transparency in government procurement. 
 
10.  Atala echoed VP Williams\' points and added that the 
GOH\'s tax collection efforts have resulted in a 20 percent 
increase in tax revenues.  Atala, who was President Maduro\'s 
point person on Temporary Protected Status (TPS), also noted 
that remittances constitute a major source of revenue for 
Honduras and have been increasing steadily over the last few 
years.  (Note:  Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza told 
the Ambassador recently that remittances increased by 38 
percent during the first six months of 2002 compared to the 
first half of 2001.  End note.) 
 
11.  In response to Atala\'s inquiry concerning the Millenium 
Challenge Fund, A/S Reich stated that Honduras was a good 
candidate for the Fund and emphasized that in designating 
the funds, the U.S. will evaluate a variety of factors, 
including a country\'s human rights record, the extent of 
investment in human capital and dedication to a free market 
economy. 
 
12.  Post notes that the throughout the conversation the 
Honduran public and private sector participants emphasized 
the need to put in place the conditions necessary for 
economic growth.  They were united in their commitment to 
moving ahead on a Central American free trade agreement with 
the U.S.  The Hondurans, as expected, made Nicaragua\'s 35 
percent tariff a major issue during the lunch.  Arguing that 
it represents the biggest obstacle to further regional 
economic integration and free trade talks, they pushed for 
the U.S. to play an active role in resolving the divisive 35 
percent tariff. 
 
Almaguer 
"
"3682","9/10/2002 16:57","02TEGUCIGALPA2531","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA1780|02TEGUCIGALPA1975|02TEGUCIGALPA2444","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002531 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, PM, AND DRL 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC 
NSC FOR AMB MAISTO 
 
E.O. 12958: 09/10/12 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, MCAP, PHUM, KJUS, SNAR, PBTS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: A/S REICH ADDRESSES MILITARY ISSUES AND PROMOTES 
JUDICIAL REFORM WITH HONDURAN MILITARY AND SUPREME COURT 
 
REFS: A) TEGUCIGALPA 1780 
B) TEGUCIGALPA 2444 
C) TEGUCIGALPA 1975 
 
Classified by PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5 (b) 
and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: On August 28 WHA Assistant Secretary Otto 
Reich visited with Honduran Minister of Defense Federico 
Breve Travieso and Chief of the Joint Staff General Jose 
Isaias Barahona.  The meeting covered a variety of topics, 
including the Cerro La Mole radar, border conflicts with 
Nicaragua and El Salvador, the potential U.S. gift of six 
UH-1 helicopters and the needs of the Honduran Armed Forces 
(HOAF) with respect to the battle against trafficking of 
drugs and arms.  The following day, A/S Reich met with the 
President of the Supreme Court of Justice Vilma Morales and 
other justices. Their meeting focused on anticorruption and 
judicial reform and independence.  A/S Reich also toured one 
of Honduras\'s new courtrooms built to implement its new 
adversarial criminal procedure, a key U.S.-sponsored legal 
reform.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
MOD REVIEWS DRUGS, ARMS, HELOS AND AN AIRPORT 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) On August 28, WHA A/S Reich visited with Honduran 
Minister of Defense Federico Breve Travieso (MOD) and Chief 
of the Joint Staff General Jose Isaias Barahona at the 
Estado Mayor Conjuntos (the Honduran equivalent of the Joint 
Staff).  He was greeted by a formal honor guard and joined 
by WHA/CEN Director Paul Trivelli, the DCM, PolCouns, 
Defense Attache, MilGrp Commander and PolMilOff (notetaker). 
 
3. (C) The MOD assured A/S Reich that the Honduran Armed 
Forces (HOAF) wants to work with the U.S. in the battle 
against drug and arms trafficking.  Breve outlined a 
plethora of problems of the HOAF, focusing on communication 
deficiencies that severely hinder Honduras\'s effectiveness 
in situations that require an immediate response.  The MOD 
raised the issue of the Cerro La Mole radar and the failure 
of the U.S. to contribute to maintenance costs of the 
facility.  A/S Reich assured the MOD that the U.S. is 
engaged on this issue and is looking for a solution.  (See 
reftel A for background information on this issue.)  Breve 
asked about the possibility of obtaining Plan Colombia funds 
to aid the HOAF\'s efforts to interdict drugs passing through 
Honduras to the U.S.  A/S Reich explained restrictions on 
the manner in which Plan Colombia money can be spent. 
 
4. (C) MOD Breve also raised the U.S. offer to give the HOAF 
six used UH-1 helicopters.  The GOH must pay $4 million to 
refurbish the helicopter to make them flight-worthy before 
they can receive the UH-1s.  However, Breve advised the A/S 
that his ministry\'s budget is too tight at this moment to 
pay for the repairs and asked if the U.S. could fund these 
repairs or assist in finding an alternative solution.  The 
MOD stressed that the helicopters would enhance Honduras\' 
ability to participate in counternarcotics activities. 
MILGRP Commander explained that U.S. funds were not 
available and that the cost of the repairs unfortunately had 
to be borne by the recipient nation. 
 
5. (U) Breve broached the subject of the proposed conversion 
of the Soto Cano military airstrip into an international 
airport for commercial use.  President Maduro embraces the 
concept, which seeks to transform the Comayagua valley into 
a new commercial center by bolstering Honduras\'s capacity to 
export cargo and import tourists.  (See reftel B for 
additional information about this proposal to convert the 
military airstrip (shared by the HOAF and Joint Task Force 
Bravo) into a facility that would accommodate both 
commercial air traffic and military operations.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
SUPPORTING JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE AND PROMOTING REFORM 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
6. (U) On August 29, A/S Reich (accompanied by Ambassador, 
WHA/CEN Director Trivelli, DCM, PolCouns, USAID Deputy 
Director, USAID FSN and PolOff) met with Supreme Court 
President Vilma Morales and five justices in the Court\'s 
conference chambers.  Morales and A/S Reich discussed at 
length the problem of corruption and the role the judiciary 
plays in combating it.  A/S Reich stressed the importance of 
an independent judiciary in a democratic system, and of 
judicial transparency and the rule of law in building the 
confidence of the international investment community.  A/S 
Reich and Morales talked about the strides Honduras has made 
in the area of judicial and legal reform, including the new 
selection process for Supreme Court judges (designed to 
depoliticize the Court) and the new Code of Criminal 
Procedure that established an adversarial system of 
prosecution.  (For a detailed account of anticorruption 
efforts in Honduras, see reftel C.) 
 
7. (C) Ambassador Almaguer raised the issue of the 
Congress\'s recently proposed Constitutional amendment that 
strips the Court of its authority to interpret the 
constitutionality of the laws and bestows it upon the 
Congress itself.  (Note: Post will provide more information 
about this ongoing judicial conflict via septel.  End Note.) 
Judges Marco T. Barahona and Ovidio Navarro weighed in on 
this topic, highlighting the need for civil society and 
other sectors, especially the G-15 group and U.S., to 
support the Court in its battle for independence and the 
maintenance of separation of powers. 
 
8. (U) The delegation toured a newly constructed courtroom 
designed to implement the country\'s new criminal procedures 
code, which uses a prosecutorial system vice the previous 
inquistorial one and which requires oral trials with 
witnesses and juries.  The new criminal procedures code is 
one of the most important U.S. sponsored legal reforms to be 
enacted in Honduras. Judge Jorge Alberto Burgos Cordova from 
the Honduran Sentencing Tribunal gave a brief presentation 
that outlined how the recent reforms to the criminal process 
are already beginning to yield more equal justice under law. 
(Note: Judge Burgos formerly served as a prosecutor, during 
which time he came very close to death when would-be 
assassins shot him 17 times.  End note.) 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3683","9/10/2002 17:00","02TEGUCIGALPA2534","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02Tegucigalpa2472","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, DRL, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC 
NSC FOR AMB MAISTO 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 09/10/12 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PBTS, ETRD, ECON, KJUS, HO, UNGA 
SUBJECT: A/S REICH MEETS WITH HONDURAN PRESIDENT MADURO; 
DISCUSSION FOCUSES ON BORDER/TARIFF DISPUTE WITH NICARAGUA 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 2472 
 
Classified by PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5 (b) 
and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary.  WHA A/S Reich met August 28 in Tegucigalpa 
with Honduran President Ricardo Maduro.  The discussion was 
positive and covered a wide range of issues, with the focus 
being the ongoing dispute between Honduras and Nicaragua on 
border issues and the Nicaraguan 35 percent tariff on 
Honduran goods.  Reich praised Maduro for not imposing a 
retaliatory tariff and urged him to seek an amicable 
solution to the dispute.  Unfortunately, it appears that 
there is no immediate solution in sight on the issue.  Reich 
and Maduro also discussed the issue of an ICC Article 98 
Agreement (see reftel).  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Participants in WHA A/S Reich meeting with Honduran 
President Ricardo Maduro in Maduro\'s office in Tegucigalpa: 
 
USG: A/S Reich, Ambassador, WHA/CEN Director Trivelli, DCM, 
PolCouns, EconCouns, and PolOff (notetaker). 
 
GOH: President Ricardo Maduro, Foreign Minister Guillermo 
Perez-Cadalso Arias, Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza, the President\'s Executive Assistant Xavier Arguello 
and Cesar Batres, the President\'s Special Advisor on Land 
Issues 
 
Nicaragua and the Tariff 
------------------------ 
 
3. (C) Maduro welcomed A/S Reich to Honduras and opened the 
meeting by asking Reich about his trip to Nicaragua August 
26-27, noting that the GOH has many issues pending with the 
GON.  Reich told Maduro that he had met with prominent GON 
officials while in Managua, including President Enrique 
Bolanos.  Reich said Bolanos was doing the best he could 
with a difficult situation, including a struggling economy. 
Reich noted that Bolanos was attacking corruption, just as 
Maduro was doing in Honduras.  Reich explained that the 
question of stripping former President Arnoldo Aleman of his 
congressional immunity was the major issue in Managua.  He 
added that he had also discussed obstacles to Central 
American integration, including the 35 percent tariff 
leveled in late 1999 against Honduran goods by Nicaragua. 
 
4. (C) Maduro replied that it appeared reversing the tariff 
had unfortunately become linked to the debate over stripping 
Aleman\'s congressional immunity.  Maduro then recalled that 
Nicaragua\'s 35 percent tariff on Honduran goods was imposed 
by the Nicaraguan Congress in reaction to Honduras ratifying 
a Caribbean maritime boundary treaty with Colombia in 1999. 
He explained that the Nicaraguans felt the treaty ignored 
GON territorial claims.  Maduro said he understood the GON 
position that the GOH had to renounce its treaty with 
Colombia.  However, Maduro said now that the GON has filed a 
case before the International Court of Justice on the 
maritime boundary the GOH\'s position is that it will await 
the court\'s ruling on its boundary claims before taking any 
action on that treaty. 
 
5. (C) Maduro outlined how Honduran FM Perez-Cadalso had 
explored options to resolve the tariff issue with Nicaraguan 
FM Norman Caldera.  GOH/GON discussions had included the 
possibility of joint maritime exploitation not just in 
disputed areas, but in all areas.  Maduro recognized that 
Aleman had criticized Bolanos for seeking cooperation with 
the GOH.  However, Maduro charged that Caldera\'s recent 
statements on oil exploration in the Caribbean were contrary 
to statements made in private GOH/GON discussions and done 
for political reasons.  He explained that those comments had 
provoked a strong negative reaction in the Honduran Congress 
and private sector. 
 
6. (C) Maduro also detailed efforts made by Cardinal 
Rodriguez, the Archbishop of Tegucigalpa, to approach his 
Nicaraguan counterpart Cardinal Obando y Bravo to discus the 
possible elimination of the tariff but that Obando y Bravo 
had declined to get involved.  Subsequently FM Perez- 
Cadalso, Nicaraguan MFA Sub-Secretary Salvatore (FM Caldera 
did not attend), and Vatican officials discussed the issue 
of possible Vatican mediation of the issue without success. 
 
7. (C) Maduro said he understood that Bolanos had the 
political will to eliminate the tariff but recognized the 
problem Bolanos faced with Aleman.  He offered that the GOH 
was looking at different approaches to solve the tariff 
problem, but warned that domestic political pressure on him 
to take action was growing.  He explained that some 
political opponents were alleging he was not taking the 
border issue seriously because he was not really Honduran. 
(Note:  Maduro was born in Panama and the issue of his 
citizenship was a hot political issue during the 2001 
presidential campaign.  End Note.) 
 
8. (C) Maduro said he was seeking to dampen political 
rhetoric on the tariff issue and hoped to find a creative 
solution.  However, he flagged that even deputies of his own 
party (the National Party) were calling for a retaliatory 
tariff.  Maduro underscored his strong personal belief that 
a retaliatory tariff would be contrary to Central American 
integration.  Reich complimented Maduro and the GOH for not 
responding with a retaliatory tariff against Nicaraguan 
goods. 
 
Gulf Of Fonseca 
--------------- 
 
9. (C) Maduro also discussed the Gulf of Fonseca border 
dispute with El Salvador and Nicaragua, saying that the 1992 
ICJ ruling had clearly given Honduras an exit point from the 
Gulf in the Pacific Ocean.  Maduro opined that a trilateral 
economic agreement to develop the gulf would be the best 
solution.  However, he noted that the Inter-American 
Development Bank did not want to get involved in the issue 
due to a lack of interest from the GON and GOES. He noted 
that the 10-year anniversary of the ICJ ruling on the 
Honduran/Salvadoran border would occur September 11.  Maduro 
said he wanted to lower border tensions and emphasize 
positive economic issues between the countries. 
 
10. (C) A/S Reich responded that the USG would be happy to 
help if it could to reduce tensions in Central America.  He 
noted that no one wanted to return to the tensions of the 
1980s.  Reich emphasized that President Bush was very 
interested in Central America.  Reich added that Honduras 
needed to catch up economically with El Salvador and Costa 
Rica, but acknowledged that would not be easy and that 
expectations needed to be realistic. 
 
Regional Disarmament? 
--------------------- 
 
11. (C) Maduro said that he had discussed with El Salvadoran 
President Francisco Flores the idea of regional disarmament. 
Maduro said that if disarmament occurred it could lead to 
savings that could be used for social investment.  A/S Reich 
said that the USG was concerned about the number of arms in 
Central America, and cited the recent case of 3,000 rifles 
that went from Nicaragua to Colombia via Panama.  Reich also 
noted that in Nicaragua there was a plethora of AK-47 rifles 
but a shortage of pistols for police.  He stressed that all 
of the arms left over from the 1970s and 80s in the region 
concerned the U.S.  Maduro noted that Honduras had fewer 
weapons and a smaller military than its neighbors do and was 
concerned by its neighbors\' military spending.  Maduro said 
that the GOH could not invest in military hardware because 
it needed the money for police, teachers, and other 
important productive domestic investments.  He asked for 
U.S. support on the disarmament issue, saying American 
leadership would be helpful.  A/S Reich offered U.S. and 
pledged to look into ways to assist this effort. 
 
Trade is Key 
------------ 
 
12. (C) Maduro emphasized his vision that Central American 
integration and free trade within the region were key to 
making progress against poverty in the region.  He noted he 
has now met with Bolanos and Flores together at least 4 
times since taking office in January.  He shared that he 
would soon meet again privately with Bolanos, and separately 
with Flores, to encourage more concrete efforts toward 
regional integration. 
 
13. (C) Maduro stressed the importance of a Central American 
free trade agreement with the U.S.  Maduro said the GOH was 
happy about the U.S. Congress voting to grant the President 
Trade Promotion Authority.  Maduro pointed out that 
increased trade was key to reducing illegal immigration to 
the U.S., but underscored that Honduran remittances from the 
U.S. were a critical element to maintaining a stable 
economic situation in Honduras.  Maduro said he hoped the 
proposed Central America Free Trade Agreement would boost 
foreign investment in the region.  A/S Reich said such 
investment usually followed a trade agreement, especially if 
progress was made against corruption and in favor of 
judicial security. 
 
Land Disputes and the Administration of Justice 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
14. (C) Maduro introduced Cesar Batres, his Legal Advisor, 
who explained (as expected) that the GOH had decided to seek 
to resolve land disputes involving the GOH by submitting 
them to arbitration (similar to the process used in Costa 
Rica for expropriation cases).  The proposal required a 
change in legislation.  Batres provided the draft law 
prepared by the Supreme Court to Ambassador.  A/S Reich and 
Ambassador thanked Maduro for this initiative. 
 
15. (C) Reich noted that the administration of justice (AOJ) 
was key for investment.  Why would a business invest if the 
law and protection for investments were not clear when they 
could invest in another location where investments were 
protected, asked Reich.  Maduro agreed that AOJ was critical 
for investment. 
 
Limited Progress on Economic and Security Problems 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
16. (C) On agricultural issues, Maduro suggested the need 
for a coordinated international response to the free-fall in 
coffee prices.  Reich noted the importance of coffee in 
Central America and the challenge producers in Central 
America and the Andean Region faced from Vietnamese coffee. 
Maduro said that even though oversupply had led to falling 
producer prices, it had not affected consumer prices, which 
if anything were rising. 
 
17. (C) Maduro commented that the tourism and textile 
sectors were improved.  He said his administration was 
trying to foster home ownership, infrastructure development, 
and micro and small businesses.  Maduro explained that 
though the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was 
disappointed in the GOH\'s wage settlement with teachers, he 
hoped they would be successful in negotiating a new three- 
year IMF program, when the IMF team arrived in October.  He 
indicated that tax receipts had risen since July, due to use 
of enforcement measures in the new tax law that included 
temporarily closing businesses that did not pay taxes. 
 
18. (C) Maduro noted he had boosted police patrols with the 
military to crack down on crime and claimed that both 
homicides and crime in general had dropped since his 
inauguration. 
 
GOH Appreciates Visit 
--------------------- 
 
19. (C) Reich thanked Maduro for the GOH\'s support on issues 
of concern to the USG at the UN.  Maduro thanked Reich for 
his visit and noted that U.S. support is key and very much 
appreciated.  Maduro praised retiring Ambassador as a friend 
of Honduras and of Maduro. 
 
Candid Discussion Reveals No Quick End to Tariff Issue 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
20. (C) Comment.  Reich and Maduro had a friendly and open 
discussion, dominated by discussion of the tariff and border 
dispute with Nicaragua.  In the lengthy talk it was clear 
that there was no immediate solution at hand on the tariff 
issue.  Maduro is likely to face growing political pressure 
to retaliate against the Nicaraguan tariff unless there are 
signs of progress in resolving the issue.  Reich\'s visit was 
an important statement that the USG recognizes Maduro\'s 
leadership in avoiding such retaliation, and that its 
resolution is key to Central American free trade and 
integration. End Comment. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3688","9/11/2002 13:29","02TEGUCIGALPA2548","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE135231|02SECSTATE164498","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EB/TPP/MTA/IPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ON USPTO IPR SEMINARS 
 
REFS: A) SECSTATE 135231, B) SECSTATE 164498 
 
1.  Per reftel requests, Post passed information regarding 
seminars on specialized intellectual property courts and 
enforcement programs hosted by the United States Patent and 
Trademark Office (USPTO) to Director of Intellectual 
Property Camilo Bendeck.  According to Bendeck, the Central 
American Economic Integration System (SIECA) is funding the 
travel expenses for one Honduran prosecutor to attend the 
seminar on specialized intellectual property courts from 
September 12-13.  Attendance at future trainings will depend 
on the availability of SIECA funding.  Note that SIECA 
(located in Guatemala) is funded by USAID\'s regional G-CAP 
program. 
 
2.  With respect to the questions posed in ref a, 
specialized intellectual property courts do not exist in 
Honduras.  After a November 2001 meeting with Emboffs, 
Attorney General Roy Medina designated one prosecutor to 
handle IPR cases exclusively.  The prosecutor is currently 
assigned to the Office of the Special Prosecutor for 
Organized Crime.  The creation of a special prosecutor for 
intellectual property will be based on the Office of the 
Attorney General\'s budgetary needs.  To address the need for 
prosecutors schooled in intellectual property matters, the 
GOH Office of Intellectual Property is assisting in training 
a number of select prosecutors from the organized crime 
office. 
 
Pierce 
"
"3689","9/11/2002 13:30","02TEGUCIGALPA2549","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR CA/VO/L/A, WHA/CEN FOR TRIVELLI, WHA/CEN FOR LANG 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, HO 
SUBJECT: REVOCATION OF VISA (PENA, RICARDO  ANTONIO) 
 
 
A. NAME: PENA, RICARDO ANTONIO 
B. DATE AND POB: 17 NOV 1962, HONDURAS 
C. COUNTRY OF NATIONALITY AND RESIDENCE: HONDURAS 
D. VISA ISSUANCE DATE: 15 NOV 1999 
   - VISA TYPE: B1/B2, MULTIPLE ENTRY 
   - VISA EXPIRATION DATE: 14 NOV 2009 
E. PLACE OF ISSUANCE: TEGUCIGALPA 
F. PASSPORT TYPE: DIPLOMATIC 
   - PASSPORT NUMBER: 001239 
   - PASSPORT PLACE OF ISSUANCE: TEGUCIGALPA 
G. SECTION OF INELIGIBILITY: 212(a)(2)(C)(i) 
 
H. Subject was arrested by Panamanian National Police on 
September 9, 2002 while attempting to cross the Panama/Costa 
Rica border.  He was arrested in the town of Paso Canoas, 
Panama with 3 to 4 kilograms of heroin concealed in several 
pairs of shoes that were in his suitcase.  Subject attempted 
to avoid a search by presenting his Honduran diplomatic 
passport and claiming diplomatic immunity.  A check of 
records in Honduras indicates that Subject is no longer a 
member of the Honduran Congress.  He is therefore no longer 
entitled to use his diplomatic passport. 
 
I. TRAVEL WOULD LIKELY BE THROUGH THE POE MIAMI OR HOUSTON. 
 
J. SUBJECT ENTERED INTO CLASS 10 SEP 2002 UNDER 2(C)(i). 
 
K. Subject is being contacted by letter and informed of his 
ineligibility.  He is not likely to present his visa for 
physical cancellation. 
L. Local carriers have been notified and INS Tegucigalpa has 
been advised and has passed this information through INS 
channels. 
 
COMMENT:  Subject as a former member of the Honduran 
congress, was supposed to have submitted his diplomatic 
passport to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for cancellation 
once he was no longer a member of congress.  His use of the 
diplomatic passport to attempt to evade inspection at a port 
of entry serves to highlight the widespread use of Honduran 
diplomatic passports by persons not entitled to have them. 
Conservative estimates, by the GOH indicates that there are 
approximately 50,000 diplomatic passports in circulation in 
this nation of only six and one half million persons.  The 
lack of control by GOH authorities over the issuance and 
recovery of these passports exacerbates the problem by 
making it relatively easy to obtain and use a diplomatic 
passport here.  We believe if Panamanian authorities return 
subject\'s passport to him, he will likely attempt to travel 
on that same diplomatic passport to the U.S. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3693","9/11/2002 21:33","02TEGUCIGALPA2556","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA1927","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002556 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
WHA/CEN, DRL, AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, KDEM, PGOV, ECON, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: TRANSPARENCY INTERNATIONAL RATES HONDURAS AMONG 
THE MOST CORRUPT IN THE REGION 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 01927 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On August 29, Transparency International 
released its 2002 Corruption Perceptions Index ranking 
Honduras 71 of 102 countries analyzed.  Honduras scored 2.7 
on a scale of 1 to 10 (with 10 being a perfect score) - the 
same score it received in 2001.  The CPI highlighted the fact 
that Honduras is the third most corrupt country in Central 
America, trailing Nicaragua and Guatemala.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------- 
THE INDEX 
--------- 
 
2.  (U) Transparency International (TI) is the world,s 
leading non-governmental organization dedicated to fighting 
corruption.  It is an international organization based in 
Germany, which has more than 80 independent national chapters 
around the world.  First initiated in 1995, the 2002 CPI 
draws on 14 different surveys that derive information from 
both residents and expatriates - including business people, 
academia and risk analysts.  The CPI does not measure the 
prevalence of actual corruption, but rather measures the 
degree to which corruption is perceived to exist among public 
officials and politicians.  The index provides a snapshot of 
the views decision-makers who make key decisions on 
investment and trade.  The purpose of the CPI is to build 
public awareness about corruption and to increase pressure on 
governments to directly address the issue. 
 
3.  (U) TI defines corruption as the abuse of public office 
for private gain.  TI considers a variety of factors, 
including the tendency of a country to receive international 
bribes, the illicit enrichment of public officials, national 
codes of conduct, the capability to identify cronyism, 
transparency in the government acquisition system and public 
access to information. 
 
-------------------------- 
HONDURAS RECEIVES BAD MARK 
-------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) On August 29, TI released its 2002 CPI that ranked 
Honduras number 71 out of a total of 102 countries analyzed. 
Honduras received a score of 2.7 on a scale of 1 to 10 - 10 
indicating the lowest level of corruption, or a \"perfect\" 
score.  This is the same score Honduras received in the 2001 
CPI.  According to the CPI Honduras is the third most corrupt 
country in Central America, trailing only Nicaragua and 
Guatemala (both with a score of 2.5).  Costa Rica led the 
Central American countries with a score of 4.5, while Chile 
received the highest mark in all of Latin America with a 
score of 7.5. 
 
5.  (U) German Espinal, coordinator of the technical agency 
for the Honduran National Anticorruption Commission, said 
that Honduras,s ranking in the CPI reflects deterioration of 
the country,s democratic credibility, and signals the 
challenge the government faces in trying to gain public 
confidence. 
 
---------------------------- 
BUT IT COULD HAVE BEEN WORSE 
---------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) President of TI Peter Eigen underscored the fact that 
there have been a number of setbacks \"to the credibility of 
democratic rule\" in Latin America in the past year. 
Argentina joined Honduras, Panama, Guatemala, Nicaragua, 
Venezuela, Bolivia, Ecuador, Haiti and Paraguay with a score 
of 3 or less in the CPI 2002.  Peru, Colombia, Mexico, El 
Salvador, Panama, Argentina, Guatemala, Venezuela and Ecuador 
all received lower scores in 2002 than in 2001.  With scores 
plunging in many Latin American countries, some observers 
opine that Honduras,s score is not so bad. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Reftel outlines recent anticorruption efforts in 
Honduras and provides a summary of the strides that have been 
made.  There is no question that corruption is still 
pervasive in Honduras, but there has been some measurable 
progress.  However, the positive developments that have 
occurred have not been enough to adequately address the 
problem, and as reflected in the CPI, the public confidence 
of Hondurans has not improved. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3694","9/11/2002 23:10","02TEGUCIGALPA2563","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02TEGUCIGALPA2043","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002563 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EINV, KPRV, HO 
SUBJECT: PRE-QUALIFICATION FOR 25-YEAR HONDURAN CELLULAR 
SERVICES CONTRACT 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 02043 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Two American cellular companies were 
among six who applied for pre-qualification to bid on the 
GOH\'s 25-year cellular service contract.  The winner of the 
bid will be the only competition for Honduras\' current 
cellular provider, Celtel (majority owned by Motorola). 
Conatel plans to announce the qualifying companies on or 
about October 8, 2002 and the official bid opening is 
scheduled for January 2003. The GOH has, unfortunately, 
limited the evaluation criteria to the size of the 
concession fee paid to the government.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On September 9, 2002, Contatel, Honduras\' 
Telecommunications Regulatory Commission, held an open pre- 
qualification process for companies who are planning to bid 
on the Honduran cellular service contract.  Two American 
companies, Bell South Honduras (comprised of Bell South 
Honduras, BS Chile, BS U.S., BS Nicaragua and BS Guatemala) 
and Digicel Honduras (U.S. partners with Salvadoran and 
Italian investment) applied.  The other potential contenders 
include Radio Movil Dipsa, S.A. de C.V. (TeleMex of Mexico), 
Telecomunicaciones de Guatemala (TelGuat of Guatemala), 
Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones, S.A. (Entel Chile - 
an Italian backed Chilean company) and Megatel - Emce 
(ENITEL, a Honduran company owned by Freddy Nasser).  This 
cellular service contract would be for one of Honduras\' 
three Personal Communication Systems (PCS) bands, not the 
highly politicized cellular band B (reftel). 
 
3. (U) Conatel will officially announce by October 8, 2002, 
which companies qualify and will go on to the second phase 
of the bidding.  During the pre-qualification process, 
Conatel will check that the firms meet certain business 
criteria, including having annual sales upwards of USD 150 
million and a company user market of minimum 500,000 mobile 
users.  Conatel is looking for large companies only for the 
bid.  The winner of the 25-year contract would be in 
competition with Honduras\' only other cellular services 
provider, Celtel (majority owned by the U.S. firm, 
Motorola). 
 
4. (U) Celtel has expanded lines rapidly, and now accounts 
for approximately half of total phone lines in the country. 
However, cell phone rates are very high by Central American 
standards and service coverage is generally limited to 
Honduras\' largest cities.  Celtel\'s contract with Conatel is 
currently under dispute.  Originally, Celtel held a ten-year 
contract that is set to expire in 2006.  However, on 
principles of fairness, Conatel extended Celtel\'s contract 
an additional 15 years to equal Hondutel\'s (Honduras state- 
owned telephone company) current 25-year contract.  Two 
deputies in the Honduran National Congress did not agree 
with Conatel\'s decision.  The Public Ministry is currently 
suing Conatel over the Celtel extension. 
 
5. (SBU) The final bid opening is forecast for sometime in 
January of 2003. The winner of the bid will be based solely 
on the highest bid presented.  Comment:  The GOH\'s decision 
to not include other criteria in this concession, such as 
expanded coverage and other customer service issues, appears 
shortsighted.  However, it appears that a simple price-based 
concession is considered more likely to obtain congressional 
support.  End Comment. 
 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3710","9/12/2002 15:28","02TEGUCIGALPA2569","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02TEGUCIGALPA725","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002569 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO TREASURY - OFFICE OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: MONEY LAUNDERING IMPLEMENTATION GETS OFF 
TO A GOOD START 
 
REF:  TEGUCIGALPA 725 
 
1.  Summary.  Three Treasury consultants held a seminar on 
money laundering and financial crimes from August 24-26 for 
40 judges, prosecutors, police investigators, Banking 
Commission officials and bank compliance officers.  The 
seminar was well received by the Honduran participants and 
the Treasury consultants commented that there is good 
cooperation among the different GOH entities responsible for 
enforcement of the law.  The Financial Information Unit is 
up and running and investigating 25 cases of suspected money 
laundering.  One of these cases is being prepared for 
prosecution.  End summary. 
 
2.  From August 24-26, three consultants (Jim Parrott, 
Ronald Cleaver and Gary Kruchten) from the Department of 
Treasury\'s Office of Technical Assistance held a seminar in 
Tegucigalpa on money laundering and financial crimes for 40 
judges, prosecutors, police investigators, Banking 
Commission officials and bank compliance officers.  The 
Treasury consultants commented that they were impressed with 
the quality of the questions raised and the level of 
interest among the participants.  The seminar was the third 
money laundering technical assistance visit by Parrott to 
support the GOH as it implements its strengthened money 
laundering legislation (reftel).  In April, Parrot reviewed 
the law that had been adopted by the National Congress and 
met with Banking Commission officials, prosecutors, the 
Supreme Court and the banking association to do a technical 
assistance needs assessment.  He returned with an attorney 
from NAS Guatemala to provide an overview of the operations 
of an FIU and spent time with prosecutors and Banking 
Commission officials reviewing draft implementing 
regulations. 
 
3.  Treasury is currently planning a trip (tentatively 
programmed for November) for Financial Information Unit 
(FIU) officials and the prosecutor assigned to the FIU to 
visit a successful FIU in Latin America (possibly Colombia). 
Treasury is also talking with FINCEN about arranging for a 
computer expert to travel to Tegucigalpa to advise Honduran 
FIU officials on organizing and upgrading their computer 
system.  Embassy hopes to continue to use Treasury 
consultants to provide training to GOH authorities (banking 
officials, prosecutors, judges, police) on money laundering, 
financial crimes and investigative techniques and envisions 
a one to two-year technical assistance program, provided 
funding is available. 
 
4.  The FIU is up and running and currently investigating 25 
cases of suspected money laundering.  One of the cases is 
being prepared for prosecution.  The FIU consists of five 
officials, including three analysts and one full-time 
prosecutor.  Both the prosecutors and Banking Commission 
officials commented on the constructive working relationship 
within the FIU. 
 
5.  Of concern to the Treasury consultants was the physical 
security of the FIU.  There is currently uncontrolled access 
to the computer systems and sensitive banking information, 
compromising not only the security of the FIU but also 
hindering information sharing among regional FIU\'s and 
FINCEN.  Banking Commission President Ana Cristina de 
Pereira agreed to take measures to improve the FIU\'s 
physical security.  However, budget restrictions (the 
Banking Commission\'s 2002 budget did not include money for 
upgrades to the FIU) may limit what the Banking Commission 
can do in the short-term to upgrade security.  Pereira 
remarked that she would request money in the Commission\'s 
2003 budget for a comprehensive FIU security upgrade. 
 
6.  Post would like to thank Treasury for its extremely 
timely and helpful support in ensuring implementation of the 
GOH\'s strengthened money laundering legislation. 
 
Pierce 
"
"3725","9/13/2002 19:03","02TEGUCIGALPA2586","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE160115|02STATE164566","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR IO/T, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, AORC, KSCA, TBIO, TPHY, HO, UNGA 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS UNDECIDED ON CLONING CONVENTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 164566 
     B. STATE 160115 
 
PolCouns demarched MFA Director General of Foreign Policy 
Mario Fortin in August on the UN Convention to Ban Human 
Cloning (ref B).  Fortin told PolCouns that the GOH also 
believed that there should be a total ban on cloning.  PolOff 
delivered Spanish talking points (ref A) September 5 to 
Fortin who told PolOff September 11 that while cloning was a 
complicated issue, he believed that the UN would arrive at an 
accord.  He also said that initially the GOH had supported 
the German and French approach that would ban only 
reproductive cloning, a statement that contradicted his 
earlier remarks.  Fortin told PolOff that the MFA was 
studying the U.S. position and that he would leave 
instructions to the Honduran Mission to the UN before he left 
UNGA September 20. 
PIERCE 
"
"3735","9/16/2002 17:18","02TEGUCIGALPA2600","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
S/CPR for Eubanks, WHA/CEN for Trivelli and Lang, CA/VO 
for Barry 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, PREL, ASEC 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS TRIES AN END RUN TO NAME CONSUL IN 
MOBILE; POST RECOMMENDS DEPARTMENT SAY NO TO GOH NOMINEE 
 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY. Post was notified on August 1, that the 
GOH was attempting to name U.S. legal permanent resident, 
Elena Maria Diaz Marinakys de Szydel, as Consul General 
of Honduras in Mobile, Alabama.  In addition to the fact 
that no Honduran Consulate currently exists in Mobile, 
Post has derogatory information concerning Mrs. Szydel\'s 
activities in Honduras during 2000 and 2001, when she was 
the dependent spouse the Area Engineer for the U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers (USACE). We believe that her conduct 
during the time her husband was assigned to this Embassy 
should make her unacceptable as a Consul General and 
member of the Diplomatic Corps. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) The proposed appointment came to Post\'s attention 
when a citizen and resident of Panama, Ana Isabel 
Pascual, applied for a visa on August 1, to work as a 
domestic employee for Elena Maria Diaz Marinakys in 
Mobile Alabama.  The same day, the Consular Section 
received a call from Honduran Vice President, Alberto 
Diaz Lobo.  Mr. Diaz Lobo said his daughter, Elena Maria 
Diaz Marinakys, had been appointed as the new Honduran 
Consul General in Mobile, Alabama and wanted to take the 
applicant to the U.S. as her domestic servant.  When 
informed that the Department of State had not given its 
permission for Honduras to open a Consulate in Mobile, 
Mr. Diaz said that there had been a Consul in Mobile for 
years and his daughter was simply replacing the old 
Consul. 
 
3. (U) Mrs. Marinakys later called the Consul General to 
ask for a special appointment for her maid because she 
was traveling with three small children and needed 
assistance.  She further said that the applicant had been 
working for her in the U.S. for the last year.  An 
examination of the applicant\'s passport indicated that 
she had been granted a B-1 visa in Tegucigalpa, on June 
11, 2001 annotated to read, \" Personal or domestic 
servant travel only with the family of Kevin and Elena 
SZYDEL\".  Her most recent trip to the U.S. had been from 
Feb. 19, 2002, until July 4, 2002. 
 
4. (U) It became apparent that Elena Szydel and Elena 
Maria Diaz Marinakys were one and the same.  On August 6, 
Ms. Marinakys again called the Consular Section to 
inquire about the visa.  She admitted that she was a 
Legal Permanent Resident of the U.S., living in Mobile, 
she was married to U.S. citizen, and all three of their 
children were American citizens.  She said the GOH was 
going through the process of getting Mobile approved for 
opening a Consulate and that she would then follow 
through to get a diplomatic visa for the applicant. 
 
5. (SBU) A group of USACE contractors, from Mobile, 
Alabama, including the Szydel family, were expelled from 
Honduras by the Ambassador in 2001.  As USACE contractors 
and direct employees of the Eterna Corporation, they 
committed gross financial irregularities, tax 
improprieties, customs violations, fraud, 
misrepresentation, malfeasance and misfeasance.  An 
investigation of their activities was conducted by the 
Criminal Investigation Division (CID) and the Inspector 
General of the U.S. Army.  The entire group of Eterna 
contractors, and the Szydel family in particular, were 
found to be deeply involved in questionable activities 
during their stay in Honduras.  Specifically, the Szydel 
family defrauded the USG by engaging in a rental 
reimbursement scheme.  They lived in a house owned by 
Mrs. Szydel\'s mother.  They lived there rent-free. 
However, they submitted vouchers and received 
reimbursements for rental expenses.  They shared the 
reimbursements with Mrs. Szydel\'s sister, who represented 
herself as owner of the property.  They committed fraud 
and abused their tax exempt status by importing a luxury 
automobile, a 2000 Lexus, for their personal use, while 
fraudulently describing it on shipping manifests as 
construction equipment.  They then imported a second 
vehicle for personal use by taking it to Panama, removing 
Mrs. Szydel\'s name, retitling it in her husband\'s name 
and bringing it back into the country exempt from 
taxation.   They ordered handmade furniture from a 
manufacturing firm owned by her father and charged it to 
the USG as as part of their household expenses.  All of 
these activities were discovered during the U.S. Army 
investigations.  Mr. Szydel was reprimanded and punished 
by the USACE.  Mrs. Szydel refused to cooperate with U.S. 
investigators and was not prosecuted under Honduran law. 
 
6. (U) Based on the the specific activities of Mrs. 
Szydel, and her active involvement in defrauding the U.S. 
Government, we request the Protocol office to find Elena 
Maria Diaz Marinakys de Szydel unacceptable to serve as a 
Consul General of Honduras in Mobile.  We also request 
that she be found unacceptable as a member of the 
Diplomatic Corps in the U.S. 
 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3767","9/19/2002 22:13","02TEGUCIGALPA2647","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02TEGUCIGALPA1391","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002647 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EB/TPP/ABT, WHA/EPSC, WHA/CEN 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
PASS TO OPIC, EX-IM, TDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EINV, EFIN, EAGR, EAID, KTEX, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS AND TEXTILES - DIVERSIFICATION WILL NOT BE 
EASY 
 
REFS: A) SECSTATE 160692, B) TEGUCIGALPA 1391 
 
1.  Summary.  Ref a requested that Post discuss the impact 
of the elimination of import quotas in 2005 on Honduras\' 
textile and apparel industry and plans in the government and 
private sector to diversify into other industrial sectors. 
Embassy has been carrying on a dialogue with the GOH and 
Honduran private sector for the past year on the subject. 
The Honduran textile industry will try to survive through 
vertical integration and duty free status in the U.S. 
market.  The government hopes to attract new investment in 
other light manufacturing, tourism, agribusiness and 
forestry.  There is limited awareness of U.S. financing 
programs.  End summary. 
 
Textile and Apparel Industry Gearing Up for 2005 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2.  As reported in ref b, Honduran maquila industry leaders 
recognize that quota elimination in 2005 presents a major 
challenge to the Honduran industry.  Unrestrained by quotas, 
companies operating in Asia (generally considered much more 
competitive) will drive down prices for textiles and apparel 
tremendously.  Industry leaders are gambling that Honduras\' 
industry will survive based on duty free treatment in the 
U.S. and its close proximity to the U.S. 
 
3.  Companies are working to improve Honduran 
competitiveness by installing more efficient machinery and 
moving away from cut and sew operations to full package 
regimes.  Due to a lack of affordable financing in the 
Honduran banking system, U.S. companies (with access to 
financing from U.S. banks) are largely responsible for the 
implementation of full package operations in Honduras. 
 
4.  The rapid growth of the Honduran maquila sector over the 
last decade is due in part to an incentives program the GOH 
provides for apparel assembly plants operating in designated 
export processing zones.  Companies are exempt from paying 
import duties on goods and capital equipment and from state 
and municipal taxes.  The GOH will continue to provide 
incentives until 2010 per WTO rules allowing countries with 
GDP per capita under USD 1,000 to maintain free trade zones. 
The general manager of the Honduran Maquila Association 
(AHM) commented that in anticipation of the WTO-prohibition 
on government incentives programs, the AHM is already 
engaging the GOH on alternative ways to attract (and 
maintain) investment in the sector. 
 
5.  To date, Honduras has had limited success in 
diversifying its textile and apparel production.  One 
industry contact decried the poor job the sector has done in 
shedding the image of Honduras as primarily a t-shirt 
manufacturing center.  The contact suggested that the GOH 
and private sector make a more concerted effort to attract 
companies producing higher-value finished products like 
fashion wear and women\'s attire. 
 
Hopes Rest on U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
6.  Industry representatives argue that a U.S.-Central 
American free trade agreement (USCAFTA) is essential for the 
sector to be able to compete in 2005 and beyond.  They hope 
that a USCAFTA will give Honduras NAFTA-like parity and at 
the very least, solidify the unilateral trade preferences 
Honduras now enjoys under the CBTPA.  Industry contacts 
report that Honduras, which is the largest manufacturer of 
knit apparel and t-shirts among CBTPA beneficiary countries, 
expects to benefit the most from recent provisions in the 
Trade Act of 2002 increasing the caps on quotas for these 
categories. 
 
Plans for Diversification 
------------------------- 
 
7.  The Maduro government\'s recently published economic plan 
focuses on the need to create an attractive climate for 
foreign investment.  The GOH\'s plan recognizes the need to 
facilitate the incorporation of a business in Honduras, seek 
out new trade and investment opportunities through free 
trade agreements, strengthen the judicial system and resolve 
land tenancy problems that hinder investment (especially 
along Honduras\' Caribbean coast).  Septel will discuss 
current plans to attack the land tenure issues. 
 
8.  President Maduro created an entity called the 
Competitiveness Council to tackle investment climate issues 
in Honduras.  The Council, which is headed by Vice President 
Vicente Williams and includes private sector, labor, 
Congress representatives and local government officials, is 
charged with reviewing and drafting modifications to 
Honduras\' existing legal framework to encourage new business 
development.  The Council recently succeeded in pushing 
through the National Congress the Administrative 
Simplification Law which reduces some bureaucratic hurdles 
to establishing a business in Honduras. 
 
9.  Maduro appointed Camilo Atala to a new position of 
Minister without Portfolio for Investment.  Atala (who is 
also the president of Bank Ficohsa) is responsible for 
promoting large investment projects with potential to create 
substantial numbers of jobs.  He is the point of contact for 
large international companies seeking meetings with the 
President and charged with clearing bureaucratic obstacles 
for these projects. 
 
10.  As advocated by consultant Michael Porter (a recent 
speaker in Tegucigalpa), the Maduro administration will 
concentrate on developing clusters - sectors with high 
potential to create jobs and related economic activity. 
This includes the attraction of other light industry 
(including electronics), developing Honduras\' tourism 
potential, strengthening the agro-industry and exploiting 
Honduras\' natural resources (primarily forestry and mining). 
 
11.  There has been limited success in attracting non- 
textile light assembly operations.  The ZIP Calpules 
industrial park (located in San Pedro Sula), for example, is 
already home to a biotechnology firm that propagates 
cultivars (primarily banana) for export and businesses 
producing wire harnesses and high-end doors and furnishings 
made from Honduran mahogany for export, among others. 
Recently, a U.S. company manufacturing wire harnesses for 
U.S. automakers announced plans to hire 1,500 new employees. 
The company has also expanded into building high cost mail 
sorters for major U.S. buyers and has plans to expand into 
other high-value assembly operations. 
 
12.  USAID has enjoyed success with its agricultural 
diversification program run by FINTRAC, an U.S. company 
working with small farmers to diversify into profitable 
nontraditional agriculture exports (primarily vegetables). 
Through the use of improved production and processing 
technologies, FINTRAC has helped many participating small 
farmers access the U.S. agricultural market. 
 
13.  A USDA-funded hot water treatment plant for mangos 
began operating in April 2002, permitting Honduran mango 
producers for the first time to meet U.S. med-fly 
phytosanitary requirements.  USDA expects the use of the 
plant to be expanded to include papayas during the mango 
growing season.  USDA has also worked with Honduran cheese 
producers to meet U.S. sanitary restrictions and qualify to 
export ethnic cheese products to the U.S. 
 
Challenges to Diversification 
----------------------------- 
 
14.  The challenges to improvement of the investment climate 
are formidable.  The judicial system continues to be weak 
and inefficient; the courts are easily manipulated and it is 
difficult to enforce contracts.  An August 2001 law 
permitting arbitration led to the creation of Honduras\' 
first arbitration center in the Tegucigalpa Chamber of 
Commerce; however, only one case has been submitted for 
arbitration. 
 
15.  The GOH has been unable to envision a solution to 
existing land disputes and the greater problem of land 
tenancy in Honduras.  The Agrarian Reform Law, which 
resulted in the titling of land for hundreds of thousands of 
Honduras\' landless poor, has encouraged land invasions in 
some cases.  The Maduro administration is in the process of 
developing a law to consolidate Honduras\' land registries 
and modify the Agrarian Reform Law; however, it may be a 
long time before any progress is made on land issues. 
 
16.  A fragile Honduran banking system and high interest, 
short-term loans continue to stifle new investment. 
Attempts to privatize the electricity distribution system 
and telecom sectors have been met with resistance in the 
private sector and National Congress.  Meanwhile, 
electricity prices and telephone rates are among the highest 
in the region. 
17.  Recent minimum wage hikes, the implementation of double 
salary payments in June and December, high severance payment 
requirements and a government mandated increase in employer 
social security contributions have all contributed to an 
increase in the cost of doing business in Honduras. 
 
Role of USG Financing Programs 
------------------------------ 
 
18.  There is limited awareness of USG financing programs 
such as the Oversees Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), 
the Export-Import Bank and the Trade Development Agency 
(TDA).  The TDA is working with Honduras\' telecom regulatory 
agency (CONATEL) on studies to strengthen and liberalize the 
telecom sector.  We are aware of little OPIC or Ex-Im 
financing at this time.  USDA recently put on a well- 
attended seminar on its agricultural financing programs.  A 
similar seminar on opportunities for OPIC, Ex-Im Bank and 
TDA opportunities would be welcome. 
 
Pierce 
"
"3775","9/20/2002 22:28","02TEGUCIGALPA2660","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02TEGUCIGALPA2207","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002660 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/LEA/IL, WHA/PPCP, AND WHA/CEN 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCD/IOI/WH/RD/DLUTTER 
USDOC FOR 4320/IEF/WH/OMCB 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/EJAFFEE 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON AND AGAH FCOOLIDGE 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, EINV, EAIR, ELTN, PGOV, PREL, KPRV, KTDB, KPWR, HO, ENGR 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ECON HIGHLIGHTS: SEPTEMBER 2002 
 
REFS:  A) TEGUCIGALPA 2563, B) TEGUCIGALPA 2207 
 
TOPICS: 
-Finance Ministry Unveils 2003 Budget Proposal 
-Maquila Sector: New Investment 
-Remittances up by 38 Percent in 2002 
-Banking System: Two Banks Intervened, New Laws Passed 
-New Honduran Airline Commences Operations 
-InterAirports Under Attack, Although Quiet for Now 
-Administrative Simplification Law Passed 
-Prequalification Contract for Cellular Contract Underway 
-Energy Sector Update: ENEE Opens Bids for 210 MW Contract 
-Coffee Export Revenues Continue to Fall 
-Chiquita Resumes Banana Production After Strike 
-Mangos Exported to the U.S. for the First Time 
-USG Donates Equipment to Benefit Small Dairy Farmers 
 
Finance Ministry Unveils 2003 Budget Proposal 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
1.  The Ministry of Finance projects that the GDP will grow 
by 2.5 percent in 2002 (most likely overstated) and that the 
central government\'s fiscal deficit as a percent of GDP will 
be 5.9 percent.  This is higher than the GOH\'s earlier 
estimate of 5.6 percent of GDP and far higher than its 
target in its IMF program.  The government is considering 
further tax measures to increase government revenues. 
 
2.  In September, the Ministry of Finance presented the 2003 
budget proposal to the National Congress.  The central 
government\'s budget of approximately 32.7 billion lempiras 
(usd 1.97 billion) represents a 10 percent increase in 
nominal terms over the 2002 levels.  Spending on health, 
education and security account for 65 percent of the budget, 
while debt service payments (including usd 100 million for 
Paris Club debt) account for 17 percent.  With improvements 
in tax receipts, the Ministry of Finance projects the 
central government fiscal deficit could fall to four percent 
of GDP; however, local economists are skeptical. 
 
Maquila Sector: New Investment 
------------------------------ 
 
3.  The Honduran Maquila Association (AHM) reports that the 
industry is rebounding from losses incurred in 2001 and 
estimates that the value added in 2002 will total usd 660 
million, an increase of usd 60 million over 2001 and equal 
to 2000 levels.  Meanwhile, total employment in the sector 
in 2002 is projected to average 110,000, the same as 2001 
but still lower than 2000 when the sector registered 125,000 
workers. 
 
4.  Local press reported that in October South Korean 
company Woon Chun de Honduras will begin operation of an 
apparel assembly plant employing approximately 1,100 
workers.  Total new investment is estimated to be over usd 
30 million.  Meanwhile, Lear Corporation, a U.S. company 
producing wire harnesses for U.S. automakers, announced 
plans to increase investment by usd 10 million, generating 
an estimated 1,500 new jobs. 
 
Remittances up by 38 Percent in 2002 
------------------------------------ 
 
5.  Remittances from abroad (primarily the U.S.) have become 
the second largest source of national income, totaling usd 
550 million in 2001, or 8.6 percent of GDP.  The Central 
Bank announced that remittances in 2002 are increasing at a 
rate of 38 percent compared to 2001 and could total nearly 
usd 800 million by the end of the year.  According to the 
Central Bank, an estimated usd 120 million is charged 
annually by money transfer companies for transactions 
between the U.S. and Honduras.  The Central Bank has plans 
to institute a mechanism in late 2002 allowing people 
residing in the U.S. to transfer money to Honduras via 
selected corresponding banks.  The new system could reduce 
transaction costs by 60 percent. 
 
Banking System: Two Banks Intervened, New Laws Passed 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
6.  The Central Bank disbursed approximately usd 40 million 
in May to intervene two undercapitalized banks, Banco 
Capital and Banco Sogerin.  The money was given as a 
supplementary credit to Honduras\' Deposit Insurance 
Institution (Fosede) in order to guarantee 100 percent of 
deposits.  The two banks account for usd 120.7 million in 
deposits.  Since the intervention, the National Banking 
Commission reported a six percent decline in Capital and 
Sogerin deposits - much lower than the expected 15 percent. 
Attorneys representing Sogerin and Capital appealed the 
interventions to the Supreme Court. 
 
7.  In August, the National Congress approved a law 
extending the 100 percent government deposit insurance until 
September 30, 2003.  At that point deposit insurance will be 
capped at 150,000 lempiras (usd 9,000). 
 
8.  The National Congress approved a law in August 
tightening rules regulating related lending and investment 
by banks.  According to the law, the cap on loans to related 
entities will decline from the current limit of 120 percent 
of the institution\'s capital to 30 percent over a three-year 
period.  Per the law, banks are also limited from investing 
more than 20 percent of their total capital in any one 
particular outside business. 
 
New Honduran Airline Commences Operations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
9.  Sol Air, the first Honduran airline to operate in nearly 
a decade, began operations on July 12 with two daily flights 
to Miami and an opening roundtrip fare of usd 399.00.  From 
Miami, Sol Air offers service to Tegucigalpa and San Pedro 
Sula.  TACA and American have responded to the new 
competition with deeply discounted fares over the summer and 
early fall.  In November, the airline hopes to begin direct 
flights from Dallas to Roatan on Saturdays, serving 
primarily tourists interested in scuba diving and other 
island tourism.  The company also hopes to fly to New 
Orleans (and on to Costa Rica), a routing pushed heavily by 
the Mayor of the city of New Orleans during his early July 
visit.  Permits to fly to San Salvador and Managua are still 
pending. 
 
InterAirports Under Attack, Although Issue is Quiet for Now 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
10.  After a series of media attacks and complaints by 
private sector groups, Congress named a special commission 
in July to investigate InterAirports for possible breach of 
contract.  The U.S.-led Interairports consortium (51 percent 
U.S. owned) took management control of Honduras\' four 
international airports in October 2000.  Critics charge that 
the San Francisco Airport Authority is not an active, full 
partner in the consortium (participation of a major airport 
was a requirement in the public tender and subsequent 
contract) and that the company has not followed through with 
investments.  They have also been criticized for fee 
increases.  InterAirports counters that the price increases 
were enacted by the National Congress and that fees for air 
cargo are still the lowest in the region.  In addition, 
delays in contract-mandated investments, such as extending 
the runway at the Tegucigalpa airport, are the result of 
government delays and inaction.  President Maduro and other 
government officials have publicly stated that Interairports 
has complied with the terms of the contract. 
 
11.  InterAirports\' figures reveal that between October 2000 
and May 2002, the company has invested usd 24.8 million in 
the four international airports.  Interairports is planning 
to invest an additional usd 26.3 million in the airports 
over the next year.  Planned projects include building a new 
hangar in Tegucigalpa and renovating and expanding the 
terminal at the La Ceiba airport. 
 
Administrative Simplification Law Passed 
---------------------------------------- 
 
12.  In August, the National Congress approved the 
Administrative Simplification Law which reduces the 
bureaucratic hurdles in establishing a business in Honduras. 
The law, which was drafted by the Competitiveness Council, 
is part of the government\'s plan to make Honduras a more 
attractive place for foreign investment.  Some of the 
benefits of the law include simplifying procedures involved 
in establishing a new business and placing time limits on 
issuing government permits. 
 
Prequalification Process for Cellular Contract Underway 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
13.  On September 9, Honduras\' telecommunications regulatory 
agency (CONATEL) held an open pre-qualification process for 
companies planning to bid on the Honduran cellular service 
contract.  Two U.S. companies, Bell South Honduras and 
Digicel Honduras (U.S. partners with Salvadoran and Italian 
investment) participated.  Other potential contenders 
include Telmex, TelGuat, Entel Chile and Megatel (Honduran). 
Conatel will officially announce which companies qualify by 
October 8, 2002.  The final bid opening is forecast for 
sometime in January 2003.  There is currently one cellular 
service provider in Honduras, U.S. led consortium Celtel. 
(See ref a for more on the prequalification process.) 
 
Energy Sector Update: ENEE Opens Bids for 210 MW Contract 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
14.  The National Electric Company (ENEE) opened bids on 
July 26 for a 210 MW contract to begin in 2004.  AES is the 
only U.S. competitor along with five other major energy 
companies including local investors.  AES and national 
thermal energy producer Lufussa submitted the lowest bids 
(just over usd 0.05 per KWH).  AES has plans to build a usd 
650 million 750 MW liquid natural gas-fired power plant in 
Puerto Cortes. (See ref b for more on the bid.) 
 
15.  In response to environmental concerns voiced by local 
environmental groups and government authorities, local 
energy company HydroHonduras revamped plans to build a 
hydroelectric project on the Cangrejal River near La Ceiba. 
The new design reduces the planned capacity from 50 MW to 40 
MW and reduces total investment to usd 71 million.  U.S. 
energy company Alaska Power and Telephone reportedly has a 
32 percent share of the project.  The Cangrejal river forms 
the eastern boundary of Pico Bonito, Honduras\' second 
largest national park.  Proponents of tourism in the area 
are concerned that the plan to build an 11 km. diversion 
canal will effectively end white water rafting on the 
Cangrejal and thus jeopardize efforts to attract additional 
tourism to nearby La Ceiba. 
 
Coffee Export Revenues Increase Slightly 
---------------------------------------- 
 
16.  According to the Honduran Coffee Institute (Ihcafe), 
coffee export revenues for the 2001-2002 coffee harvest 
totaled approximately usd 179 million, an increase of usd 10 
million compared to the 2000-2001 harvest.  Honduras 
exported an estimated 3.5 million quintals (1 quintal = 100 
lbs.) during the 2001-2002, an increase of 300,000 quintals 
compared to the 2000-2001 season. 
 
17.  In response to the dismal international market for 
coffee, hundreds of small coffee farmers demonstrated in 
Tegucigalpa in August.  The demonstrators demanded financial 
assistance to help defray losses suffered during this year\'s 
coffee harvest.  Maduro, bowing somewhat to pressure, agreed 
to have the state banks small producers 100 lempira (about 
usd six) loans per quintal produced up to 100 quintals.  The 
15-year loans have a three-year grace period. 
 
Chiquita Resumes Banana Production After Strike 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
18.  Chiquita\'s 2,200 employees returned to work following 
the resolution of a nine-day strike during May.  Union 
leaders took issue with Chiquita\'s use of pesticide-treated 
bags to combat the cochinilla insect.  Chiquita reports that 
the cochinilla insect affects 30% of the crop.  Union 
leaders also presented a list of demands regarding job 
security, salary and medical care.  Workers returned to work 
after an international scientific commission certified that 
Chiquita\'s pesticides are safe.  Chiquita has publicly 
stated that, in light of the strike, high absenteeism and 
low productivity rates, it is considering reducing its 
presence in Honduras and selling some of its farms to 
independent producers. 
 
Mangos Exported to the U.S. for the First Time 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
19.  A USDA-built hot water treatment plant for mangos began 
operating in April, permitting Honduran mango producers for 
the first time to meet U.S. med-fly phytosanitary 
requirements.  A total of 18 containers were exported during 
April and May at a value of approximately usd 500,000. 
Reportedly 45 percent of the fruit brought to the plant for 
treatment was rejected, primarily for being undersized, 
damaged during shipment or for being too ripe.  Between 700 
and 800 hundred hectares of mango are cultivated in the 
Comayagua valley in central Honduras.  Honduras is projected 
to export approximately 30 containers of mangos in 2003 
worth nearly usd two million.  Legislation creating the 
cooperative (which will own and manage the facility) has 
been moving slowly through Congress.  The GOH is looking 
into ways to use the plant during other times of the year, 
for papaya and other fruits. 
 
USG Donates Equipment to Benefit Small Dairy Farmers 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
20.  In May, 12 dairy farmer cooperatives were given the 
titles to dairy refrigeration tanks valued at over usd 
300,000.  The tanks were donated by the USG as a result of 
cooperation between USAID and the U.S. firm Land O\'Lakes. 
USAID will provide another usd 5.5 million in technical 
assistance, training and equipment with the goal of 
modernizing Honduras\' dairy sector.  Nearly 500,000 
Hondurans rely upon the dairy sector for their livelihood. 
 
Pierce 
"
"3805","9/25/2002 15:04","02TEGUCIGALPA2701","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE183680","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002701 
 
SIPDIS 
 
BLUE LANTERN 
 
PM/DTC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR, STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC, ETTC, HO 
SUBJECT: PRE-LICENSE END USE CHECK ON APPLICATION 05-863618 
 
REF: SECSTATE 183680 
 
 1.  This cable responds to the action requested in reftel. 
 
 2.  SUMMARY:  Post has verified that the Honduran Air Force 
has contracted with ENAER (Empresa Nacional de Aeronautica) 
in Santiago, Chile to support the repair of Honduran C-130 
and F-5 aircraft for the 2002-2005 time frame.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 3.  Poloff confirmed with DAO and U.S. MilGroup officials 
that the Honduran Air Force recently entered into a $10 
million contract with ENAER of Santiago, Chile for the repair 
and maintenance of the Air Force\'s C-130, F-5 and A-37 
aircraft.  Post understands that the contract is for the time 
frame 2002-2005. 
 
 4.  According to DAO and MilGroup, the $3 million worth of 
spare parts for the routine repair and maintenance of the 
aircraft is consistent with the reported $10 million dollar 
contract with ENAER. 
 
 5.  MilGroup reports that one of the Honduran Air Force\'s 
C-130s has already been refurbished by the Chilean company, 
and that it was delivered to the Hondurans in January 2002. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3829","9/27/2002 20:13","02TEGUCIGALPA2727","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE187181","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, AND EAP/K 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS UNSURE IF IT WILL ATTEND COMMUNITY OF 
DEMOCRACIES MEETING IN KOREA DUE TO IBERO-AMERICAN SUMMIT 
 
REF: A. STATE 187181 
 
     B. STATE 177615 
 
PolOff informed MFA Director General of Foreign Policy Mario 
Fortin September 16 that Secretary Powell would be heading 
the USG delegation to the Community of Democracies 
Ministerial meeting November 10-12 in Seoul, Korea.  Fortin 
told PolOffs September 26 that Honduras was unsure if it 
would attend.  While FM Guillermo Perez-Cadalso wants to 
attend, Fortin said that the Ibero-American meetings in the 
Dominican Republic November 14-15 might make it difficult for 
the Honduran FM (and other Latin American FMs) to attend the 
Community of Democracies Ministerial meeting. 
PIERCE 
"
"3830","9/27/2002 22:56","02TEGUCIGALPA2730","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE175073|02STATE184022|02TEGUCIGALPA2525","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002730 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, S/WCI, EUR/ERA, L, PM/AT, AND PM/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2012 
TAGS: PREL, KTIA, PGOV, MOPS, HO, KICC 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS FACES SOME GRIEF OVER ICC ARTICLE 98 
AGREEMENT WITH U.S. 
 
REF: A. STATE 184022 
     B. STATE 175073 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2525 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR FRANCISCO PALMIERI; REASONS 1.5. (B) 
 AND (D). 
 
The GOH has received some negative press criticism (septel) 
and questions from the Argentine Embassy following the 
September 19 signing of an ICC Article 98 Agreement between 
the USG and the GOH on the margins of the UNGA.  DATT had 
heard indications that EU member nations were possibly going 
to demarche the GOH over the issue but according to MFA 
Director General of Foreign Policy Mario Fortin, the EU had 
not done so as of September 25.  In fact, Fortin said that in 
a meeting between the EU and Central American countries on 
the margins of UNGA EU Foreign Policy SecGen Javier Solana 
said that the EU was still studying the issue of Article 98 
agreements and did not speak out against any prospective 
Article 98 agreements between Central American countries and 
the U.S. 
PIERCE 
"
"3831","9/27/2002 23:11","02TEGUCIGALPA2731","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE175469|02TEGUCIGALPA2608","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002731 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, NEA/NGA, AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/12 
TAGS: PREL, IZ, HO, UNSC 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS WILL NOT ISSUE STATEMENT ON IRAQ 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2608 
     B. STATE 175469 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR FRANSISCO PALMIERI; REASONS 1.5 (B) 
AND (D). 
 
MFA Director General of Foreign Policy Mario Fortin told 
PolOffs September 25 that contrary to earlier indications 
from the GOH (ref A), Honduras will not issue a statement at 
this time supporting the USG position on Iraq.  Fortin said 
that the MFA believes that the USG needs to work harder on 
gaining multilateral support at the United Nations.  It 
appears that without UNSC or Rio Group consensus the MFA is 
not yet willing to issue a public GOH statement backing U.S. 
policy on Iraq. 
PIERCE 
"
"3844","9/30/2002 17:46","02TEGUCIGALPA2743","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02STATE187606","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/EPSC, WHA/CEN, WHA/BSC, AND WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KSUM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS UNDECIDED ON PROPOSED 2003 SPECIAL SUMMIT 
OF THE AMERICAS 
 
REF: STATE 187606 
 
PolCouns met September 27 with MFA Director General of 
Foreign Policy Mario Fortin to discuss the proposal for a 
2003 Special Summit of the Americas.  Fortin said that the 
GOH was not opposed to a special summit, but said that the 
Canadians had not presented enough information on the need 
for such a meeting.  Fortin said that the GOH wanted more 
details from the Canadians before making a decision.  He also 
noted that in addition to Brazil, the GOH understood that 
Argentina and Ecuador also opposed the idea of a special 
summit. 
PIERCE 
"
"3845","9/30/2002 17:59","02TEGUCIGALPA2746","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 002746 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S, D, P, WHA, EB, CA, INL, DRL, PM, AND WHA/CEN 
NSC FOR AMB MAISTO 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/2012 
TAGS: OVIP, PREL, PGOV, ETRD, PTER, SNAR, PHUM, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY POWELL\'S VISIT TO 
HONDURAS OCTOBER 10-11 
 
 
Classified By: CHARGE D\'AFFAIRES, A.I., ROGER PIERCE; REASONS 1.5 (B) A 
ND (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, only in 
office since January, faces numerous challenges in one of the 
poorest and most corrupt countries in the Western Hemisphere. 
 His Administration has been stalled on its domestic agenda 
since June as it tries to reconcile its ambitious goals to 
its straitjacketed financial situation.  Bilateral relations 
between the U.S. and Honduras are excellent; Honduras was the 
first country in Central America (and the second in Latin 
America) to sign an ICC Article 98 Agreement with the U.S. 
and its support for the international counterterrorism effort 
is steadfast.  The United States and Honduras have maintained 
a longstanding close relationship framed by such events as 
the establishment of the banana plantations in the late 
1800s, the Contra wars of the 1980s, and reconstruction 
efforts in the wake of the October 1998 fury of Hurricane 
Mitch.  End Summary. 
 
Key Issues in Bilateral Relationship 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) The central themes in our bilateral diplomatic 
efforts in Honduras are combating international crime by 
strengthening governance and attacking corruption, assisting 
American citizens, fostering economic development, promoting 
regional stability, promoting trade and investment, and 
combating terrorism.  However, the underlying difficulty to 
realizing USG objectives is improving the administration of 
justice and rule of law.  President Ricardo Maduro,s 
government is fully engaged on all of these issues, supports 
judicial and political reform, and is seeking to transform 
Honduras so that law and order can be restored and economic 
growth ignited.  He faces formidable challenges from 
entrenched economic and political interests in moving his 
agenda forward. 
 
Status of the Maduro Government 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) President Maduro is facing increasing criticism from 
the political opposition over his government,s policies and 
continued dissatisfaction from his own party,s Members of 
Congress because of his Administration,s technocratic style. 
 The Honduran Congress is a focal point of political 
opposition to his policies.  It is a corrupt institution 
riddled with avaricious politicians, and Maduro\'s National 
Party does not control a majority of the unicameral body. 
The ongoing problems within his own party are serious and 
threaten his broader political agenda, which will require 
legislation to advance.  Continuing political negotiations 
will be needed to manage this situation.  Maduro,s personal 
life is also intruding into the political sphere.  His 
imminent wedding to a Spaniard has been criticized by many 
Hondurans who view the President as distracted by his 
personal life. 
 
4. (SBU) Your meeting with President Maduro is well-timed to 
give his Presidency a needed lift.  The President,s standing 
has remained stalled at a low point since June.  Faced with 
slow progress in his efforts to promote regional economic 
integration, Maduro,s team is pinning its hopes that a 
U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) can serve 
as a catalyst to regional economic cooperation.  Maduro is 
also beginning to hear wider disillusionment among the 
Honduran public as violent crime levels are increasing once 
again despite his successful initial \"zero tolerance\" law and 
order campaign.  Notwithstanding his crackdown on street 
crime, actual ongoing criminal investigations, in particular 
homicides, remain stalled. 
 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Maduro is a good and reliable friend of the U.S. on 
counterterrorism.  His government hosted a major U.S. 
military counterterrorism exercise in March and has quickly 
responded with freeze orders to all U.S. requests regarding 
suspect terrorist bank accounts.  No terrorist assets have 
been found in Honduran financial institutions, to date.  The 
GOH still needs to take the following concrete steps: 
designate a national coordinator for counterterrorism, file 
its national report in accordance with United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 1373, and most of all, 
sign and/or ratify the seven outstanding international 
conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions (1971 and 2002) 
against terrorism. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
 
6. (C) While the GOH is in general supportive of key USG 
foreign policy goals, the Ministry of Foreign Relations 
appears hesitant to be out front supporting the USG position 
on Iraq.  MFA officials have privately voiced concern that 
they believe that the USG needs to work harder on gaining 
multilateral support at the United Nations.  Without UNSC or 
Rio Group consensus the GOH is not yet willing to make a 
public statement backing U.S. policy on Iraq.  However the 
U.S. should be able to count on Honduras\' support when a 
final decision is taken. 
 
Anti-corruption 
--------------- 
 
7. (SBU) The new U.S. policy against corruption struck a 
nerve in Honduras, especially any mention of our new visa 
revocation authorities.  Politicians in Congress and certain 
business elements feel the U.S. is attacking them.  Maduro is 
committed to addressing corruption, even if it will cost him 
political support within his party.  The Supreme Court 
President is also on board.  Given the scope of the problem, 
any public discussion about the country,s pervasive 
corruption is a positive development. 
 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) The Supreme Court is developing into an independent 
branch of power, unlike all of its predecessor courts since 
democracy was restored in 1982.  It is pro-reform in 
orientation and fighting for its prerogatives.  In some 
respects, the development of the court in Honduras, restored 
democracy is approaching its \"Marbury v. Madison\" moment. 
The emerging issue is whether it can become a fully 
independent and co-equal branch of political power, 
consistent with the separation of powers provision in the 
Honduran Constitution.  The established political order is 
fighting that prospect with all its might.  In fact, the 
Congress recently seized the political opportunity to 
introduce legislation that would give itself the power to 
interpret the constitutionality of the laws its passes. 
 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27 President Maduro,s 
first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise - a zero 
tolerance campaign against the country,s out-of-control 
crime situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 soldiers to the 
streets to support the police.  The public responded 
enthusiastically.  However, despite the initial success of 
establishing a visible police presence, violent crime, 
particularly kidnappings, has only fallen marginally.  Public 
support is fading and the campaign needs some visible 
victories to restore confidence in the government,s program. 
 We are helping the Maduro government establish an 
anti-kidnapping unit, increase intake/training of police 
recruits, create a model tourist police force, boost its 
counternarcotics efforts, and expand the frontier police. 
The country\'s geographic position makes it an obvious 
strategic transit point for narcotics trafficking, alien 
smuggling operations and other organized crime activities. 
 
10. (SBU) Extradjudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults between 1998-2001, have been a source 
of serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to 
take steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases. 
There has been some discussion of the establishment of a 
Truth Commission to look into unresolved alleged human rights 
abuses from the 1980s.  There are serious problems with child 
labor in several industries, particularly melon, coffee, and 
shrimp (but not the maquila) sectors, and trafficking in 
persons of women/children for prostitution in the U.S. and 
children for commercial sexual exploitation in Central 
America.  USAID and Peace Corps have both been involved in 
HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Some 500,000 Hondurans, both legal and illegal, 
live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration issues high 
on the bilateral agenda.  There is deep appreciation for the 
Administration\'s extension of Temporary Protected Status 
(TPS) in the U.S. and interest in possible congressional 
action on the pending Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central 
American Relief Act (NACARA), which would give immigration 
parity for Hondurans.  With fourteen thousand American 
citizens residing in Honduras and many thousands visiting 
Honduras annually for tourism and business American Citizen 
Services are a key part of the Embassy\'s work.  There is 
little progress in any of the now more than 30 American 
citizen murder cases.  In the last year the GOH has increased 
cooperation with the Embassy on these cases, including 
establishing two prosecutors.  However, little progress has 
been made on extradition cases involving American Citizens 
wanted for felonies in the U.S. 
 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
12. (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three Central 
American land neighbors and its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  Its land and maritime 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast is a particularly 
difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
ruling laid out shared areas of control in the Gulf of 
Fonseca and established the land border between Honduras and 
El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow to implement 
the ruling.  In September of this year El Salvador raised 
issues related to the 1992 ruling to the ICJ for 
clarification. 
 
13. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.   Honduras provoked Nicaraguan retaliation when it 
signed a maritime treaty with Colombia recognizing the 15th 
parallel as its maritime border in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an 
ICJ case over the maritime border and more importantly in 
1999 slapped a punitive 35 per cent tariff on Honduran goods 
that remains in place despite a Central American Court of 
Justice ruling that it is illegal.  With former Nicaraguan 
President Arnoldo Aleman deposed as President of the National 
Assembly, GOH officials have expressed renewed optimism that 
Nicaraguan President Enrique Bolanos will make good on 
private assurances to lift the tariff and thereby take an 
important step forward toward regional economic integration. 
You may wish to compliment Maduro on the GOH,s restraint and 
note that the regional integration benefits of a CAFTA with 
the U.S. (as well as other integration efforts) will be 
undermined by a trade war. 
 
Troubled Economy Endangers IMF Program and HIPC Debt Relief 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
14. (SBU) President Maduro may ask you for assistance in 
convincing Paris Club creditors to be patient, IMF officials 
to be lenient, and donors to agree to changes in the Highly 
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) rules on accounting for 
poverty reduction programs.  President Maduro inherited a 
stagnating economy and seriously deteriorated government 
finances from the previous government.  The GOH missed all 
key International Monetary Fund (IMF) targets in 2001.  Even 
after the Maduro economic team won passage of austerity and 
tax measures in May of this year, the government,s budget 
deficit is still expected to be a high 5.9 percent of GDP. 
The IMF is skeptical that the GOH will undertake the 
meaningful and long overdue reforms needed to work out a new 
three-year program.  An IMF team arrives in October. 
 
15. (SBU) International Financial Institution (IFI) and 
bilateral donor disbursements will be held up until the new 
IMF program is in place.  There could also be pressure on GOH 
Paris Club debt service payments (USD 100 million per year). 
In the meantime, the completion point for HIPC debt reduction 
(worth USD 900 million) continues to slip back further. 
Ultimately, this fiscal situation could impact Honduras, 
eligibility for Millennium Fund grants. 
 
16. (SBU) The Honduran economy is growing slowly (estimated 
real GDP growth of 1.8 percent this year).  Low world coffee 
prices continue to hurt the economy in rural areas. 
Inflation continues to decrease slowly, estimated at 8-9 
percent in 2002.  The currency is depreciating at a rate of 
about five percent per year.  The economy is dominated by 
agriculture - particularly the production of coffee, bananas 
and cultivated shrimp - although the in-bond apparel assembly 
industry has grown dramatically over the past decade and 
remittances, from Hondurans living overseas, continues to 
grow rapidly (up 38 percent in the first six months of this 
year) and have become the most important source of foreign 
exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras\' largest trading partner; 
roughly 150 U.S. companies do business here.  While many 
social indicators are improving, two-thirds of all Hondurans 
live in poverty and average educational levels are very low. 
 
17. (SBU) Maduro will probably express gratitude for a 
Treasury Department technical assistance project on tax 
collection and enforcement, partially supported by USAID. 
While modest in scope, the GOH is excited about its potential 
to strengthen its tax service and help deter tax evasion. 
 
U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) Critical 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
18. (SBU) Maduro has personally identified himself with a 
CAFTA as his government\'s principal trade objective.  The 
Minister of Industry and Trade is reorganizing the Ministry 
(historically fairly weak) and adding staff in a belated 
effort to get ready for the negotiations.  The Maduro 
administration has also been more cooperative with the U.S. 
in the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Geneva.  Honduras 
(along with other Central American countries) has been 
supportive in the FTAA ministerials but to date has not taken 
an active role in the negotiating groups. 
 
19. (SBU) Latent protectionism exists in the private sector, 
but the general attitude toward a free trade agreement in 
Honduras is positive.  The textile and apparel industry in 
particular believes an FTA is the only way that the Honduran 
apparel sector can survive the elimination of quotas in 2005 
and compete with Asian manufacturers. 
 
U.S. Investment Faces Problems 
------------------------------ 
 
20. (SBU) The Maduro government understands that Honduras 
needs foreign (and domestic) investment to spur economic 
growth but has placed emphasis on the more immediate problems 
of political and judicial reforms, the fiscal deficit, and 
needed improvements in security, education and health. 
Maduro will tout a new law on simplification of 
administrative procedures and formation of a national 
competitiveness council, headed by Vice President Vicente 
Williams, to enhance the investment climate at all levels of 
society.  The government has identified tourism, 
agrobusiness, forestry, and mining as important sectors that 
could create much-needed jobs. 
 
21. (SBU) Much more needs to be done to declare Honduras 
\"open for business.\"  Maduro needs to find a way to get his 
cabinet (and the prickly legislative and executive branches) 
to make meaningful changes that will resolve the key 
problems: poor and expensive infrastructure; weak legal 
system; personal security, education and health conditions; 
land tenure problems; and opposition to large foreign 
investments by well-connected vested interests. 
 
22. (SBU) The Honduran government has stalled in its past 
efforts to liberalize and privatize the electricity and 
telecommunications markets.  We are closely following the 
pending tender by the National Electric Energy Company (ENEE) 
to purchase 210 mega-watts of electricity starting 2004.  If 
U.S. company AES is successful in this bid and its efforts to 
build a combined cycle plant in Puerto Cortes, we expect a 
big spur to regional integration and investment in light 
manufacturing and assembly in Honduras.  The GOH,s telecom 
regulatory agency is also bidding out a second cellular phone 
license this year; two U.S. companies have applied during the 
pre-qualification stage.  The GOH has requested USG policy 
support for liberalization of the telecom (through the Trade 
and Development Agency) and power (through USAID) sectors. 
However, in order to make these long overdue structural 
reforms a reality, the Maduro government must follow through 
on its commitments. 
 
23. (SBU) Land tenure problems (combined with a weak judicial 
system) are endemic in Honduras, and undermine efforts to 
develop the tourism, agriculture and forestry sectors.  They 
also deter new investments in a variety of other sectors. 
The Embassy has files on 112 property dispute cases 
(generally squatter/land reform cases and title disputes), of 
which 32 are active.  There are an additional 68 commercial 
disputes, of which 14 are currently active.  The GOH plans to 
introduce a law allowing some of the land cases to be 
submitted to arbitration and is working on an improved 
property registry system. 
 
24. (SBU) These will be important steps, but much more is 
needed.  The GOH and Supreme Court need to ensure that the 
judicial system provides effective responses to commercial 
and investment disputes and violations of property rights. 
 
Money Laundering and Bank Failures 
---------------------------------- 
 
25. (SBU) Strengthened money laundering legislation, with an 
antiterrorist financing clause, was the first law to be 
adopted by the new Congress in late February of this year. 
The fragility of the financial system remains a key concern. 
The GOH took over the two most troubled banks in May 2002, 
arranged for the absorption of a third undercapitalized bank 
and is actively promoting mergers among the remaining 20 
private banks.  Although the Maduro government has managed 
the financial sector issue well, massive challenges remain. 
A World Bank/IMF review of the financial sector is underway. 
 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
26. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  Our Peace Corps program, with more than 220 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY02 budget of USD 34.5 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula.  Five-hundred and fifty 
U.S. service men and women are stationed at Honduras\' Soto 
Cano Airbase under the auspices of U.S. Southern Command as 
Joint Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment, and will enable our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster recovery, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
PIERCE 
"
"3846","9/30/2002 21:35","02TEGUCIGALPA2753","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY) 
INFO IIP 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, Ios, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: RAUL MORENO, SALVADORAN ECONOMIST, 
CRITICIZES THE IDEA OF A CA FREE TRADE AREA BEFORE HONDURUAN 
CONGRESS; REPORTING ON TWO ECONOMIC CONFERENCES 
 
 
1. September 28, \"El Heraldo,\" a moderate Tegucigalpa-based 
daily, carried a full-page article on the presentation of a 
Salvadoran Economics expert to the Honduran national 
Congress. The President of the Honduran National Congress, 
Porfirio Lobo, had invited him to talk about the \"Social 
Impact of a Free Trade Agreement in Central America.  Other 
papers also reported on the speech. 
 
  Media Coverage on Free Trade Agreement 
 
  1.   On Saturday September 28, \"El Heraldo\" and \"La Tribuna\" 
     (Liberal party periodical) ran articles focusing on the Free 
     Trade Agreement and the presentation of the Salvadoran 
     economist to the Congress. 
 
     El Heraldo, \"Free Trade Agreements will be the kiss of 
     death for Central American Integration\" - The Central 
     American Free Trade Agreements with Mexico and the 
     United States do not guarantee sustainable development, 
     but rather guarantee an increase in poverty and 
     disparity of incomes and the loss of competitiveness of 
     the small states. 
 
     \"These agreements are not just commercial, they upset 
     the social relationship inherent in production and the 
     circulation and distribution of income; furthermore 
     they harm the political and legal systems, the 
     environment and labor relations within the country. 
     these are not Free Trade Agreements but agreements for 
     free investment.\" 
 
     \"FTA will stop the integration process because its aim 
     is to establish bilateral free trade..FTA is flawed due 
     to the absence of a social agenda.\" 
 
     MEDIA COVERAGE-- September 24-27 
 
  2.   September 26, \"El Tiempo\"- San Pedro Sula-based Liberal 
     paper owned by Businessman and Congressional Deputy 
     Rosenthal, reported on an AmCham-Honduras, SICA (Secretaria 
     de Integracin Centroamerica) and USAID-hosted conference on 
     FTA and its impact on regional integration and the economy, 
     saying \"the biggest obstacle to negotiations on fta is 
     reaching a consensus on Central American integration.\" 
 
  3.   September 27, \"El Tiempo\" ran an article called \"Free 
     Trade Agreement could break Honduran small businesses\" in 
     reporting on an economic conference hosted by the Honduran 
     Foundation for Development (FUNHDE) at the Central American 
     Bank of Economic Integration, which discussed the economic 
     and social sector implications of the FTA. According to the 
     President of FUNDHE, \"at least 15,000 micro and small 
     businesses will disappear if they do not receive support to 
     handle the challenges that the free trade agreements will 
     present.\" 
 
  4.   September 28, La Tribuna reported on a speech by a 
     deputy from the Democratic Unification Party to a group of 
     students.  \"The ftaa will promote investments and the 
     circulation of northamerican capital, but will not encourage 
     symmetry between the economy of latin america and the 
     Caribbean and that of the us. 
 
Pierce. 
"
"3856","10/1/2002 14:40","02TEGUCIGALPA2759","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE171121","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR OES/OA, L/OES, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/01/2012 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS GIVEN NONPAPER ON STRAIGHT BASELINE 
CLAIM; NO IMMEDIATE OFFICIAL REACTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 171121 
 
     B. OLSEN/MAKENS/SMITH E-MAIL 9/27 AND 9/30 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR FRANCISCO PALMIERI; REASONS 1.5 (B) 
AND (D). 
 
1. (U) PolOffs delivered ref A nonpaper on the Honduran 
straight baseline claim to MFA Director General of Foreign 
Policy Mario Fortin September 25.  There was no immediate 
official reaction from the MFA. 
 
2. (C) Informally, Fortin was not surprised to receive these 
U.S. views.  He almost, but not quite, sheepishly 
acknowledged the expansive nature of the Honduran claim.  He 
said that he would pass the nonpaper on to the maritime 
borders unit of the MFA.  He queried  whether or not the two 
sides would meet again in Washington or Tegucigalpa to 
discuss the issue. 
PIERCE 
"
"3857","10/1/2002 14:43","02TEGUCIGALPA2760","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE179250","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002760 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR S/CT, DS, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/01/2012 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, ASEC, SNAR, KCRM, KVPR, HO 
SUBJECT: FOREIGN TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS - POST HAS NONE TO 
RECOMMEND FOR INCLUSION IN FTO LIST 
 
REF: STATE 179250 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger Pierce. 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Upon receipt of reftel Post reviewed the legal 
criteria for designation and determined that Post does not 
have any additional foreign terrorist organizations (FTO) to 
recommend for inclusion in the list of FTOs. 
 
2. (C) Post notes that both the FARC and to a lesser extent 
the AUC have been active in Honduras attempting to exchange 
cocaine for weapons.  GOH authorities recently arrested a 
Colombian citizen named Ethalson Mejia Hoy who entered 
Honduras using a false identity carrying a small amount of 
marijuana.  He is allegedly a member of the FARC seeking to 
arrange a drugs for guns transaction. 
PIERCE 
"
"3906","10/7/2002 23:02","02TEGUCIGALPA2814","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002814 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: TRADE MINISTER RESIGNS 
 
1.  (SBU) Minister of Industry and Trade Juliet Handal 
resigned on Friday, October 5.  In announcing her 
resignation, Handal mentioned that she was interested in 
devoting more time to her family and pursuing her business 
interests.  She also pledged support for President Maduro as 
a private business person.  Press reports indicate that she 
resigned after learning that the GOH planned to form a 
special team outside of the Ministry to negotiate the 
USCAFTA.  The press also spoke of differences between the 
Ministry and coffee growers and millers over price controls, 
but Handal did not confirm that these confrontations 
affected her decision.  The GOH plans to name her 
replacement sometime this week. 
 
2.  (SBU) Embassy had heard rumors during the past two to 
three weeks from two sources that the GOH had planned to 
appoint Ramon Medina Luna, current Minister for Strategic 
Issues and Communication and former Minister of the Economy, 
to be a special trade negotiator.  It is possible that the 
GOH will ask Medina to take over the Ministry instead. 
Another possible replacement for the trade minister, or 
alternatively possible chief of a USCAFTA negotiating team, 
is Norman Garcia, current director of the export promotion 
NGO called FIDE. 
 
3.  (SBU) A third possibility, although Embassy contacts 
have not mentioned his name recently, is Oscar Nunez, a 
director at the Central Bank.  Nunez headed Honduras\' 
negotiating team for the GATT accession in the early 1990\'s. 
 
4.  (SBU) Comment.  Minister Handal never had the support of 
the President\'s closest advisors, who viewed her as 
inexperienced and at times a loose cannon.  Handal and her 
Vice Minister for Foreign Trade, Irving Guerrero, did not 
have backgrounds in trade policy but improved markedly in 
their understanding and management of trade issues since 
they entered office in late January.  With limited funds, 
they had restructured the Ministry and were beginning to 
form and train a team of negotiators, with some help from 
our USAID G-CAP program and USAID\'s bilateral PEP program, 
in preparation for USCAFTA negotiations.  The Embassy was 
heartened to see during Handal\'s time at the Ministry, more 
operational control of the Honduran Mission to the WTO in 
Geneva and more cooperation from the GOH on key WTO issues. 
End comment. 
 
Pierce 
"
"3907","10/7/2002 23:02","02TEGUCIGALPA2815","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE153075|02STATE170144","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002815 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR TERRORIST FINANCING TASK FORCE 
FOR EB/ESC/ESP 
FOR S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC, EFIN, PTER, PREL, KVPR, CVIS, KSEP, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTI-TERRORIST FINANCING: FINANCIAL SYSTEM REVIEW 
OF LISTS 15 AND 18 
 
REF: (A) STATE 153075, (B) STATE 170144 
 
In letters dated September 4, 2002 and September 16, 2002, 
the National Banking and Insurance Commission informed the 
Embassy that Honduran financial institutions were ordered to 
block any accounts, if found, matching the names on lists 
fifteen and eighteen under Executive Order 13224 of 
individuals and entities associated with terrorism.  The 
Commission is responsible for ordering financial 
institutions to check for suspect accounts and issuing 
freeze orders. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"3924","10/8/2002 15:54","02TEGUCIGALPA2819","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002819 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY) 
INFO IIP 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, Ios, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: HONDURAS WILL SUPPORT THE INVASION 
TO IRAQ 
 
  1.   October 5, \"El Heraldo\" a moderate Tegucigalpa-based 
      daily, reported on remarks by the Minister of Foreign 
      Affairs, Guillermo Perez Cadalzo, regarding Honduran support 
      for a U.S. invasion of Iraq. 
 
      \"If the United States gets United Nations support, 
      Honduras will respect and support a decision to 
      invade Iraq. At the present time, the United States 
      is trying to convince its principal allies in the 
      Security Council of the need of an invasion but it 
      has not yet gotten the necessary support. 
 
      \"This matter is being debated in the Security Council 
      and whatever decision is made there, we will support 
      totally\". 
 
 
Pierce. 
"
"3935","10/9/2002 20:11","02TEGUCIGALPA2829","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA1756","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002829 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/OIA, INR/B, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, WHA/EX 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID FOR LAC/AA, USTR, EXIM, OPIC, 
USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, EAID, EAGR, PGOV, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT: NEW LAND CASE IN ROATAN GOOD TEST FOR GOH RESOLVE 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 01756 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. American citizens Jean and Roger Moore 
were suddenly and forcefully evicted from their Roatan home 
in August of this year when the Melvyn McNab family 
presented (and local judicial officials accepted) 
unsubstantiated arguments that they had claim to this land. 
A recently done cadastral survey by the GOH indicates that 
the McNab claims are not true.  President Maduro, Supreme 
Court President Vilma Morales, land registry officials and 
local government representatives in the islands are all 
aware of this case.  The Supreme Court has brought the case 
to Tegucigalpa to investigate for irregularities.  The 
Embassy believes the dispute represents an important test of 
the GOH\'s professed interest in improving legal protections 
for investors and positioning the Bay Islands for increased 
investment and tourism.   End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) The Moores, and several other Americans, purchased 
their beachfront lots in Paya Bay on the island of Roatan 
from Amcit Eric Anderson in 1994; the property that he 
subdivided is known in the land registry as plat number 
306002.  He had full title to the land.  Anderson also has 
an adjacent property, Plat 306001; it is this adjacent 
property, purchased in the 1960s in the name of another 
Honduran islander (at that time expats were not allowed to 
own land near the coast) that has been the source of a 
property dispute with Melvyn McNab since 1996.  This year, 
however, McNab has expanded the dispute by providing to the 
courts a redrawn map that changes the shape and location of 
the disputed property (306001) to include the lots Anderson 
sold to the Moores, Meyers and other Amcits.  The official 
cadastral survey of the islands, just completed this summer, 
clearly shows that the Moores\' land is located in plat 
number 306002. 
 
3. (SBU) On August 28th of this year, Jean Moore sent a fax 
to the Embassy describing their forceful eviction on August 
22nd from their home on the island of Roatan, Honduras. 
According to the Moores, on August 9th, they received a 
phone call from their caretaker who had been physically 
removed in handcuffs from the house.  Judge Casco took 
possession of all house keys from the caretaker.  The McNab 
family then placed guards around the Moore\'s house and 
property.  The Moore\'s arrived on Roatan on the 17th and 
were denied access to their house.  Their attorney filed a 
petition for an appeal for relief under the Honduran 
Constitution, an amparo, to stop the eviction act.  The 
petition was denied.  In the following days the Moores and 
their attorneys tried to demonstrate their clear title over 
the land and convince the judge to overturn his ruling, 
without success.  On the 22nd, the Moores were told to 
follow the police to their property.  The McNab family, 
several police officers, including the Chief of Police, and 
the McNab\'s attorney were all present as the Moores were 
forced to remove all their personal belongings from their 
property in a 2 hour time period.  They were not allowed to 
lock the house and had to leave several items behind.  The 
Moores report that there is already a family of six living 
in the Moore house and some of their property has been 
damaged. 
 
4. (SBU) Econoffs put the Moores in touch with Octavio 
Sanchez, a legal advisor to the President, and Henry 
Merriam, coordinator of a GOH program to complete cadastral 
surveys and unify the land registries throughout Honduras. 
They arranged to have a copy of the official survey of this 
part of Roatan prepared.  The catastral survey appears to 
fully support the American citizens\' assertion that the 
Honduran party has no legal grounds for their claim to the 
Moore\'s property. 
 
5. (SBU) On September 11th the Embassy sent a letter signed 
by the Charg d\'Affaires, Roger Pierce, to President Maduro 
and Honduran Supreme Court (CSJ) President, Vilma Morales 
with copies to Investment Minister, Camilo Atala, Tourism 
Minister, Thierre Pierrefeu, and Cesar Batres, Godofredo 
Alvarado and Octavio Sanchez, legal advisors to President 
Maduro, stating the Embassy\'s concern about this case and 
the apparent disregard of investor rights.  Econoffs visited 
Roatan on September 26-29 to emphasize the importance of 
fair treatment of Amcit investors in general, and quick 
resolution of the Moore dispute in particular, in 
conversations with the Governor, municipal authorities, 
judicial authorities and the local land registry 
representative.  We also met with the director of the IDB- 
funded Tourism Ministry project that performed the usd 1.5 
million cadastral survey and urged rapid integration of the 
cadastral results with the existing land registry. 
 
6. (SBU) Partially as a result of Embassy advocacy, the 
Moore case has received rare high-level attention in the 
GOH.  We are aware that President Maduro, CSJ President 
Morales and the Minister of Interior (Gobernacion y 
Justicia) have discussed the case.  Supreme Court President 
Morales instructed the court in La Ceiba to send the case to 
the Tegucigalpa courts to be reviewed for judicial 
irregularities.  CSJ President Morales told econoff on 
October 2 that the review will occur quickly and that she 
will notify the Embassy of the results of the review. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Background on the Legal Issues in the Dispute 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Background: In the 1960\'s, Roy Anderson bought a 
15-acre parcel of land in Wilkes Point, plat number 306001. 
At that time, U.S. citizens weren\'t allowed to purchase land 
so Mr. Anderson bought the property from the McLaughlin 
family using a Honduran woman named Merly Cooper and 
registered it under their company name, Calico S.A. 
 
8. (SBU) In 1974, Roy Anderson purchased a second parcel of 
land totaling 17 acres directly from the McLaughlin family, 
as the law now allowed foreigners to own coastal land under 
certain conditions (small private investor, tourism, etc.) 
This second parcel is adjacent to the first, and is located 
in Wilkes Point West - with plat number 306002.  In 1994, 
Roger and Jean Moore purchased two lots from Erik Anderson 
(Roy Anderson\'s son) on parcel 306002. 
 
9. (SBU) Mervin and Lurlene Cooper de McNab own land 
adjacent to Wilkes Point West called Paya Bay.  Lurlene 
McNab\'s maiden name is Cooper.  The McNab\'s are claiming 
that Lurlene is the sole heiress to the deceased Merle 
Cooper\'s land, however Merle Cooper never married and had no 
children, therefore has no heirs.  The inheritance battle is 
over parcel 306001 (the 15 acres purchased through Merle 
Cooper.)  The Moore property is on parcel 306002.  However, 
Mervin McNab pulled up all the fence lines and survey 
markers between the two properties that runs North to South 
and re-drew the map to show that the 15 acres runs East to 
West along the coast cutting through both parcels (map faxed 
to desk).  The official Government survey that was recently 
completed using GPS, satellite tracking, and topographical 
surveys clearly shows the delineation of the two parcels, 
with no depiction of the McNab redrawn parcel. 
 
10. (SBU) We understand from judicial authorities that under 
Honduran law the Moores\' property should not have been 
subject to the confiscation because they are not a party to 
the underlying dispute.  And, in fact, when the Moores first 
appealed to the judge to rescind the eviction order, the 
judge agreed, noting the Moores\' name did not appear on the 
court documents.  Rather Erik Anderson was the defendant for 
a 15-acre parcel in Wilkes Point.  However, when the Moores 
went to the police station to pick up their keys, the judge 
had changed his decision, and the eviction order was 
enforced.  The Moores believe the McNab\'s attorney, through 
her political connections, was responsible for the change in 
the judge\'s decision. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (SBU) We consider this an important test case for the 
GOH\'s resolve to attack the endemic problems of land title 
and abuse of the judicial system.  The Bay Islands have a 
history of problems of this type, but the new cadastral 
survey and the proposed land registry project together 
provide the government and court system with an important 
set of tools.  We are hoping that the political will exists 
to ensure that a rapid and just resolution for the Moores\' 
case (and the other Amcits who purchased property from Eric 
Anderson) can be found.  End Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"3936","10/9/2002 22:43","02TEGUCIGALPA2833","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002833 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/OIA, INR/B, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, WHA/EX 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID FOR LAC/AA, USTR, EXIM, OPIC, 
USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, EAID, EAGR, PGOV, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY - NEW LAND CASE IN ROATAN GOOD TEST 
FOR GOH RESOLVE 
 
REF: (a) Tegucigalpa 01756, (b) Tegucigalpa 02829 
 
This is a correction to Ref (b), corrected plat numbers. 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. American citizens Jean and Roger Moore 
were suddenly and forcefully evicted from their Roatan home 
in August of this year when the Melvyn McNab family 
presented (and local judicial officials accepted) 
unsubstantiated arguments that they had claim to this land. 
A recently done cadastral survey by the GOH indicates that 
the McNab claims are not true.  President Maduro, Supreme 
Court President Vilma Morales, land registry officials and 
local government representatives in the islands are all 
aware of this case.  The Supreme Court has brought the case 
to Tegucigalpa to investigate for irregularities.  The 
Embassy believes the dispute represents an important test of 
the GOH\'s professed interest in improving legal protections 
for investors and positioning the Bay Islands for increased 
investment and tourism.   End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) The Moores, and several other Americans, purchased 
their beachfront lots in Paya Bay on the island of Roatan 
from Amcit Eric Anderson in 1994; the property that he 
subdivided is known in the land registry as plat number 
306001.  He had full title to the land.  Anderson also has 
an adjacent property, Plat 306002; it is this adjacent 
property, purchased in the 1960s in the name of another 
Honduran islander (at that time expats were not allowed to 
own land near the coast) that has been the source of a 
property dispute with Melvyn McNab since 1996.  This year, 
however, McNab has expanded the dispute by providing to the 
courts a redrawn map that changes the shape and location of 
the disputed property (306002) to include the lots Anderson 
sold to the Moores, Meyers and other Amcits.  The official 
cadastral survey of the islands, just completed this summer, 
clearly shows that the Moores\' land is located in plat 
number 306001. 
 
3. (SBU) On August 28th of this year, Jean Moore sent a fax 
to the Embassy describing their forceful eviction on August 
22nd from their home on the island of Roatan, Honduras. 
According to the Moores, on August 9th, they received a 
phone call from their caretaker who had been physically 
removed in handcuffs from the house.  Judge Casco took 
possession of all house keys from the caretaker.  The McNab 
family then placed guards around the Moore\'s house and 
property.  The Moore\'s arrived on Roatan on the 17th and 
were denied access to their house.  Their attorney filed a 
petition for an appeal for relief under the Honduran 
Constitution, an amparo, to stop the eviction act.  The 
petition was denied.  In the following days the Moores and 
their attorneys tried to demonstrate their clear title over 
the land and convince the judge to overturn his ruling, 
without success.  On the 22nd, the Moores were told to 
follow the police to their property.  The McNab family, 
several police officers, including the Chief of Police, and 
the McNab\'s attorney were all present as the Moores were 
forced to remove all their personal belongings from their 
property in a 2 hour time period.  They were not allowed to 
lock the house and had to leave several items behind.  The 
Moores report that there is already a family of six living 
in the Moore house and some of their property has been 
damaged. 
 
4. (SBU) Econoffs put the Moores in touch with Octavio 
Sanchez, a legal advisor to the President, and Henry 
Merriam, coordinator of a GOH program to complete cadastral 
surveys and unify the land registries throughout Honduras. 
They arranged to have a copy of the official survey of this 
part of Roatan prepared.  The catastral survey appears to 
fully support the American citizens\' assertion that the 
Honduran party has no legal grounds for their claim to the 
Moore\'s property. 
 
5. (SBU) On September 11th the Embassy sent a letter signed 
by the Charg d\'Affaires, Roger Pierce, to President Maduro 
and Honduran Supreme Court (CSJ) President, Vilma Morales 
with copies to Investment Minister, Camilo Atala, Tourism 
Minister, Thierre Pierrefeu, and Cesar Batres, Godofredo 
Alvarado and Octavio Sanchez, legal advisors to President 
Maduro, stating the Embassy\'s concern about this case and 
the apparent disregard of investor rights.  Econoffs visited 
Roatan on September 26-29 to emphasize the importance of 
fair treatment of Amcit investors in general, and quick 
resolution of the Moore dispute in particular, in 
conversations with the Governor, municipal authorities, 
judicial authorities and the local land registry 
representative.  We also met with the director of the IDB- 
funded Tourism Ministry project that performed the usd 1.5 
million cadastral survey and urged rapid integration of the 
cadastral results with the existing land registry. 
 
6. (SBU) Partially as a result of Embassy advocacy, the 
Moore case has received rare high-level attention in the 
GOH.  We are aware that President Maduro, CSJ President 
Morales and the Minister of Interior (Gobernacion y 
Justicia) have discussed the case.  Supreme Court President 
Morales instructed the court in La Ceiba to send the case to 
the Tegucigalpa courts to be reviewed for judicial 
irregularities.  CSJ President Morales told econoff on 
October 2 that the review will occur quickly and that she 
will notify the Embassy of the results of the review. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Background on the Legal Issues in the Dispute 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Background: In the 1960\'s, Roy Anderson bought a 
15-acre parcel of land in Wilkes Point, plat number 306002. 
At that time, U.S. citizens weren\'t allowed to purchase land 
so Mr. Anderson bought the property from the McLaughlin 
family using a Honduran woman named Merly Cooper and 
registered it under their company name, Calico S.A. 
 
8. (SBU) In 1974, Roy Anderson purchased a second parcel of 
land totaling 17 acres directly from the McLaughlin family, 
as the law now allowed foreigners to own coastal land under 
certain conditions (small private investor, tourism, etc.) 
This second parcel is adjacent to the first, and is located 
in Wilkes Point West - with plat number 306001.  In 1994, 
Roger and Jean Moore purchased two lots from Erik Anderson 
(Roy Anderson\'s son) on parcel 306001. 
 
9. (SBU) Mervin and Lurlene Cooper de McNab own land 
adjacent to Wilkes Point West called Paya Bay.  Lurlene 
McNab\'s maiden name is Cooper.  The McNab\'s are claiming 
that Lurlene is the sole heiress to the deceased Merle 
Cooper\'s land, however Merle Cooper never married and had no 
children, therefore has no heirs.  The inheritance battle is 
over parcel 306002 (the 15 acres purchased through Merle 
Cooper.)  The Moore property is on parcel 306001.  However, 
Mervin McNab pulled up all the fence lines and survey 
markers between the two properties that runs North to South 
and re-drew the map to show that the 15 acres runs East to 
West along the coast cutting through both parcels (map faxed 
to desk).  The official Government survey that was recently 
completed using GPS, satellite tracking, and topographical 
surveys clearly shows the delineation of the two parcels, 
with no depiction of the McNab redrawn parcel. 
 
10. (SBU) We understand from judicial authorities that under 
Honduran law the Moores\' property should not have been 
subject to the confiscation because they are not a party to 
the underlying dispute.  And, in fact, when the Moores first 
appealed to the judge to rescind the eviction order, the 
judge agreed, noting the Moores\' name did not appear on the 
court documents.  Rather Erik Anderson was the defendant for 
a 15-acre parcel in Wilkes Point.  However, when the Moores 
went to the police station to pick up their keys, the judge 
had changed his decision, and the eviction order was 
enforced.  The Moores believe the McNab\'s attorney, through 
her political connections, was responsible for the change in 
the judge\'s decision. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (SBU) We consider this an important test case for the 
GOH\'s resolve to attack the endemic problems of land title 
and abuse of the judicial system.  The Bay Islands have a 
history of problems of this type, but the new cadastral 
survey and the proposed land registry project together 
provide the government and court system with an important 
set of tools.  We are hoping that the political will exists 
to ensure that a rapid and just resolution for the Moores\' 
case (and the other Amcits who purchased property from Eric 
Anderson) can be found.  End Comment. 
 
 
PALMER 
"
"3960","10/11/2002 13:25","02TEGUCIGALPA2855","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002855 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY) 
INFO IIP 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: HONDURAS AND THE WAR AGAINST IRAQ 
 
 
  Editorial in \"La Tribuna\"(liberal party periodical) 
  Tegucigalpa-based daily (10/9), \"Honduras and the War 
  against Iraq.\" The Minister of Foreign Affairs has said 
  that Honduras will support the United States in an 
  invasion of Iraq to bring down and if it possible get rid 
  of Saddam Hussein\". 
 
  \"In addition to this, the Honduran government also signed 
  an agreement with the United States promising not to send 
  North American soldiers stationed in our country to the 
  International Criminal Court for trial.\"  This agreement 
  was signed at the request of the United States who seeks 
  to sign similar agreements with other countries in order 
  to protect U.S. soldiers from being tried at the 
  International Criminal Court\". With these two incidences 
  of support, nobody can question that Honduras is not an 
  excellent ally of the United States. 
 
  \"Because of the unconditional support that Honduras 
  offered to its northern neighbor on two issues that are 
  of high interest to it, we would hope the visit of Colin 
  Powell to Honduras would be advantageous and beneficial 
  and will give us the opportunity to outline themes that 
  are important to us - of which we have many, including 
  the border problems with our neighbors\". 
 
Palmer. 
"
"3962","10/11/2002 15:43","02TEGUCIGALPA2857","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA2207","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002857 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, EPET, EINV, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY ADVOCACY FOR AES AS THE DECISION ON THE 210 
MW CONTRACT APPROACHES 
 
REF:  a) 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2872, b) TEGUCIGALPA 02207 
 
1. (SBU) The Embassy continues to advocate strongly for a 
transparent process that will treat American investors 
fairly, as the state electricity company ENEE\'s decision on 
the winner of the 210MW electricity tender approaches. 
ENEE\'s decision, like the bid opening itself (ref b), has 
been postponed several times.  It now appears that the 
announcement may occur by October 14.  Rumors continue to 
swirl of corruption and political intrigue.  High level GOH 
officials were surprised by the unexpectedly low prices bid 
by the domestic companies.  AES is the only U.S. firm to bid 
on the project; if AES wins the bid, this power contract 
will allow it to proceed with financing and construction of 
its LNG-fuel combined-cycle El Faro project.  With its usd 
650 million investment, its low cost per kilowatt hour and 
its benefits for regional integration, the project would be 
a boon to Honduras. 
 
2.  (SBU) In response to advocacy requests by AES throughout 
the summer and fall, Emboffs have taken all available 
opportunities to demonstrate USG interest in the fairness of 
the process.  On Monday, October 7, then-Charg d\'Affaires, 
Roger Pierce spoke with Luis Cosenza, Minister of the 
Presidency, to raise the issue of the energy bid and 
emphasize the importance of a fair and transparent process. 
A followup conversation is planned for October 11. 
 
3. (SBU) Econcouns reinforced this message with Presidential 
Advisor Ramon Medina Luna on October 7, and with Investment 
Minister, Camilo Atala, on October 10.  She emphasized the 
importance of the project as an indication of Honduras\' 
ability to attract sizable foreign investment.  She flagged 
the possible timing problem of an announcement occurring 
after the President, Luis Cosenza, Camilo Atala and other 
high level officials leave the country for a trip to Europe 
and Asia (providing more opportunity for undue pressure). 
Atala indicated that the GOH intends to have the 
announcement occur before President Maduro\'s departure for 
Europe on October 15 for that very reason.  Finally, she 
asked if it were possible that a firm that did not comply 
with all the tender requirements could be declared winner (a 
veiled but clear reference to the rumor that is circulating 
that AES\'s closest competitor, Lufusa, omitted from its 
offer a commitment to build a usd 20 million transmission 
facility).  Atala acknowledged familiarity with this issue 
and responded that such a firm would be disqualified. 
 
4.  (SBU) Also on October 10, Emboff was in contact with the 
Commerce Department advocacy center and AES local 
representative, Carlos Pineda, to confirm appropriate 
wording for a possible advocacy letter for AES to be sent to 
President Maduro from Commerce Secretary Evans.  The letter 
emphasizes the proposed AES plant would be a regional power 
facility, supplying power to Honduras, El Salvador, 
Guatemala and elsewhere.  It cites the benefits in terms of 
job creation, lower cost of electricity, and the 
introduction of an environment friendly fuel, liquid natural 
gas.  The letter continues on to request that the bid 
process be followed strictly, that all participants have a 
level playing field and that there be maximum transparency. 
 
5. (SBU) Background:  Since the bid opening, there has been 
a raging war in the press between the two most competitive 
bidders, AES and the Honduran firm Lufusa (ref b).  As the 
contest entered the endgame, there have been increased 
rumors and allegations of Honduran firms offering bribes. 
The lack of a disqualification of Lufusa, because of its 
failure to include the cost of building a new substation and 
associated transmission lines, worried local AES reps that 
the intrigue might be yielding fruit.  Embassy strategy has 
been to ensure that the GOH is fully aware that the USG is 
watching the process closely and aware of the details. 
Opponents of the AES project have also advocated 
disqualification of the U.S. company because of financial 
setbacks of its parent company. 
 
6. (SBU) Embassy will continue to engage high-level GOH 
officials on the importance of the transparency and fairness 
of the tender process, fair treatment of U.S. investors such 
as AES, and the benefits of the El Faro project. 
Palmer 
"
"3980","10/15/2002 13:32","02TEGUCIGALPA2871","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY) 
INFO IIP 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: \"INTEGRATION AND LEADERSHIP\" 
 
  October 11, Editorial in \"Tiempo\"(San Pedro Sula-based 
  Liberal paper owned by businessman and Congressional 
  Deputy Rosenthal): \"The new U.S. Ambassador to Honduras, 
  Doctor Larry Palmer, has begun his diplomatic work 
  announcing that the US will continue working for regional 
  integration.\"  Obviously the U.S. government is convinced 
  wisely that Central America\'s economic and social 
  problems have a negative impact on the United States, 
  mainly the substantial flow of illegal immigrants - these 
  problems can not be resolved individually by each country 
  but only regionally\". 
 
  \"Ambassador Palmer\'s statements should not be ignored 
  because it shows the firmness of his country\'s stance on 
  the Free Trade Agreement that is now being negotiated 
  between the United States and the Hemisphere - a Free 
  Trade Agreement good for Central America and the United 
  States\". 
 
  \"The fact is that the conclusion of the NAFTA agreement 
  between the United States and Canada can be seen not only 
  as a tool for economic growth or as a commercial 
  interchange, but as a way to help solve the social 
  calamities of poverty and unemployment\". Honduras 
  understands the value of integration but until now has 
  not taken any concrete action.  It is time to make an 
  extra effort to put it into practice--it is an urgent 
  task for real leaders\". 
 
 
Palmer. 
"
"4002","10/17/2002 15:05","02TEGUCIGALPA2893","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002893 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: FIDE CHIEF NORMAN GARCIA TO BE NEW TRADE MINISTER 
 
 
1.  (SBU) President Maduro has tapped Norman Garcia, 
Executive Director of the investment and export promotion 
NGO, FIDE, to be the new Minister of Industry and Trade, 
replacing Juliet Handal.  He will be sworn in on October 17 
by Acting President Vicente Williams.  The GOH is also 
creating a cabinet level task force, consisting of the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Ministry of Agriculture, 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Finance Ministry, to 
assure interagency coordination of ongoing trade 
negotiations.  This Trade Negotiation Cabinet will be led by 
Minister of the Presidency, Luis Cosenza. 
 
2.  (SBU) Norman Garcia is a former Minister of Tourism 
during the Flores Administration.  He has wide contacts 
throughout Central America and in the United States.  His 
English is excellent.  Since President Maduro\'s election, he 
has worked closely with Vice President Vicente Williams to 
develop the Competitiveness Council, and was instrumental in 
bringing Michael Porter to Honduras earlier this year.  He 
is a close associate of Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza and Minister for Communications and Strategic 
Affairs, Ramon Medina Luna (both former FIDE Directors as 
well).  He does not have direct experience in trade 
negotiations and trade policy, but he should bring a much- 
needed strategic vision to the Ministry.   He is 58 years 
old and has a degree in Industrial Engineering from 
California State Polytechnic University.  Garcia has been an 
excellent Embassy and AID contact for many years. 
 
3.  (SBU) Garcia is well aware that Honduras needs to 
accelerate its preparations for various trade negotiations: 
WTO Doha Round, FTAA, Central America Free Trade talks with 
the United States (USCAFTA), and regional customs union 
talks.  We hope that we will be able to determine shortly 
whether he will attend the upcoming FTAA Ministerial.  Both 
USAID and Econcouns have spoken to Garcia and other GOH 
officials about the need to complete quickly a National 
Action Plan for Honduras for technical assistance in the 
area of Trade Capacity Building, due on October 31.  We 
understand (and hope to confirm shortly) that Garcia plans 
to keep Vice Minister for Foreign Trade Irving Guerrero and 
his new team in place.  SIECA consultant Alvaro Sarmiento is 
continuing with his plans to provide rapid training to the 
new employees in the Ministry; this assistance is financed 
by USAID\'s G-CAP program. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment: It is a very encouraging sign that the GOH 
chose to replace former Minister Handal with a trusted 
member of Maduro\'s inner circle, rather than trying to 
create a new government entity to conduct the USCAFTA 
negotiations.  We also consider it encouraging that Cosenza 
plans to lead the Trade Negotiation Cabinet and to keep it 
small.  While other Ministries will need to be included and 
consulted (especially Labor and Natural Resources) from time 
to time, we believe this approach demonstrates that the GOH 
intends to now give trade policy the attention it deserves. 
End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4005","10/17/2002 22:29","02TEGUCIGALPA2897","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002897 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, EPET, EINV, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: AES PROJECT: ANNOUNCEMENT OF 210MW BID WINNER 
DELAYED AGAIN 
 
REF:  a) 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2872, b) TEGUCIGALPA 02207, C) 
 
TEGUCIGALPA 02857 
 
1. (SBU) Once again, the announcement of the winning bid in 
the 210MW energy contract has been delayed (bids were 
presented on July 26).  Angelo Botazzi, the general manager 
of the state-owned electricity company ENEE, now says the 
decision will be announced sometime before October 23rd.  As 
the decision draws near, is postponed and draws near again, 
the American bidder, AES, continues to request USG advocacy. 
As noted in ref a, Embassy has advocated for this project, 
consistently, at the highest levels of government. 
Ambassador and DCM have discussed the tender personally with 
President Maduro and Minister of the Presidency, Luis 
Cosenza on several occasions.  Econoffs continue to show 
Embassy support for a fair process at all opportunities. 
 
2. (SBU) On October 16th, Emboffs met with ENEE general 
manager, Botazzi and passed on concerns expressed by the 
U.S. company, AES, about possible irregularities in the 
evaluation process, including the fact that some 
confidential documents from the evaluation committee have 
 
SIPDIS 
been circulated publicly. 
 
3. (SBU) Botazzi replied that while it is possible an 
individual on the evaluation committee has acted 
irresponsibly, he has complete confidence that the 
committee\'s decision will result in a fair and transparent 
outcome. He added that the decision of the evaluation 
committee will be unanimous, limiting the ability of any one 
individual to unduly influence the process.  The evaluation 
committee\'s recommendation will also need to have the stamp 
of approval from the separate transparency committee (which 
is serving as a watchdog) before it is submitted to the ENEE 
board.  Botazzi stated he is confident that the winner of 
the bid will be the project that meets all the requirements 
and has the lowest evaluated cost. 
 
4. (SBU) Despite the repeated delays in the announcement, 
Botazzi promised the decision would be announced within the 
week.  He professed not to be concerned about the time the 
decision has taken up to now, since the tender evaluation is 
very technical and complicated.  He noted that the committee 
is working hard to make sure the recommendation is so well 
documented that no party will be able to challenge the 
decision. 
 
5. (SBU) This position is consistent with a conversation 
Econcouns had with Presidential advisor, Ramon Medina Luna, 
on October 15th.  Medina Luna said that it was important for 
the Government to avoid any possible legal challenges that 
would delay the awarding of the contract.  Since the country 
desperately needs this energy by 2004, they do not feel they 
can afford the delays of a legal challenge.  Both Botazzi 
and Medina Luna indirectly acknowledged the importance of 
AES\'s El Faro project, but neither one gave any indication 
AES will definitely be the winner of this contract.  Note: 
AES\'s El Faro project is technically independent of the 
result of this bid.  However, all parties understand that 
under the current world energy market conditions obtaining 
this contract would probably be necessary for AES to get 
financing for El Faro.  End Note. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: We believe the meetings with Botazzi and 
Medina were useful in communicating again USG interest in 
the fairness of the tender and the American company\'s 
concerns about possible irregularities.  Embassy will 
continue its advocacy on this case at all appropriate 
opportunities.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"4016","10/18/2002 23:11","02TEGUCIGALPA2916","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","01TEGUCIGALPA2091|01TEGUCIGALPA2359|01TEGUCIGALPA3993|02STATE168607|02TEGUCIGALPA944","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002916 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL (GWHITE), WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB (TFAULKNER) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EIND, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI, HO, USAID 
SUBJECT: CHILD LABOR IN HONDURAS: INFORMATION FOR THE TRADE 
AND DEVELOPMENT ACT (GSP) REPORTING REQUIREMENT 
 
REF: A. STATE 168607 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 944 
     C. 01 TEGUCIGALPA 3993 
     D. 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2359 
     E. 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2091 
 
1. Summary.  Over the past several months, Labor Attache and 
other EmbOffs have spoken with government officials, private 
sector, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and 
child advocates regarding the situation of child labor in 
Honduras.  The Embassy has been active in promoting an agenda 
to support the eradication of the worst forms of child labor. 
 We believe that child labor is a serious issue in Honduras 
and will continue to pressure government and private sector 
stakeholders to eradicate the worst forms of child labor. 
The Government of Honduras (GOH) and the Ministry of Labor 
have demonstrated the political will necessary to implement 
and uphold their obligations to eliminate the worst forms of 
child labor.  Answers below generally follow the subjects 
specified in ref A.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------- 
CHILD LABOR IN HONDURAS 
----------------------- 
 
2. Honduran Government officials, International Labor 
Organization officials, and human rights organizations 
estimate that approximately 400,000 children work illegally 
in Honduras, the majority for their own families, in the 
informal sector, and in rural areas.  Many of these children 
work out of economic necessity alongside other family 
members.  Bonded and/or enslaved labor is rare, but work in 
hazardous conditions and for long hours is common, especially 
for those children who have given up schooling.  The 
U.S.-funded and International Labor Organization-managed 
International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor 
(IPEC) identified the worst forms of child labor in Honduras 
as prostitution (particularly in tourist areas along the 
North Coast), fireworks industry workers in Copan, child 
divers in lobster boats in the Mosquitia (Caribbean coast), 
limestone quarry and lime production workers, garbage dump 
pickers in the two large cities of Tegucigalpa and San Pedro 
Sula, and coffee and melon agricultural workers.  Of these 
occupations, the most hazardous is diving, and the one with 
the most significant incidence of child labor is in the melon 
industry, where NGOs and the GOH have estimated that 
approximately 2,000 children work as seasonal laborers (ref 
E).  Harvesting sugar cane fields is also a dangerous area of 
child labor. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PROSCRIBING WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3. Honduras has adequate laws and regulations proscribing the 
worst forms of child labor.  The Honduran Congress ratified 
ILO Convention 182 in May 2001 and Honduras became a party to 
the convention in June 2001.  The definition of the worst 
forms of child labor are identical to that of the ILO 
Convention 182.  All child labor laws, including the ILO 
Convention 182, are applicable in all sectors and industries. 
 
4. Honduras regulates child labor in the Constitution and in 
two codes, one relating to minors, and the other to labor. 
The Constitution (Chapter 5, article 128, section 7) 
establishes that minors who are under age 16 or who are 
students ages 16 and older cannot work.  The Constitution 
also establishes the maximum hours worked for children under 
17 years as six hours daily and 30 hours weekly.  Under the 
Child and Adolescent Code, a law passed in 1996, parents or a 
legal guardian can request the Ministry of Labor for special 
permission to allow children ages 14-15 to work, as long as 
the Ministry of Labor performs a home study to assure that 
the child both shows the need to work and will be working 
under non-hazardous conditions.  The work day proscribed for 
children is four hours per day for 14-15 year-olds, and six 
hours per day for 16-17 year-olds.  No minor is allowed to 
work in hazardous conditions.  In law and in practice, the 
Ministry of Labor carries out the home studies and limits the 
number of permits that children ages 14-15 can have.  The 
Labor Code, passed in 1959 and subsequently revised, 
prohibits night work and extra hours for minors under age 16, 
and also requires that employers in areas with more than 20 
school-aged children on their farm, ranch, or business must 
provide a location for a school.  In practice, many children 
work without going to the Ministry of Labor to request a 
permit, particularly those who work in the informal sector 
and in rural areas. 
5. International treaties have a status superior to that of 
the Constitution.  Honduras is a party to ILO Convention 138, 
which was ratified in 1980.  It establishes the minimum age 
of work at 14 years and specifies the age for completing 
educational requirements at 15 years.  The United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Children, ratified by Honduras in 
1990, requires each signatory government to establish a 
minimum age of work, conditions and hours of work, and 
penalties to assure effective application of the law.   The 
above-mentioned Child and Adolescent Code was developed out 
of the UN Convention, according to Ministry of Labor sources. 
 
6. Honduran law defines hazardous work to include: standing 
on scaffolding higher than three meters; use of toxic or 
noxious substances; exposure to vehicular traffic; exposure 
to abnormal temperatures; work in tunnels or underground 
mining; exposure to noise louder than 80 decibels; 
manipulation of radioactive substances; exposure to high 
voltage electric currents; underground diving; exposure to 
garbage or to biological or pathogenic substances; painting 
with industrial or lead paint; work on dangerous machines 
such as those that cut, shape, or file metal or wood; 
activities related to ovens, smelters, metal-working, or 
heavy presses; or high risk agroindustrial work. 
 
7. The minimum age for employment is consistent with the age 
for completing educational requirements in law, but in 
practice, more than sixty percent of children do not complete 
sixth grade, despite GOH increased spending on educational 
budgets and improvement to school access in rural areas. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
8. In urban areas, these laws and regulations regarding child 
labor are better implemented than in rural areas.  A rural 
economy in which a significant portion of employment is in 
the informal sector and in which parents face high 
opportunity costs to send children to school makes it 
difficult to implement and enforce these measures against 
child labor.  In large scale manufacturing and services, 
however, implementation and enforcement of these measures are 
more consistent.  National enforcement remedies are not 
adequate to punish or deter violations, but pressure from 
international agreements, such as the Generalized System of 
Preferences (GSP) and Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act 
(CBTPA), and awareness of the U.S. Customs Forced Child Labor 
program, have sensitized employers who work in the export 
sector. 
 
9. Regarding the worst forms of child labor, the GOH has not 
yet established enforcement or penalties beyond those 
mentioned above and - for child labor in illicit activities - 
in the criminal code.  Penalties imposed on firms for 
violating the Child and Adolescent Code include sanctions 
between 303 and 1,515 USD (5,000-25,000 Lempiras), or twice 
that if the employer is a repeat offender.  For sale or 
trafficking of children, the criminal code prohibits illegal 
detention of minors and imposes a 14-18 year prison sentence. 
 Forced child labor, prostitution, and other immoral 
activities are characterized as economic exploitation in the 
Child and Adolescent Code and are subject to a three to five 
year prison term.  Furthermore, the criminal code specifies a 
seven to 12 year sentence, and a 455 to 909 USD (7,500-15,000 
Lempira) fine for persons found guilty of prostituting 
minors.  Forced recruitment and obligatory military service 
were abolished under a Constitutional amendment in 1997. 
Adults who use children in narcotrafficking are sanctioned 
according to the Law on the Illicit Use and Trafficking of 
Psychotropic Drugs. 
 
10. In theory, if children are found to be working in illicit 
conditions, either through a labor inspection or through a 
police investigation, the Special Prosecutors\' Office on 
Children, founded in 1997, works with the investigative 
police to uncover evidence and bring the perpetrators to 
trial.  The judicial branch has also established Children 
Courts, where violations of children\'s rights are tried.  In 
practice, the Honduran police and judicial system are rife 
with inefficiencies and corruption and face many difficulties 
in administering justice.  Nonetheless, the GOH has improved 
its police force and recently implemented a new modern 
criminal procedures code that is intended to improve the 
Government\'s ability to bring cases to trial and to 
administer justice. 
 
11. For children employed in the worst forms of child labor 
that are not illicit by their nature but are hazardous or 
illegal for minors, the authority that would investigate such 
cases is the Ministry of Labor, which has trained inspectors 
to identify child labor.  Labor inspectors, upon being told 
of a violation or in a routine inspection, would report the 
incident for administrative action.  The inspection unit 
cannot immediately sanction employers, and the Ministry has 
less than 50 inspectors in a country of six million people. 
Note:  Like most government ministries, a severe lack of 
resources restricts what the MOL is able to accomplish.  End 
Note.  Despite these problems, in 2001, the MOL re-opened a 
regional office and re-initiated inspections of lobster boats 
in the Mosquitia region, where boat captains illegally employ 
boy divers.  The MOL also cooperated with the Honduran 
Private Business Council (COHEP) to launch an education 
campaign among private industries that increases business 
awareness of the worst forms of child labor in September 
2001.  Early in 2001 the Minister of Labor personally 
directed a special inspection of the melon industry in order 
to uncover the incidence of abuse in the sector.  In March 
Minister German Leitzelar visited Choluteca to observe the 
problems of child labor in the melon and sugar cane 
industries. 
 
--------------------- 
WHAT DOES THE GOH DO? 
--------------------- 
 
12. The Government provides free, universal, and compulsory 
education through the age of 13; however, the Government 
estimated that as many as 65,000 children ages 6 through 12 
fail to receive schooling of any kind each year; of these, 
almost 10,000 will never attend primary school.  A number of 
social and educational programs exist that are intended to 
reach children at risk for working instead of attending 
school.  A school grant program run by the Ministry of 
Education (MOE) provides very poor families with money for 
school supplies.  The MOE also provides alternative schooling 
by radio and long-distance learning for children in distant 
rural areas with few schools.  Regional committees of \"Child 
Defense\" volunteers try to convince parents to send their 
children to school.  Nonetheless, extreme poverty, recent 
famine in rural areas, and lack of jobs for grade school and 
high school graduates create an atmosphere where government 
incentives or programs have not yet stemmed the flow of 
children working. 
 
13. The National Commission for the Gradual and Progressive 
Eradication of Child Labor, established by decree by former 
President Carlos Flores in 1998 and maintained by current 
President Ricardo Maduro (who swore in a new commission in 
May), provides a tripartite working group in which civil 
society (including the ILO, unions, and non-governmental 
organizations), employer groups, and a number of government 
ministries have been able to discuss child labor issues over 
the past several years.  The Commission created a social 
dialogue and forum for negotiation between the groups, 
resulting in broad support for the ratification of ILO 
Convention 182, the development of a National Action Plan for 
the Gradual and Progressive Eradication of Child Labor, and 
the Regulations on the Worst Forms of Child Labor, which were 
drafted by the Commission and passed by Congress in December 
2001.  (Note:  In Honduras, Congress passes a law, the 
President signs the law, the executive branch drafts 
implementing regulations, and then Congress must pass the 
regulations for them to take effect.  This cumbersome process 
is a factor in the inability of successive administrations to 
update many outdated labor regulations.  End Note.) 
Furthermore, the Commission spawned seven inter-institutional 
sub-committees throughout the country that work in a 
tripartite fashion to develop strategies to eliminate child 
labor in Honduras.  Maduro\'s impressive Minister of Labor, 
German Leitzelar - a labor lawyer by profession (see ref B), 
has continued to increase the ministry\'s work combating child 
labor. 
 
14. The MOL also signed a Memorandum of Understanding with 
the ILO in 1997 to support the ILO IPEC program, which 
initiated program activities in the melon and coffee sectors. 
 The MOL also established its own office on the Gradual and 
Progressive Eradication of Child Labor. 
 
15. The Department of Labor (through ILO/IPEC) and USAID, as 
well as UNICEF, support several projects to promote the 
eradication of the worst forms of child labor, including by 
promoting school attendance.  In general these projects aim 
to remove children from or prevent children from exploitative 
work, and aim to provide educational opportunities and social 
services for children and their families.  See septel for a 
list of technical assistance on labor issues from 
international donors, including projects combating child 
labor. 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
16.  The GOH and the MOL have actively demonstrated the 
political will and found the resources to combat the child 
labor problem.  The industry group, COHEP, has recently 
showed renewed vigor to participate in the tripartite 
commission and to educate its own members on the importance 
of adhering to the ILO Convention 182.  We note that this 
reawakened commitment came on the heels of the July 17-18, 
2001 visit of the USTR-led interagency delegation to Honduras 
to discuss labor conditions.  The delegation determined that 
the situation in Honduras did not warrant opening a review of 
CBTPA benefits (ref D).  The U.S. Embassy continues to work 
with the government, NGOs, and the private sector to send the 
message that the worst forms of child labor are detrimental 
to business with the U.S. and could subject offending sectors 
to U.S. sanctions.  In addition, strong Honduran interest in 
a possible U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) 
is clearly a motivating factor for the GOH and the private 
sector to accelerate efforts to eradicate the worst forms of 
child labor.  In sum, Post believes that the GOH is making 
continual progress toward the elimination of the worst forms 
of child labor.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"4050","10/22/2002 23:05","02TEGUCIGALPA2928","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA2860","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002928 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, DS/OP/WHA, AND S/CT 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/22/2012 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, PREL, PTER, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATION PROTESTS COLUMBUS DAY, 
GLOBALIZATION, AND U.S. POLICIES OUTSIDE EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 2860 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) On October 11 approximately 100 peaceful demonstrators 
protested outside Embassy Tegucigalpa.  The protesters 
included representatives of the Convergence of Movements of 
the Peoples of America (COMPA), the public university 
worker\'s union (SITRAUNAH), the Civil Council of Indigenous 
and Popular Organizations and Ethnic Groups of Honduras, and 
the loose political alliance known as the Popular Block. 
 
2. (U) The demonstrators protested against a number of 
issues, including Columbus Day, Plan Puebla Panama, Plan 
Colombia, the planned Free Trade of the Americas (FTAA), 
globalization, the proposed privatization of municipal water 
services, and U.S. policy on Iraq.  It received front page 
coverage in the major newspapers.  Aldo Mauricio Calderon, a 
journalist for the San Pedro Sula newspaper El Tiempo, helped 
choreograph the protest, something he has done at past 
anti-U.S demonstrations.  Ericka de Ramirez, the reigning 
Miss Honduras from the Garifuna community who has traded 
accusations with pageant organizers, led a similar peaceful 
protest in La Ceiba (the third largest city in Honduras) and 
called for observance of women\'s rights. 
 
3. (SBU) Honduran security forces notified RSO in the hours 
prior to the demonstration that two busloads of indigenous 
people had been sighted en route to Tegucigalpa from La 
Esperanza, a town four hours from Tegucigalpa.  The 
approximate number of occupants of the buses matched the 
rough number of indigenous protesters later witnessed in the 
demonstration outside the Embassy.  These \"protesters for 
hire\" had been allowed to enter the city and after completing 
a peaceful protest were most likely paid for their services 
prior to leaving Tegucigalpa, a pattern that has been 
observed many times in the past.  Post notes that few of the 
demonstrators, other than the leaders, appeared to be from 
Tegucigalpa. 
 
4. (C) COMMENT:  While much tamer than protests in previous 
years, the GOH has reacted very nervously to these 
demonstrations.  The Minister of Defense and the Minister of 
Public Security (Police) separately asked if the Embassy was 
noticing an increase in activities by leftists groups in the 
country or whether we had any information about these groups 
arming themselves again a la the 1980\'s armed Patriotic 
Morazan Front.  They acknowledged that their concerns were a 
bit exaggerated but noted that a recent spate of bomb threats 
in Tegucigalpa (directed at government offices) and San Pedro 
Sula had prompted them to ask their intelligence units to 
monitor the situation.  END COMMENT. 
PALMER 
"
"4064","10/23/2002 20:17","02TEGUCIGALPA2934","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET//NOFORN","02SECSTATE151188|02TEGUCIGALPA989","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002934 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/ITA 
DS/OP/WHA FROM EAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2012 
TAGS: ASEC, HO, PTER 
SUBJECT: SECURITY ENVIRONMENT PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE (SEPQ) 
 
REF: A. 02 SECSTATE 151188 
     B. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 00989 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger Pierce, Reason 1.5 (C) 
and (D). 
 
1.  (U)  The following responses are keyed to the Security 
Environment Profile Questionnaire contained in REFTEL. 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
 
2.  (SBU)  Demonstrations:  Responses keyed to REFTEL 
question paragraphs. 
 
(1-A.)  Yes.  Indigenous groups such as the civic council of 
popular indigenous organizations (COPIN) and Council of 
Peasant Organizations of Honduras (COCOCH) have carried out 
anti-American demonstrations against U.S. foreign policy 
initiatives and military presence.  Additionally there is a 
Mosque in San Pedro Sula (approximately 3 1/2 hours North of 
Tegucigalpa).  There is a large concentration of persons of 
Arab decent (although most Honduran Arabs are Christian and 
pro-American) in San Pedro Sula and La Ceiba (a town along 
the North Coast).  It was reported that after the terrorist 
attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon there were 
small celebrations in each city (NFI). 
 
(1-B.)  No. 
 
(1-C.)  N/A. 
 
(1-D.)  Usually less than 100 people.  In April of 1998 an 
estimated 220 protesters from COCOCH demonstrated in front of 
the Embassy compound. 
 
(1-E.)  Yes.  Demonstrations are triggered by U.S. foreign 
policy initiatives, past perceived human rights violations, 
military action, and the U.S. presence in Honduras (i.e., 
U.S. Military presence at Soto Cano Air Base).  Note: Most 
Anti-US activity is inspired by a handful of demonstrators, 
sometimes within larger demos passing by the Embassy in route 
to other venues that take the opportunity to be photographed 
by newspapers/media.  Demonstrators sometimes conduct 
protests on domestic issues in front of the Embassy to 
maximize local news coverage. 
 
(1-F.)  Peaceful. 
 
(1-G.)  N/A. 
 
(1-H.)  NO. 
 
(1-I.)  Yes. 
 
(1-J.)  Yes.  Occasionally they will pass by the Embassy 
compound. 
 
(1-K.)  The size varies from a few hundred to a few thousand 
people. 
 
(1-L.)  Peaceful. 
 
(1-M.)  N/A. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Macro Conflict Conditions:  Responses to paragraph 
2. 
 
(2-A.)  NO. 
 
(2-B.)  N/A. 
 
(2-C.)  N/A. 
 
(2-D.)  N/A. 
 
4.  (SBU)  Host Country Capabilities:  Responses to Paragraph 
3. 
 
(3-A.)  No. 
 
(3-B.)  Yes.  (See 3-J) 
 
(3-C.)  Yes. 
 
(3-D.)  No.  However, GOH intelligence units have an 
institutional awareness of and a modest capability of 
penetrating indigenous radical groups. 
 
(3-E.)  Yes. 
 
(3-F.)  No. 
 
(3-G.)  Yes. 
 
(3-H.)  Average. 
(3-I.)  Average/Ineffective. 
 
(3-J.)  Ineffective.  A new unit within the Ministry of 
Security has been established,(and received training from USG 
via US border patrol BORTAC TDY Trainers funded by ICITAP),to 
handle border patrol duties but has yet to come fully on-line. 
 
5.  (SBU)  Indigenous Terrorism-Anti American Terrorist 
Groups:  Responses to paragraph 4. 
 
(4-A.)  No. 
 
(4-B.)  N/A. 
 
(4-C.)  N/A. 
 
(4-D.)  N/A. 
 
(4-E.)  N/A. 
 
(4-F.)  N/A. 
 
(4-G.)  N/A. 
 
(4-H.)  N/A. 
 
6.  (SBU)  Other Indigenous Terrorist Groups:  Responses to 
paragraph 5. 
 
(5-A.)  No. 
 
(5-B.)  N/A. 
 
(5-C.)  N/A. 
 
(5-D.)  N/A. 
 
(5-E.)  N/A. 
 
7.  (S/NF)  Transnational Terrorism-Transnational Terrorist 
Indicators:  Responses to paragraph 6. 
 
(6-A.)  No.  However, there are rumors that there are Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty (ETA), IRA, and Chiapas(Zapatistas) 
sympathizers in Honduras who could be involved in advising 
indigenous groups.  Some Hondurans are studying in Cuba and 
also conceivably could be receiving training in subversion 
and terrorism, although it is more likely they are being 
indoctrinated as agents of influence.   As this Cuban program 
for Hondurans is in its infancy, there have been no 
indications that such training is taking place. 
 
(6-B.)  N/A. 
 
(6-C.)  N/A. 
 
(6-D.)  N/A and NO; however, there was one sensitive report 
that 1-2 individuals, formerly from a European group may have 
been hiding in Honduras and possibly working with unwitting 
individuals.  They reportedly have departed the country, NFI. 
 
(6-E.)  N/A. 
 
(6-F.)  The only known hostile intelligence presence of note 
is Cuban.  While the Cuban mission appears to have extensive 
contacts with leftists and indigenous groups, there is no 
indication they are planning or supporting terrorism. 
 
(6-G.)  There is no shortage of weapons in Honduras.  It 
would also not be difficult for hostile terrorist elements to 
import weapons and/or explosives from neighboring countries. 
PALMER 
"
"4086","10/25/2002 19:02","02TEGUCIGALPA2959","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA2534","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, WHA, WHA/CEN, PM, AND INR/B 
NSC FOR MAISTO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2012 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MASS, MCAP, ETRD, PINR, HO, XK 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN MINDEF OUTLINES REGIONAL DISARMAMENT 
PLAN; EMERGES AS LEADING NATIONAL SECURITY FIGURE IN GOH 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 2534 
 
Classified By: PolChief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Minister of Defense Federico Breve used his 
introductory courtesy call with the Ambassador to outline an 
ambitious Honduran regional disarmament policy initiative 
that seeks to complement the current push for greater 
regional economic integration.  Breve\'s vision is in line 
with U.S. policy goals and highlights how civilian leadership 
of Latin American militaries can advance U.S. interests in 
the region.  We expect Breve to be named as President Ricardo 
Maduro\'s National Security Advisor in the near future.  He 
will be dual-hatted and keep the Defense Ministry portfolio. 
End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Changing Region\'s Military Paradigm to Favor Integration 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
2. (C) During the Ambassador\'s initial courtesy call on 
October 23, Minister of Defense Federico &Fred8 Breve 
described in broad terms a Government of Honduras (GOH) 
initiative that seeks to reduce the size of regional 
militaries and number of armaments in Central America.  He 
explained that President Ricardo Maduro has proposed a 
regional disarmament initiative to his fellow Central 
American Presidents.  Maduro and Breve believe that reducing 
the size of the region\'s military forces and amount of 
military expenditures would boost regional economic 
integration efforts.  Breve told the Ambassador that the 
possibility of armed military confrontation between Central 
American countries was now in the past.  He said that 
President Maduro believes that regional disarmament could 
foster increased cooperation and build mutual trust among the 
region\'s countries; something that Maduro also mentioned 
previously in an August 28 meeting with WHA A/S Otto Reich 
(reftel). 
 
3. (C) Breve told the Ambassador that President Maduro has 
discussed this idea with Salvadoran President Francisco 
Flores and Nicaraguan President Enrique Bolanos.  All three 
presidents are interested in the topic and agreed that it 
should be tabled as an agenda item for further discussion at 
upcoming summits of Central American presidents.  Breve said 
that Flores expressed stronger interest in the idea because 
Flores sees its potential to change the fundamental paradigm 
of relations among the Central American countries.  Flores 
and Maduro believe a regional disarmament agreement could 
send a bold message to the international investment community 
that there is a new spirit of political stability in Central 
America.  However, Breve cautioned that while Flores is 
personally interested in the concept, he is moving slowly in 
advancing the issue with his own military in El Salvador, in 
part because El Salvador has some important pending arms 
purchases.  Bolanos, Breve noted, is even more limited in how 
he can respond because of the still strong influence of the 
Sandinistas on Nicaraguan military attitudes. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Seeking Balance in U.S. Military Assistance to Region 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
4. (C) Breve acknowledged that the GOH initiative is at a 
very preliminary stage but asked the Ambassador for U.S. 
support.  He has said previously that ministerial-level talks 
with El Salvador were encouraging but revealed that El 
Salvador was not ready to enter into detailed talks yet. 
Breve suggested that U.S. views would be welcome and 
important to the GOH. 
 
5. (C) Breve also pointed out that the U.S. could send out 
important signals to the region on this issue.  Breve noted 
that the U.S. is seeking to improve military to military 
relations with the Nicaraguan armed forces and added that 
with the right cues from the U.S. the Nicaraguan military 
might become an ally in this disarmament effort.  In 
addition, he asked that the U.S. pay special attention to the 
overall size of the Nicaraguan military.  He said the GOH 
believes it is once again trying to increase its numbers.  He 
mentioned that U.S. support for Salvadoran military hardware 
purchases be equally and carefully calibrated.  He has noted 
to other EmbOffs that it appears that there is a reduction in 
the size of Guatemalan military underway as well.  (COMMENT: 
Breve, while not saying so directly, feels that there is not 
a balance in U.S. FMF assistance to the region.  As the only 
civilian head of a Central American military, he has pointed 
out to EmbOffs that it would help his standing with his own 
military if he could show some positive results from the U.S. 
for Honduran military assistance requests.  We also note that 
Breve has never linked the Honduran decision to sign an 
International Criminal Court Article 98 agreement with the 
U.S. to any of his requests for U.S. military assistance. END 
COMMENT.) 
 
6. (C) The Ambassador replied that the U.S. strongly 
supported regional economic integration efforts that would 
promote a free trade agreement with the Central American 
countries.  The Ambassador said he would inform Washington of 
the GOH interest in regional disarmament and raise the issue 
at an upcoming Chiefs of Mission conference. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Defense Minister\'s National Security Role to Expand 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
7. (C) Defense Minister Breve will likely replace Ramon 
Medina Luna as National Security Advisor in the near future. 
Multiple sources have told post that President Maduro is 
giving Breve this expanded portfolio because Breve has 
successfully managed the Honduran Armed Forces\' (HOAF\'s) 
support for the &zero-tolerance8 crime campaign.  The 
military\'s support has been steadfast and continual, when 
many doubted the HOAF,s ability to sustain its 
participation.  Breve also told the Ambassador that he is 
fully committed to expanding the military\'s role in the drug 
interdiction war.  He explained that while the police have 
the legal mandate to fight drug trafficking they do not have 
the wherewithal to do the job. 
 
8. (C) Breve said he is very happy with his role in the 
Maduro government.  He said that his lack of previous 
military experience was proving to be an advantage in running 
the Defense Ministry.  He explained that his private sector 
background allowed him to bring a business-like approach to 
his management of the Ministry.  He had already been able to 
improve the Ministry\'s contracting procedures and to 
negotiate better deals with some long-term military 
suppliers.  He also remarked that he had an excellent 
relationship with the Chief of the Joint Staff General Isaias 
Barahona.  Breve said that General Barahona was proving to be 
an excellent choice because he commands the full respect of 
his troops and has a well-developed understanding of the role 
of the military in peacetime. 
 
9. (C) COMMENT:  President Maduro was preparing to raise this 
disarmament initiative during the now-postponed visit of 
Secretary Powell earlier in the month.  Both the President 
 
SIPDIS 
and Defense Minister firmly believe that a regional 
disarmament effort could positively catalyze regional 
economic integration efforts by reducing the threat of 
military action over ongoing border disputes and 
demonstrating to the international community the political 
maturity of the current regional political leadership.  Breve 
also freely concedes that since Honduras has the smallest 
armed forces in the region it has much to gain from this 
initiative.  He admits that the GOH\'s budget situation will 
limit the growth of the Honduran armed forces in the near 
future and that he does not anticipate any significant GOH 
investment in military arms or hardware in the short-term. 
When Breve assumes the National Security portfolio, post 
expects him to be a more reliable and responsive interlocutor 
than Medina Luna.  END COMMENT. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Bio Note: Federico (Fred) BREVE Travieso 
---------------------------------------- 
 
10. (C) Federico (Fred) BREVE Travieso was born August 18, 
1945 in Tegucigalpa and is married.  After attending the 
American School in Tegucigalpa, he earned a B.S. from McGill 
University in Montreal, Canada, and an MBA from the INCAE in 
Managua, Nicaragua.  He is a businessman and construction 
contractor and has built a small business empire in Honduras. 
 From 1990 to 1993, Breve Travieso was the General Manager of 
the Honduran electric company, National Electric Energy 
Company (ENEE).  In a 1992 survey conducted by the 
Tegucigalpa newspaper La Tribuna, Breve received the dubious 
honor of being the \'worst official of the year\' with almost 
twice the votes of the official who came in second place.  In 
1991, he was embroiled in a scandal in which he allegedly 
orchestrated the payment of USD 2.8 million of debt owed to 
ENEE by Panama through Corporacion Financiera S.A. (COFISA). 
Coincidentally, relatives of high-level Honduran government 
officials owned COFISA.  (Comment:  At this point, we do not 
know if there was or is any connection between President 
Maduro and COFISA.  However, during the COFISA scandal, 
Maduro was president of the Central Bank of Honduras.  End 
comment.)  Breve sits on the boards of numerous local 
corporations and is the president and general manager of a 
construction company that held the local contract for 
expansion of the U.S. Embassy.  He speaks excellent English. 
PALMER 
"
"4103","10/28/2002 15:26","02TEGUCIGALPA2966","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02TEGUCIGALPATWX1053DATED052018ZAPR02","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281526Z Oct 02
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002966 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEA WASHDC FOR SARI, OFC/MCMANUS AND HOBAN, NIBM FOR CASTO 
AND SZULIM, NIBC FOR WOMBLE, NIAM 
DEA MEXICO FOR ORTEGA AND VILLALOBOS 
DEA BOGOTA FOR BASILE AND WILSON 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO PHOENIX FIELD DIV FOR DAWSON 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO MIAMI DIV GROUP 42 FOR SANES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NONE 
SUBJECT: AIRCRAFT DOWN IN HONDURAS AND THE SEIZURE OF 3.3 
KILOS OF COCAINE, GFTI-98-8001/WEC1F/OPERATION WAHOO 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA TWX 01053 DATED 052018ZAPR02 
 
1. On October 16, 2002 at approximately 11:30AM, a white 
Cessna aircraft traveling northbound was observed by 
witnesses decending over Honduran territory in the vicinity 
of San Jose de La Landa, Honduras.  During the descent 
witnesses observed a suitcase being thrown out of a side door 
of the aircraft. The aircraft subsequently conducted an 
emergency landing (131088N/0871466W) at a hacienda identified 
as La Bodega. The ground was saturated in deep mud at the 
time of the landing.  Witnesses reported seeing a fire rise 
from the area where the aircraft came to rest. 
 
2.  Hours later at approximately 4:00PM local, a Honduran Air 
Force (HOAF) helicopter was observed landing at the site 
remaining for at least 30 minutes.  Witnesses believe that 
only military personnel were initially present at the site. 
Most witnesses were away from the wreckage at the time and 
did not know if anything was removed. Police eventually 
arrived at the scene later that day. 
 
3.  Police do not believe the fire was a result of the crash 
as the wings were left intact adjacent to the charred remains 
of the fuselage loaded with fuel. The rear portion of the 
plane still connected to the aircraft had a heavy smell of 
cocaine.  Several used cans of butane and shreds of 
string/rope were located in the wreckage suggesting the 
traffickers were prepared to burn the aircraft in the event 
of an emergency. 
 
4.  The police arrested two subjects at an unspecified time 
after landing.  Both subjects were taken into custody 
approximately six kilometers from the aircraft site walking 
through farm land.  The pilot was identified as Luis Mauricio 
PALACIO-Giraldo (NADDIS 3070303).  NADDIS records indicate 
that PALACIO is a registered Pilot from Colombia.  The 
passenger was a Guatemalan citizen identified as Jose Ramon 
GAMBOA-Lara. Identifying data on the arrested subjects can be 
found in the indexing section. 
 
5.  PALACIO appeared visibly nervous during questioning.  The 
pilot claimed they departed from San Jose, Costa Rica and 
were destined for Guatemala to display the aircraft to a 
potential buyer.  PALACIO stated he did not know GAMBOA very 
well as GAMBOA was only an agent for the sale of the 
aircraft.  PALACIO was visibly disturbed when police 
questioned him on the submission of a flight plan.  When 
PALACIO was asked who contracted him to fly the plane, 
PALACIO immediately asked for a lawyer.  GAMBOA immediately 
asked for a lawyer when questioned about his association with 
PALACIO. 
 
6.  On October 17, a story appeared in the local newspapers 
reporting the downed aircraft.  Rather than receiving timely 
notification from the Honduran authorities, the TCO found out 
about the incident from the newspaper report. 
The TCO/TAT then inquired with El Centro de la Informacion 
Conjunto (CEINCO) on their knowledge of the issue.  CEINCO is 
the Honduran Joint Intelligence Center (JICC) that acts as a 
central conduit for information sharing and dissemination. 
CEINCO claimed to have no prior knowledge of the incident. 
CEINCO informed the TCO that Police Commander 
Maradiaga-Pancheme in Choluteca, HD most likely acted 
unilaterally to initiate the investigation. 
 
7. The TCO learned that on the morning of the 17th of October 
a team composed of one fiscal and other law enforcement 
personnel found 3.3 kilos of cocaine in the charred remains 
of the aircraft.  Information also indicated that the HOAF 
once again arrived on the scene early that day. 
 
8.  On the afternoon of October 17, 2002, DEA I/A Domingue 
and TAT I/A Scholl traveled to the site accompanied by 
Comisario Jorge Carrias of CEINCO and Comisario 
Maradiaga-Pancheme, Police Chief in Choluteca, HD. Upon 
arrival at the site I/A Domingue retrieved numbers from the 
aircraft motors.  Number 110079 was located on the aircraft 
motor housing.  Number 43371100202 was found on a second 
device attached to the motor.  A third item was documented 
under part# 420930 and associated with serial# FF1093. 
9.  The Honduran police report dated October 18, 2002 
indicated at 13:00 hours on October 16, 2002, police from 
Department Number 6 received a phone call informing officers 
of the downed aircraft.  The report infers from witness 
accounts that PALACIO and GAMBOA burned the aircraft to 
destroy evidence. Police officers seized $5,300.00 from 
PALACIO and $1,940.00 from GAMBOA.  In addition a Garmin GPS 
and two Nokia cell phones were seized.  The report indicated 
that Honduran Air Force Helicopter 971 was deployed in 
response to the ingress of the unauthorized aircraft after it 
was detected on radar.  Colonel Sarmiento Santos Moya, Major 
Juan Ramon Bautista, Lieutenant Noel Matute Baquedano and 
mechanic Walter Matute were documented as being aboard the 
responding helicopter. 
 
10. Dissemination of information by the Honduran Defense and 
Security agencies is a continuing problem despite the 
thousands of dollars that are invested to create an effective 
operational network.  Information accuracy and timeliness 
rank as top deficiencies that obscure interdiction courses of 
action and chain of command accountability.  There have been 
two prior air ingress events in which Honduran Defense and 
Security agencies failed to intervene or follow up (see ref). 
 The TCO later discovered that the Police Director and the 
Minister of Security were informed on Oct 16 of the event yet 
failed to make agreed upon notification to the TCO.  Several 
meetings between U.S. and Honduran officials to formulate 
response procedures and solidify a timely dissemination cycle 
have produced no improvement.  The TCO is left to conclude 
there is an extreme level of apathy about informing the TCO 
or the Honduran authorities purposely choose not to inform 
the TCO. 
 
11. The seized cocaine was tested as positive on October 22, 
2002 by the Criminal Laboratory of the Ministerio Publico. 
The cocaine evidence was assigned control number 6368-2002. 
The TCO will obtain the telephone numbers stored in the 
memory of the seized cellular phones and GPS information to 
exploit for intelligence value. 
 
12. Pursuant to the DEA Agents Manual, section 6242.11, this 
twx is submitted in lieu of a DEA-6. 
 
13. Any questions concerning this cable can be directed to 
C/A Tom Berger, S/A Ivan Rios or I/A John Domingue at 
(301)985-9321. 
 
INDEXING 
 
1.  Palacio-Giraldo, Luis Mauricio - NADDIS 3070303 
    DOB: August, 25, 1961 
    Associate: Jose Ramon Gamboa Lara 
 
2.  Gamboa-Lara, Jose Ramon - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
    DOB: July 17, 1978 
    Nationality: Guatemala 
    Guatemalan Passport#: 009623701 
    Guatemalan ID Number: A-1962370 
    Associate: Luis Mauricio Palacio-Giraldo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PIERCE 
"
"4105","10/28/2002 16:40","02TEGUCIGALPA2967","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02Tegucigalpa1756|02Tegucigalpa2833","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 002967 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND EB/OIA 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID FOR LAC/AA 
STATE PASS TO USTR, EXIM, OPIC 
STATE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, EAID, EAGR, PGOV, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH POSITIVE INITIATIVES TO RESOLVE OUTSTANDING 
LAND CASES: DRAFT LAW AND ARBITRATION 
 
REF: a) Tegucigalpa 01756 b) Tegucigalpa 02833 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Clear property ownership is important to 
improving the well-being of the Honduran urban and rural 
poor, as well as to the resolution of outstanding Amcit 
investment disputes.  Although the GOH has not formed a 
small Commission to address the outstanding Amcit disputes 
as Embassy had encouraged (see ref a), Honduran officials 
instead plan two complementary efforts: legislation to 
create a National Property Institute (INAP) and a 
legislative change that would allow arbitration of selected 
land expropriation claims.  These actions are welcome and 
indicative of a thoughtful approach by the Maduro government 
but are not expected to result in significant progress on 
Amcit land cases in the near term.  Embassy has supported 
GOH efforts to address the complicated land tenure issue 
with a variety of USAID and Public Affairs projects and 
through extensive discussions with Embassy contacts.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
A System for Arbitration 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) The Supreme Court will soon recommend to the 
National Congress an amendment to Honduran law to allow 
arbitration of pending land cases.  This draft bill, which 
was provided to former Ambassador Almaguer and WHA A/S Reich 
during his recent visit to Honduras, deals explicitly with 
cases involving action or inaction by the Honduran 
government at the national or local level (expropriation 
claims).  The claimant\'s case must currently be in process 
under administrative or judicial procedures.  If the case 
has already exhausted all legal avenues (final Supreme Court 
decision made) the claimant cannot apply for arbitration. 
Note: This prevents use of the arbitration mechanism by a 
claimant in one of the Embassy\'s oldest land cases, Alfred 
McDaniels, who lost his appeal to the Honduran Supreme Court 
for compensation for his investment in a banana farm that 
was taken over by squatters.  Mr. McDaniels requested USG 
espousal for his case in 2000.  End note. 
 
3. (SBU) Under the proposed legislation, a case would be 
eligible for arbitration if: 
 
a) The legal proceedings have taken more than half the 
allowed time and the case has not yet been resolved; 
b) The delay in the proceedings is not caused by a lack of 
action on the part of the individuals, their 
representatives, or attorneys; 
c) The deadline to file the petition in the case\'s 
respective court level or procedure has not passed; 
d) The private party requests arbitration within six months 
of the effective date of this law; and 
e) The Attorney General determines that arbitration is 
consistent with this law. 
 
4. (SBU) Once the Attorney General\'s office concurs with 
arbitration in a particular case, the parties would sign an 
arbitration agreement.  The signed agreement would be 
submitted to the judge or other authority working on the 
dispute, requesting that the legal case be suspended.  The 
case would then go to arbitration. 
 
---------------------------- 
A Land Institute is Proposed 
---------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) A small group of lawyers working for the Minister 
of the Presidency is preparing a proposal for the National 
Congress to create a unified property registry called the 
National Property Institute (INAP).  The INAP would be 
responsible for the development, execution and 
administration of a national policy on real estate, liquid 
assets, business property and intellectual property.  This 
institute would be composed of a board of directors, an 
executive directorate, the National Center for Registry and 
Surveys, the National Center for Property Policy and 
Regulations, an Inspector General, a Complaint Resolution 
Commission and the Director Generals. 
 
6. (SBU) The Board of Directors would be made up of the 
President of Honduras and various Ministers such as the 
Minister of Industry and Trade, Minister of Justice, 
President of the umbrella association for the private sector 
group (COHEP) and others.  It does not include a member 
representing the National Agrarian Institute (INA), the 
Honduran agency that implements the Agrarian Reform Law. 
INA will continue to be responsible for titling national 
lands fit for farming and distributing land to peasant 
groups; however, INA would have to get their titles through 
the proposed National Property Institute. 
 
7. (SBU) Within the INAP, the National Center for Registries 
and Surveys would be responsible for unifying and regulating 
the efficient functioning of registries and surveys for all 
of Honduras.  The National Center for Property Policy and 
Regulations would serve as a body for proposals and dialogue 
dealing with property issues such as the security and 
transparency of registered transactions, dispute settlement, 
and public outreach, among others. 
 
8.  (SBU) Whereas the arbitration proposal is designed to 
facilitate resolution of old squatter and expropriation 
cases involving the State, the land institute is designed to 
avoid the current proliferation of private land title 
disputes in the future.  In the proposal, land registration 
would be the exclusive jurisdiction of the INAP.  Any 
negative responses to land inscriptions would be sent before 
the Dispute Resolution Commission.  All resolutions issued 
by the Dispute Resolution Commission division would be 
considered final and binding. 
 
---------------------- 
A Resistance to Change 
---------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) The Property Registry proposal recently ran into 
some resistance within the Honduran Supreme Court.  Under 
the 1974 Property Registry Law, the courts ordered that the 
National Registry be combined with the national cadaster (a 
public record, survey, or map of the value, extent and 
ownership of land as a basis of taxation).  However, the 
National Registry falls under the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court, while the Ministry of Government and Justice 
houses the national survey. In the last 28 years, neither of 
these two government entities has been willing to give up 
its jurisdiction to the other, so the registry and the 
survey have remained separate, non-communicating entities. 
Meanwhile, the cadastral survey was not maintained and 
became outdated.  The Maduro administration therefore had to 
begin from scratch in early 2002.  The proposed legislation 
creating the INAP would pull both the registry and cadastral 
survey from their respective ministries, moving them to the 
new agency that would be independent of any ministry and 
would fall under the authority of the executive branch. 
Supreme Court Magistrates, despite participation in some of 
the planning and recent regional land tenure seminar, have 
indicated reluctance to relinquish control of, and revenues 
from, land registration. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
A National Survey and Registration System 
----------------------------------------- 
 
10. (U) Former Tegucigalpa Mayor, Henry Merriam, is the 
national coordinator for the World Bank-funded 
Administration of Rural Areas Project (PAAR) under the 
auspices of the Ministry of Agriculture, and is expected to 
become the first director of the INAP.  Under Merriam, the 
PAAR has coordinated two pilot topographic, satellite and 
global positioning system (GPS) surveys in the areas of 
Comayagua and the Bay Islands.  In the Islands, an Inter- 
American Development Bank (IDB) sustainable development 
project team, PMIB, under the auspices of the Ministry of 
Tourism, was responsible for preparation of the USD 1.5 
million catastral survey. 
 
11.  (SBU) The GOH intends to complete all future surveys 
throughout Honduras directly through PAAR. After each 
regional survey is completed, it will be integrated with the 
local registry.  This is when ownership of the surveyed land 
will be accounted for and discrepancies and/or title 
disputes will be flagged under the new system. 
 
12. (SBU) In the Bay Islands, once the cadaster was 
completed, the GOH began the process of determining land 
ownership.  This includes the process of joining the survey 
results with the existing public registry, which is 
anticipated to take 2 to 3 months to complete. In the Bay 
Islands, is estimated that 5 percent of all land parcels 
equivalent to roughly 32 percent of all land area is in 
dispute. Of the roughly 12,000 total plots of land in the 
Bay Islands, about half have been registered. There are 
still almost 6,000 parcels to be titled and registered.  The 
remaining land to be titled is labeled as \"occupied,\" 
meaning people live on it, but it is national land and no 
title has ever been issued. The squatters will have to pay 
the government just 10 percent of the assessed value of the 
land in order to title and legally take possession of it. In 
the second project area, Comayagua, surveys have been 
completed in just 8 of the 21 municipalities.  The remaining 
surveys and process of rectification with existing 
registries should be completed by July 2003. 
 
13. (U) Upon completion of the surveying process, in order 
to keep the cadaster current it must be merged with the 
public land registry. This is no easy job given the aged, 
disorderly state of the records.  In the Bay Islands, for 
example, public registry book volumes 3 and 5 are in pieces 
in shoeboxes due to old age and rodent appetites. 
Nevertheless, a new software system is being developed to 
unify the cadaster and the registries and should be ready 
for use by October 31, 2002.  This computer system will have 
computer generated survey drawings, digital satellite 
downloaded imagery, and scanned registry documents.  As an 
attempt to combat fraud, the new land registry will not only 
maintain an image of the parcel, but also a photograph of 
the owner of record and a fingerprint. The proposed land 
registry computer system will be able to cross-reference the 
fingerprint and photos of the owner from any public registry 
in Honduras.  The project hopes to be able to issue real 
documents to the public by January 2003. By February 2003, 
the first registry link between the Bay Islands and 
Comayagua computer systems should be connected and 
communicating to one another. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
A Financial Lift for the Municipalities 
--------------------------------------- 
 
14.  (U) Earlier this year, the Honduran Supreme Court 
signed a decree which requires any party wishing to buy 
property in the Bay Islands to present the cadaster for the 
piece of property first, in order to prove the land is not 
in dispute, before the transaction can take place.  Though 
the cadaster is currently only an administrative tool, under 
the proposed legislation, the cadaster would become a legal 
document as well.  Since the cadaster in the Bay Islands 
became effective, the municipalities on all three major 
islands have seen an increase in tax revenues.  On the 
island of Utila until recently, the average tax collection 
was 300,000 lempira a year (around USD 18,000).  Thanks to 
the cadaster, the municipality is now expecting to receive 
6.5 million lempira (USD 388,600) annually.  During the 
first month, the municipality had reported receiving 4.5 
million already (roughly USD 270,000).  On the island of 
Roatan, the municipality of Roatan should receive 16 million 
lempira (USD 956,000) in tax revenue and the municipality of 
Santos Guardiola expects 8.5 million lempira (USD 508,000). 
The municipality on the island of Guanaja will benefit by 7 
million lempira (USD 418,000) in annual tax revenue. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Implications for Amcit Land Disputes 
------------------------------------- 
 
15. (SBU) The Embassy continues to manage a caseload of 
roughly 180 cases, of which 32 are active land cases and 22 
are active commercial disputes.  Of the total cases, we are 
aware of 13 American citizen claims totaling 17 
expropriation cases against the GOH (some Amcits have more 
than one property case pending).  Only three of those cases 
have exhausted all legal avenues up through the Honduran 
Supreme Court and would therefore not be eligible to apply 
for the proposed arbitration process.  On the face of it, it 
appears that 13 of the 17 pending cases could qualify for 
the arbitration process if requested by the American citizen 
claimants.  One case could potentially qualify for 
arbitration if the Amcit\'s attorney files for 
unconstitutional recourse with the Honduran Supreme Court to 
reactivate her case.  It would remain to be seen, however, 
how the eligibility criteria would be enforced. 
 
16. (SBU) Post has found that even when an American citizen 
receives a favorable court ruling, it is difficult if not 
impossible to get the local municipalities to enforce the 
rulings, such as the long standing case of the Valenzuela 
family.  The Honduran Supreme Court ruled in April 1992 in 
the Valenzuela\'s favor, recognizing the Valenzuela\'s clear 
title over the property known as \"Jerico\".  However, the 
local Mayor refuses to recognize the Supreme Court\'s ruling 
and allegedly continues to allow the municipal land 
registrar to register some Jerico lands under a different 
name, \"Capiro\", but using the same known tax identification 
number. 
 
17.  (SBU) The level of alleged corruption in the Honduran 
judicial system also remains high.  In August 2002, American 
citizens Jean and Roger Moore were forcefully evicted from 
their home in the Bay Islands on Roatan  (ref b). 
Government officials openly admit the judge in the Islands 
ignored legal guidelines and available evidence in allowing 
this eviction to occur and in delaying the processing of 
their requests for appeals and injunctions.  It is possible 
that Embassy advocacy and high level government and Supreme 
Court attention in this case may help push it toward a just, 
prompt resolution.  However, it is indicative of the 
frustrations that Amcit claimants face in these private (non- 
expropriation) land disputes. 
 
18. (SBU) Another important variable for the future is the 
continuing problematic role that the National Agrarian 
Institute plays in squatter cases.  In some Amcit cases, INA 
has agreed to expropriate land for land reform despite the 
unsuitability of the land for agriculture and the lack of 
funds to compensate the owners.  In some cases, such as the 
Norma Bogran case, INA has failed to pay compensation and 
then reversed its expropriation decisions long after 
communities have been built on the land, thus denying the 
Amcit claimants both compensation and his or her property. 
To add insult to injury in the Bogran case, the land was not 
used by the landless farmers but was instead sold quickly to 
wealthy Hondurans; the appeals court in this case recently 
ruled that the statute of limitations was expired, even 
though INA had waited ten years to reverse its expropriation 
finding).  Finally, INA (and the GOH as a whole) do not have 
a consensus on how to deal with conflicting land claims that 
involve Garifuna and other indigenous groups.  All that 
said, the Embassy has not seen any new INA cases arise since 
the advent of the Maduro administration. 
 
-------------- 
USG Assistance 
-------------- 
 
19. (SBU) The lack of a clear property ownership system is a 
major problem in Honduras and a constraint in providing 
access to assets by the poor.  Security of property rights 
is an essential element of a sound environment for broad- 
based economic growth. USAID is actively involved in 
supporting the policy debate surrounding land administration 
and land-use planning issues.  Through the Honduran 
municipal association, USAID has financed the creation of 
mayoral commissions that participate in the policy dialogue 
of specific issues with their respective legislative 
commission counterparts.  In the case of legislative bills 
that have been introduced in the Honduran Congress, such as 
the land-use planning framework, these commissions have 
engaged in working sessions to address specific policy 
issues.  Similar commissions will be established once the 
land administration bill is introduced.  USAID is also 
organizing study tours around these land issues for the 
benefit of both the legislative and mayoral commissions. 
 
20. (SBU) In 2001, USAID sponsored a study to assess the 
property registration system in Honduras. This study was 
conducted by Instituto Libertad y Democracia (ILD) and the 
Honduran Counsel for the Private Sector (COHEP).  The Public 
Affairs section of the Embassy has supported this work with 
distribution of Hernando De Soto\'s book The Mystery of 
Capital. On July 16, Embassy PAS held an Interactive 
Dialogue Program (video conference) with Hernando de Soto. 
The Honduran interlocutors included: Luis Cosenza, Minister 
of the Presidency, Sergio Zavala, Attorney General, Miguel 
Pastor, Mayor of Tegucigalpa and Segisfredo Infante editor 
of the daily newspaper, la Tribuna. Former Ambassador Frank 
Almaguer served as moderator for this dialogue. The Embassy 
received wide press coverage of the event. 
 
21. (SBU) Last February, ILD presented the findings of the 
ILD/COHEP study to President Ricardo Maduro, the Economic 
Cabinet and other institutions.  There was consensus among 
government officials of the importance of implementing a 
sound property registration system in Honduras, and the work 
to date on development of the INAP and trying to improve 
land cadasters and the land registry reflects this 
consensus. 
 
22. (SBU) ILD is proposing follow-on work to the 2001 
registration project. Full implementation of the ILD program 
takes place in five phases: awareness, diagnosis (assessment 
done by ILD/COHEP in 2001), reform design, implementation, 
and capital formation and good governance.  On October 14, 
ILD met with GOH officials (Arturo Alvarado, Ministry of 
Finance and Ricardo Callejas, President of the Commission 
for Modernization of the State) to present the proposal for 
the \"reform design\" phase, with an estimated cost of USD 6 
million.  Implementation costs (phase 4) can range between 
USD 50 million to USD 80 million. 
 
23. (SBU) On September 24-26, the Fourth Meeting of the 
Central American Legislators Group (Red Centroamericana de 
Legisladores) took place in Tegucigalpa. The main objective 
of the event was to promote awareness of the need for 
national and regional legal frameworks that support 
decentralization processes and good local governance. 
Approximately 140 participants, consisting of legislators, 
mayors, and heads of land registries discussed land 
administration policy and municipal management issues, 
experience with land cadasters, land tax policies, land 
titling and management. This event was sponsored by USAID and 
the IDB. 
 
24. (SBU) GOH officials remain in close contact with the 
Economic Section of the Embassy and USAID on their plans and 
possible obstacles.  They have asked for continued 
assistance, as feasible, in raising public awareness of the 
importance of improved land tenure and property rights.  The 
GOH is also working closely with the World Bank, IDB and 
other donors to seek funds for the cadastral and land 
registration projects. 
 
PALMER 
"
"4106","10/28/2002 21:33","02TEGUCIGALPA2972","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02SECSTATE203301","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS TO USTR: ANDREA GASH-DURKIN, DAN FANTOZZI 
STATE PASS TO USDA/FAS FOR BRENDA FREEMAN/AA/ITP 
DOL FOR ILAB: ROBERT WHOLEY 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT: DTHOMPSON 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT: FCOOLIDGE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EAGR, ECON, ELAB, EINV, PREL, XK, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN-U.S. BILATERAL TRADE AND NON-TRADE ISSUES 
AFFECTING USCAFTA 
 
REFS: A) SECSTATE 203301 
 
      B) SECSTATE 207175 
      C) TEGUCIGALPA 728 
      D) TEGUCIGALPA 1951 
      E) TEGUCIGALPA 2307 
      F) TEGUCIGALPA 2207 
      G) TEGUCIGALPA 2857 
      H) TEGUCIGALPA 2897 
      I) TEGUCIGALPA 1920 
      J) TEGUCIGALPA 1756 
      K) TEGUCIGALPA 2829 
      L) TEGUCIGALPA 2916 
 
1.  (U) In response to refs a & b, Post identifies the 
following outstanding bilateral trade and non-trade issues 
that could negatively impact perception of a U.S.-Central 
American free trade agreement in the U.S. private sector and 
Congress. 
 
Agriculture Import Restrictions 
------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) Honduras has had a ban on U.S. raw poultry imports 
for some time.  USDA FAS estimates that if Honduran 
restrictions on U.S. raw poultry and poultry parts were 
lifted, U.S. producers could export an additional USD 10 
million of poultry products to Honduras, annually. 
 
3.  (U) Since President Maduro took office on January 27, 
Embassy has received a series of complaints from local 
importers regarding import restrictions, difficult 
certification requirements and other obstacles to the 
importation of U.S. pork, poultry and dairy products.  GOH 
agriculture officials, in increasing the bureaucratic 
requirements to import U.S. products, appear bent on using 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures as a way to 
restrict imports and support local poultry and pork 
producers.  GOH officials, in turn, claim that Honduran 
importers provide partial documentation, either for purposes 
of tax evasion or in order to evade SPS restrictions on 
products from third countries.  U.S. companies Cargill and 
PriceSmart (a subsidiary of Costco) have been among the 
companies complaining in 2002 of import obstacles.  Post 
notes that in 2001, Honduras imported USD 6.1 million of 
U.S. dairy products, USD 6 million of U.S. pork products, 
USD 3.5 million of U.S. poultry products. 
 
4.  (U) In February, several Honduran importers of U.S. meat 
and dairy products complained to the Embassy that Honduras\' 
Office of Plant and Animal Health (SENASA) was denying 
applications for the importation of goods from the United 
States on the basis that the plants producing the food 
products had not been certified by SENASA (ref c).  SENASA 
Director Reyes explained that the actions were being taken 
not on the basis of Honduran phytosanitary law but due to a 
Honduran implementing regulation adopted in late 2001 and 
that the GOH believes its actions are consistent with its 
WTO commitments.  He committed to ensuring the clearance of 
all U.S. agriculture imports as soon as the importers fill 
out applications for pre-certification.  While the 
complaints have lessened since that time, there have been 
some sporadic incidents over this requirement. 
 
5.  (U) In June, SENASA began restricting imports of U.S. 
poultry products over concerns of an outbreak of avian 
influenza in the U.S.  After some negotiation, GOH officials 
agreed to allow poultry imports if and when USDA certifies 
that the products originate from a zone free of avian 
influenza (ref d).  The ensuing back and forth on whether 
USDA can certify poultry products free of low pathogen avian 
influenza delayed entry of cooked and mechanically deboned 
poultry meat into the Honduran market.  USDA FAS is aware of 
several U.S. suppliers that have turned away from selling to 
Honduras because of these reported difficulties. 
 
6.  (U) There doesn\'t seem to be any legitimate health 
concern over U.S. pork imports, which SENASA began 
restricting in June and July (ref e).  The GOH indicated 
privately to importers that it is interested in limiting the 
number of containers from certain companies (ostensibly over 
concerns that importers don\'t have the necessary cold 
storage capacity to handle the amount of imports).  After 
discussions with Embassy and importers about paperwork 
requirements, GOH obstacles to pork product imports from the 
U.S. began to ebb. 
 
7.  (U) In October, in response to an announcement by USDA 
of a recall of turkey products originating from certain 
plants in the U.S. due to listeria, SENASA announced that it 
would restrict imports of U.S. turkey, chicken and other 
products susceptible to listeria.  Without consultation or 
prior notice, SENASA told importers it requires FSIS or 
APHIS to certify that these products are free of listeria 
and newcastle disease.  Embassy has begun discussions with 
SENASA officials over USDA\'s zero tolerance policy for 
listeria in cooked and processed food, and appropriate 
action on raw turkey.  We expect this issue to be 
problematic in the near term. 
 
8.  (U) Post is also concerned that the GOH is not giving 
advance notice of changes in import regulations as required 
by WTO rules.  We are skeptical that SENASA is applying 
equivalent SPS treatment to domestic poultry and pork 
products. 
 
IPR Issues 
---------- 
 
9.  (SBU) U.S. pharmaceutical company Pfizer has complained 
that the Ministry of Health, in approving a competing 
company\'s pharmaceutical product, did not respect Pfizer\'s 
data exclusivity rights as guaranteed in article 77 of 
Honduras\' Industrial Property Law and article 39 of the WTO 
TRIP\'s agreement.  The Ministry of Health approved the 
pharmaceutical product, despite communication from Honduras\' 
IPR Division that Pfizer\'s research and data were protected 
under Honduran law.  Pfizer argues that in order for the 
competing product to be legally registered with the Ministry 
of Health, the company needs to provide the research and 
data to support their application.  Honduran law provides 
five-year exclusive use of data provided in support of 
registering pharmaceutical products. 
 
10.  (U) U.S. companies, through the Business Software 
Alliance (BSA), complain that attempts to prosecute computer 
software infringement cases have been met with resistance by 
officials in the Ministry of Industry and Trade\'s IPR 
Division and the GOH\'s Attorney General\'s Office who often 
cite procedural problems or lack of resources as the main 
causes of government inaction. 
 
11.  (U) Honduras largely complied with the Trade Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement by 
the January 1, 2000 deadline.  However, there has been no 
action by the GOH to obtain approval of two laws governing 
the designs of integrated circuits and plant variety 
protection in the National Congress.  Approval of the two 
laws is necessary for Honduras to be in complete TRIPS 
compliance. 
 
AES 
--- 
 
12.  (SBU) U.S. energy company AES is the only U.S. finalist 
in the current bidding for a 210 MW tender by the GOH (refs 
f, g & h).  AES has plans to build a usd 650 million liquid 
natural gas-fired power plant with transmission lines and 
LNG port that would serve Honduras, El Salvador and other 
countries in the region.  General Electric is a strategic 
partner in this project.  The state-run electricity company 
(ENEE) has delayed announcement of the winner, presumably 
because of heavy pressure by Honduran competitors in the 
thermal and hydropower sector.  While the Maduro 
administration has assured that the 210 MW tender will be 
fair and transparent, the government-controlled process 
provides ample opportunity for discretion and manipulation. 
One possible issue is that one domestic firm, which bid low, 
did not include the price of constructing a new substation 
and accompanying power lines in its bid offer.  Presumably 
this company should be disqualified. 
 
Property, Investment and Commercial Disputes 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
13.  (SBU) The Embassy has files on over 150 property and 
investment cases involving U.S. citizens.  The 2002 Helms 
Act report (ref I) includes 9 cases that could be termed 
expropriation without adequate compensation, under the 
definition used in the Helms Act.  Eight of the claims 
described in the Helms Act report involve the Honduran 
National Agrarian Institute (INA) and land invasion by 
squatters.  Land invasions are common for both Honduran and 
foreign landowners.  According to the National Agrarian 
Reform Law, idle land fit for farming can be expropriated 
and awarded to the landless poor.  Generally, an INA 
expropriation case begins after squatters target and invade 
unprotected property. The squatters then file for the land 
with the INA under the Agrarian Reform Law.  In most cases, 
pursuit of the subsequent legal avenues has proven to be 
costly and time consuming, and has rarely lead to positive 
results.  Representatives in the U.S. Congress have been 
contacted about land cases in Honduras, especially Senator 
Graham of Florida who has been contacted by four 
constituents about their cases. 
 
14.  (SBU) Post demarched the Honduran government repeatedly 
in 2001 and 2002 on the importance of establishing a 
mechanism that will allow progress on expropriation cases 
involving U.S. citizens (ref j).  In late August, the GOH 
informed us that they are pursuing our recommendation of 
letting land cases involving the Honduran or municipal 
government be resolved in arbitration rather than through 
the courts (this will require legislation, which has not yet 
been submitted to Congress).  Note: Honduras\' first 
experience with arbitration involving a private dispute 
between U.S. and Honduran companies does not bode well; the 
U.S. company is now appealing the arbitral award to its 
former subcontractor, alleging corruption.  End note. 
 
15.  (SBU) The Embassy is aware of numerous other property 
and investment disputes involving U.S. investors, the 
majority of which have arisen out of inadequate titling 
procedures or fraudulent business dealings and involve 
disputes between U.S. and Honduran citizens.  In many of the 
private disputes between U.S. and Honduran citizens, the 
U.S. citizens charge unfair, often egregious, treatment in 
the court system.  Most of these problems arose under 
previous administrations.  In the case of the Moore family 
in Roatan, however, an unwarranted eviction from their 
property occurred in August (ref k).  While the case has 
received widespread attention, there has not yet been a 
favorable result. 
 
16.  (SBU) U.S. Tobacco and textile company JE Morgan have 
both had difficult and prolonged labor cases that arose when 
the companies tried to investigate or dismiss key employees. 
(Note: In the case of U.S. Tobacco, the dismissed employee 
is a U.S. citizen and the Embassy is therefore limited in 
its role.  End note.)  In both cases, the employees have 
gone to the labor courts requesting extremely high severance 
packages.  Texaco has complained of undue delays and lack of 
due process in its contractual dispute with a franchisee. 
Transpacific Geothermal has complained that slow, 
inefficient court proceedings have unjustifiably tied up the 
company\'s bid to build a small geothermal energy project in 
Western Honduras.  (Note: Another U.S. citizen is suing the 
GOH over a former mining concession on the land.  End note.) 
U.S. companies have also complained about judicial 
procedures that inhibit the return of stolen property. 
Several U.S. companies and investors have complained of 
arbitrary and unfair environmental permitting procedures, 
although this appears to have improved significantly under 
the Maduro administration.  The U.S. companies have alleged 
unfair treatment in the courts and indicated that the state 
of the judicial system has dissuaded them from any new 
investments. 
 
Labor 
----- 
 
17.  Although not mentioned in other Central American posts\' 
cables on bilateral trade and non-trade issues affecting 
U.S.-CAFTA, civil society in Central America and the U.S. 
have voiced concern over labor issues throughout the region 
and are likely to press for improvement in the labor 
situation and swifter action to eradicate the worst forms of 
child labor as conditions for a trade agreement.  Concerns 
frequently mentioned by international labor organizations 
and NGOs, especially in the maquila sector, include 
challenges to and problems with the freedom of association, 
the right to organize, the right to strike and the right to 
collectively bargain.  These rights are generally respected 
in practice, but enforcement is weak.  While many Central 
American countries, including Honduras, are party to ILO 
Convention 182 to eradicate the worst forms of child labor, 
the private sector - particularly in coffee, melon, 
sugarcane, and lobster agroindustrial production for export 
- continues to employ children in hazardous agricultural 
activities in which the minors also lose opportunities for 
schooling (see ref L).  Other illicit activities in which 
minors engage in throughout Central America and which are 
even more difficult to enforce include commercial sex 
exploitation in tourist and border areas and illegal 
narcotics smuggling in the border areas and the Caribbean 
coast.  (Note:  There are numerous regional projects 
supported by USDOL with the goal of working to eradicate the 
worst forms of child labor.  End Note.) 
 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
18.  (SBU) The GOH provides extensive tax incentives to 
foreign and domestic companies, especially in the apparel 
assembly sector and widely defined tourism.  Companies 
operating in designated export processing zones are exempt 
from paying import duties on goods and capital equipment and 
from state and municipal taxes.  In the lead up to the 
initiation of the Doha round, the GOH put priority on 
maintenance of its incentives regime.  The GOH will continue 
to provide incentives through 2010 per WTO rules allowing 
countries with GDP per capita under USD 1,000 to maintain 
free trade zones.  Previously negotiated contracts with 
franchisees provide tax incentives to some Honduran owners 
of fast food outlets for another 15 years.  Electric power 
producers are allowed to import fuel duty free, but some 
national firms may be taking advantage of the tax exemption 
to evade taxes on the sale of refined oil products.  Embassy 
understands that investment incentives are an issue in the 
Canada-Central America free trade talks.  International 
donors, including the IMF, IDB and World Bank, have 
identified the GOH\'s extensive tax exemptions as a main 
contributor to the Government\'s perennial fiscal problems. 
During U.S-CAFTA talks, U.S. negotiators should be aware of 
the interplay of the trade and fiscal issues. 
 
19.  (SBU) The IMF and the World Bank are looking closely at 
the fragile financial sector in Honduras.  The Honduran 
banking system is considered weak and in need of 
consolidation.  Insider abuses and heavy losses in key 
sectors have combined to contribute to a large overhang of 
bad loans.  Problems in the financial sector affect interest 
rates and the availability of medium and long-term lending. 
During the U.S.-CAFTA trade talks on financial services, 
U.S. negotiators should be aware of the measures the IMF and 
World Bank are recommending to strengthen the banking 
sector. 
 
20.  (U) We also note that Honduras has failed to implement 
fully its customs valuation obligations.  The U.S.-CAFTA 
negotiations could be used to push for more complete 
implementation of the WTO customs valuation agreement. 
 
Pierce 
"
"4115","10/29/2002 13:23","02TEGUCIGALPA2975","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02SECSTATE178513","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002975 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR PM/PPA, PM/PPA--PLEASE PASS DTRA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2012 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MASS, MARR, HO 
SUBJECT: OFFER OF ASSISTANCE TO COMBAT ILLICIT ARMS 
TRAFFICKING DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: SECSTATE 178513 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U)  SUMMARY: On October 17, 2002, PolOffs met with the 
Honduran Minister of Defense Federico Breve Travieso (MOD), 
and again delivered reftel talking points.  The MOD expressed 
great interest in the offer to provide training and technical 
assistance to combat illicit arms trafficking in Honduras. 
The MOD acknowledged that there is a problem in Honduras and 
emphasized his interest in improving security, related 
communications systems and administrative control of arms 
stockpiles.  He pledged to consider the offer and advise Post 
of the GOH\'s intentions in the near future.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U)  On October 17, 2002, PolOffs met with MOD Federico 
Breve and presented the talking points in reftel.  We had 
shared earlier the demarche with the MFA.  The MOD expressed 
great interest in the offer to provide training and technical 
assistance to combat arms trafficking in Honduras.  He 
referred to the offer as \"excellent,\" acknowledging that 
Honduras has had problems properly controlling the arms cache 
located in Naco. 
 
3. (C)  The MOD underscored Honduras\' need for better 
security of the Naco stockpile, and expressed his view that 
the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) needs to improve its 
internal communications systems as well as administrative 
controls.  Additionally, the MOD pointed out that the Naco 
cache is the subject of litigation both in Honduras and 
Miami, and that, therefore, destruction of the arms is not 
currently an option.  However, he did acknowledge that the 
type of training and assistance offered by the U.S. 
government would benefit the GOH.  (NOTE:  Despite the 
ongoing litigation, the HOAF are responsible for the security 
of the Naco cache.  END NOTE.) 
 
4. (U)  MOD Breve could not provide an immediate and definite 
response to the offer, but indicated that the GOH and HOAF 
would be very interested in the proposed training and 
technical assistance.  Post will follow up this week for a 
formal MOD invitation so that Washington action agencies can 
begin preparation to provide the training. 
PIERCE 
"
"4118","10/29/2002 20:40","02TEGUCIGALPA2981","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB, DRL/IL, WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
DOL PASS BLS 
COMMERCE FOR CENSUS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, ECON, SOCI, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ISSUES 2001 CENSUS FIGURES; POPULATION 
TOPS 6.5 MILLION 
 
1. (U) On October 18, National Institute of Statistics (INE) 
Director Magdalena Garcia presented the numbers from the 2001 
census to Acting President Vicente Williams.  The last census 
in Honduras was conducted in 1988 and INE utilized the 1988 
statistics during the presentation as a reference point for 
comparisons.  Projected numbers for 2015 were also featured. 
 (Note: The following statistics are the national average 
unless specified.  End Note.) 
 
2. (U) The population of Honduras is currently 6,535,344, up 
from 4,614,377 in 1988, with 44.8 percent of the people 
living in urban areas.  A growth rate of 2.64 percent per 
year (down from a 3.11 rate of growth in 1988) leads INE to 
estimate the population to reach approximately 8,958,301 in 
the year 2015.  Average life expectancy has increased from 65 
years in 1988 to 71 years in 2001. 
 
3. (U) To determine the poverty level, the definition of 
people with \"unsatisfied basic necessities\" was utilized. 
From this, INE determined that 65.5 percent are living in 
poverty while 47.4 percent are living in extreme poverty.  In 
the eastern department of Gracias a Dios on the Caribbean 
coast, almost 90 percent of the people are living at or below 
the poverty level.  Teenage mothers have increased in number 
from 20,113 in 1988 to 32,475 in 2001.  On the positive side, 
the literacy rate of persons 15 years old and above has 
jumped from 66 percent in 1988 to 80 percent in 2001. 
 
4. (U) Other census statistics are currently being processed 
and finalized.  For further information, refer to the INE 
website at http://www.ine.online.hn. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: PolOffs previously met October 16 with 
Garcia to discuss Honduran statistical issues as they related 
to labor and human rights issues.  Garcia, who is  favorably 
known to Post and has a strong background as a statistician, 
was confident that the census figures were accurate.  This 
was despite the fact that the numbers were gathered by a 
temporary executive branch agency established solely for the 
census that left the raw data for INE to tabulate and 
analyze.  Garcia said she had been besieged by requests from 
congressmen for detailed census information and that she was 
determined to put everything on the Internet to have the 
information available to all (and to reduce requests on her 
relatively small staff).  INE also collaborates with the 
Honduran Central Bank on economic statistical issues.  End 
Comment. 
 
6. (U) Post will be sending septel in the coming month with a 
more detailed USAID analysis of the 2001 census, including 
more comparisons to the 1988 census. 
PIERCE 
"
"4119","10/29/2002 23:44","02TEGUCIGALPA2987","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002987 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/IL, DS/OP/WHA, AND S/CT 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2012 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, PTER, SOCI, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: POPULAR BLOCK AND TEACHERS DEMONSTRATE VIOLENTLY 
AGAINST GOH; MADURO WORRIED BUT PLEDGES TO STAND FIRM 
 
REF: A. TRIVELLI/PIERCE E-MAIL 10/25 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2928 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1342 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 1298 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) On October 24-25 several thousand demonstrators that 
included the loose political alliance known as the Popular 
Block, the labor union SITRASANAA, secondary teachers 
(COPEMH), and three Democratic Unification Party (UD) 
congressmen clashed with police in violent demonstrations 
that included the reported use of Molotov cocktails.  The 
demonstrators protested against a number of issues, including 
the pay packages for teachers and other workers, the possible 
purchase of GOH housing bonds by teachers\' pension funds, the 
installation of fences outside the entrances to Congress, and 
opposition to proposed GOH policies on municipal water, 
forests, and education as well as proposed regional free 
trade agreements. 
 
2. (U) Demonstrators threw rocks at police vehicles, ripped 
down the Congressional fences, and damaged vehicles and 
private businesses, including a Pizza Hut restaurant.  Police 
were forced to use tear gas, fire hoses, and rubber bullets 
against the demonstrators outside of Congress, and several 
policemen, demonstrators, and journalists were injured.  Only 
two protesters were arrested.  Embassy security company 
Inter-Con confirmed that gang members were also among the 
demonstrators.  It is not known if their presence was 
organized or opportunistic. 
 
3. (U) The demonstrations came on the heels of the October 23 
approval by a divided Congress to revise the teachers\' 
statute to codify the May accords between primary school 
teachers and the GOH.  The May agreement provides for a 12 
percent salary increase and delinks teacher salaries from the 
minimum wage, thereby ending a key but controversial 
provision in a 1997 law which generously indexed teachers\' 
pay to five times the minimum wage (refs C and D).  President 
Ricardo Maduro\'s National Party supported the bill, which was 
opposed by the Liberal Party, Party of Innovation and 
National Unity (PINU), and UD.  Secondary school teachers 
continue to demand the 40 percent increase provided under the 
original 1997 statute.  In September the Supreme Court ruled 
that the part of the teachers\' statute that linked teacher 
salaries to minimum wage was unconstitutional, which 
observers had thought would set the stage for wrapping up the 
strike.  The secondary school teachers pledge to continue 
their protests and to strike until their demands are met. 
 
4. (U) The demonstrations followed an October 11 
demonstration outside the Embassy (ref B), and a string of 
false bomb threats in the country, including one on October 
23 at the Congress.  There are reports of another possible 
Popular Block demonstration October 30 against the IMF and 
proposed GOH privatization policies. 
 
5. (U) Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza termed the 
protesters actions \"vandalism\" and Minister of Public 
Security Oscar Alvarez said that the GOH would maintain a 
\"firm hand\" against violent demonstrators.  President Maduro, 
in a speech to the nation October 28, pledged that the GOH 
would not back down in the face of violent protests.  Maduro 
specifically defended the GOH\'s decision to provide up to 
30,000 lempiras (USD 1,818) in subsidies for a low income 
family to buy a house.  While open to dialogue, Maduro said 
that this openness should not be confused with weakness nor 
fear. 
 
6. (C) COMMENT:  Unlike the tame October 11 demonstration, 
the GOH has reason to be worried about this violent turn of 
events.  Notwithstanding their public belief and private 
comments that these protests are being orchestrated to 
undermine the Maduro government, many leading GOH officials 
acknowledge that there are even tougher times ahead.  A 
pending agreement to negotiate with the IMF, approval of the 
2003 austerity budget, the next round of minimum wage 
negotiations - all could serve to spark further public unrest. 
 
7. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED:  President Maduro called WHA/CEN 
Director Trivelli October 25 and told him that the 
demonstrations were disturbing and that the protesters\' use 
of Molotov cocktails was a particularly bad sign. Maduro said 
he suspected Liberal Party agitation was behind the 
demonstrations, citing in particular Jorge Arturo Reina, who 
was quoted in the press calling the teachers\' law a \"blow\" to 
the constitution.  Maduro\'s advisors also acknowledge that 
elements of their own party are fomenting some of the unrest. 
 Post believes that there remains a larger untapped sentiment 
of discontent in the country.  However, historically the 
Honduran public has been lethargic and apathetic about 
demanding public policy changes.  The Maduro government 
should be able to manage the situation if it continues to act 
decisively and to demonstrate its engagement.  END COMMENT. 
PIERCE 
"
"4132","10/30/2002 15:00","02TEGUCIGALPA2991","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE209216","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002991 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/TTP/MTA/MST/KIM BARR AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS TO USTR: ANDREA GASH DURKIN, DAN FANTOZZI 
DOC FOR 4320/DOC/ITA/MAC/WH/ONIA/MCARILLO 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:DTHOMPSON 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT:FCOOLIDGE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EAGR, ELAB, PREL, KTEX, HO, FCS 
SUBJECT: FTAA: HONDURAS\' EXPORT PRIORITY INFORMATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 209216 
 
1.  As solicited in reftel, Post identifies the following 
export priorities for the Honduran government and private 
sector.  The cable includes both non-agricultural products 
(mentioned in reftel) and agricultural goods. 
 
2.  According to its recently published economic plan, the 
Maduro administration will concentrate on developing export 
sectors with high potential to create jobs and related 
economic activity.  This includes strengthening Honduras\' 
existing export capacity in the apparel-assembly and agro- 
industrial sectors and diversifying exports from other light 
industry and agro-industrial enterprises and exploiting 
Honduras\' natural resources (primarily forestry and mining). 
 
3.  Honduras is the largest exporter of textile and apparel 
products to the U.S. among Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership 
Act beneficiary countries and the second largest exporter in 
the region after Mexico.  Industry representatives argue 
that duty free treatment for Honduran exports to the U.S. 
market is essential for the sector to be competitive with 
Asia when import quotas are eliminated in 2005.  Honduras\' 
apparel assembly industry primarily manufactures knit 
apparel and t-shirts.  The Honduran government and 
manufacturing sector are interested in diversifying the 
industry to produce higher-value finished products like 
fashion wear and women\'s attire. 
 
4.  The GOH and industrial park operators are also seeking 
to diversify out of apparel and textile production and into 
other types of light industry, including footwear, 
automotive parts, electronics assembly, data processing 
services and wood furniture and other wood furnishings.  To 
date, there has been limited success in attracting non- 
textile light assembly operations.  Honduras is home to a 
few businesses producing wire harnesses and high-end doors 
and furnishings made from Honduran mahogany for export. 
Recently, a U.S. company manufacturing wire harnesses for 
U.S. automakers announced plans to hire 1,500 new employees. 
The company has also expanded into building high cost mail 
sorters for major U.S. buyers and has plans to expand into 
other high-value assembly operations. 
 
5.  Honduras is a major exporter of coffee, bananas and palm 
oil, which have traditionally been the leading sources of 
foreign exchange.  Falling commodity prices and natural 
disasters have significantly impacted Honduras\' export 
revenues.  In recent years, and thanks in part to the 
Caribbean Basin Initiative, the Honduran government and 
private sector have expanded the agro-industrial export 
sector to include nontraditional agricultural products. 
There is significant investment in Honduras\' melon industry 
(watermelon and cantaloupe) and seafood industry, especially 
for farm-raised and wild shrimp and other seafood products, 
especially spiny-tailed lobster. 
 
6.  USAID has enjoyed success with its agricultural 
diversification program run by FINTRAC, a U.S. company 
working with small farmers to diversify into profitable 
nontraditional agriculture exports (especially oriental 
vegetables and jalapenos).  A USDA-funded hot water 
treatment plant for mangos began operating in April 2002, 
permitting Honduran mango producers for the first time to 
meet U.S. med-fly phytosanitary requirements.  FINTRAC is 
working with Honduran farmers to develop a fledgling papaya 
for export industry.  There is interest in expanding use of 
the mango hot water treatment plant to include papayas 
during the mango-growing season. 
 
7.  USDA has also worked with Honduran cheese producers to 
meet U.S. sanitary restrictions and qualify to export ethnic 
cheese products to the U.S.  Honduran dairy producers are 
interested in increasing exports of ethnic cream to the U.S. 
and beginning exports of soft cheeses (mozzarella). 
 
8.  Other Honduran agricultural export interests include 
poultry products (especially white meat), beef, tobacco 
products (cigars), sugar, herbs and spices (parsely, 
oregano, black pepper, among others), blueberries and 
ornamental plants and flowers.  Honduran exports of poultry 
products, beef, blueberries and spices are restricted 
because they do not meet U.S. phytozoosanitary regulations. 
The Honduran government has also been publicizing the fact 
that Honduras\' North Coast has been declared free of the med- 
fly in order to take advantage of the U.S. market for 
fruits. 
 
Pierce 
"
"4133","10/30/2002 18:28","02TEGUCIGALPA2996","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002996 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, EB/OIA, INR/B 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR, EXIM, OPIC 
STATE PASS USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMAT:DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PGOV, HO, ETRDECD 
SUBJECT: RENEWED DEBATE ON DOLLARIZATION IN HONDURAS, BUT 
GOH POLICY UNLIKELY TO CHANGE ANY TIME SOON 
 
 1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Liberal Party congressman and businessman 
Jaime Rosenthal Olivia and banker Jorge Bueso Arias have 
renewed their appeals for dollarization in recent weeks.  The 
two bankers argue that replacement of the lempira with the 
dollar would help increase capital investment and lower 
interest rates.  They claim the GOH has used gradual 
depreciation of the lempira, the Honduran national currency, 
as a tax on the public to generate revenue.  GOH officials 
have downplayed the issue, simply commenting that the 
preconditions for dollarization do not exist in Honduras. 
The leadership of the Congress has agreed to hold hearings at 
Rosenthal\'s request but there are no plans in the legislature 
to push for dollarization either.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Rosenthal\'s Complaint is With the Exchange Rate Policy 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Jaime Rosenthal Olivia, Secretary-General of the 
Liberal Party (PL) and a private businessman with banking 
interests, renewed his public calls for dollarization in 
early October.  Rosenthal\'s key concern appears to be the 
Central Bank\'s policy of gradual depreciation (currently five 
to six percent annually) designed to maintain purchasing 
power parity with the U.S. and competitiveness of Honduran 
exports.  Jorge Bueso Arias, president of Bank Occidente and 
an active member of the Liberal Party, has expounded upon 
Rosenthal\'s argument.  Bueso Arias terms the exchange rate 
policy, in which the lempira has lost 26 percent of its value 
since 1998, as a tax on average Hondurans.  Bueso Arias 
believes that if the GOH keeps devaluing the lempira, it 
would be better to dollarize. 
 
3. (SBU) Rosenthal terms the steady depreciation of the 
lempira as instability that undermines Honduras\' economic 
development.  He argues that dollarization, by eliminating 
currency risk, would increase foreign and domestic 
investment.  He asserts that dollarization would lower the 
risk premium for investments in Honduras and result in lower 
interest rates and inflation.  He also claims that 
dollarization would increase remittances and reduce capital 
flight (which he discusses in terms of Hondurans who protect 
the value of their savings by converting their lempiras into 
dollars).  The bankers\' arguments imply they believe that 
dollarization would lead to more sound fiscal policies. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment: There are a number of apparent fallacies in 
Rosenthal\'s argument.  The GOH has instituted its exchange 
rate policy purposely in order to avoid pressures that would 
result in a sudden devaluation of the lempira and a financial 
crisis.  Hondurans are able to both save and lend in dollars 
or lempiras, so there is no impetus toward capital flight or 
a disincentive to the sending of remittances (which have been 
growing at a high rate since 1998).  The high interest rates 
and limited availability of medium and long term loans are 
related to country risk, problems in collection of loans, and 
the weakness of the banking sector (there have been several 
bank failures in recent years); currency risk appears to play 
a small role.  The Central Bank has brought inflation down 
steadily since 1999.  Because of Honduras\' high indebtedness, 
the government is restricted in its ability to print money to 
finance deficits.  Finally, the Liberal Party contingent of 
the Congress has been a major impetus for the pop 
ulist, budget-busting legislation which has caused the 
government\'s intractable fiscal problems.  Dollarization 
would not fix this.  End Comment. 
 
-------------------------------- 
The GOH  - Honduras is Not Ready 
-------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) GOH officials in the Maduro administration, just 
like their predecessors in the Flores government, have 
downplayed the proposal, explaining quietly that Honduras is 
not in a position to dollarize at this time. 
 
6. (SBU) Maria Elena Mondragon, president of the Central Bank 
of Honduras, and Ana Cristina de Pereira, president of the 
National Commission of Banking and Insurance, have noted that 
the country must lower inflation and the fiscal deficit to 
U.S. levels before dollarization can be considered. 
Mondragon also has noted to the press that international 
reserves equal four months of imports, reducing the risk of 
an abrupt devaluation.  Mondragon also said that 
dollarization will not solve the country\'s economic and 
financial problems.  Cristina de Pereira has explained to the 
press it would take at least five years for the country to 
make the necessary economic structural reforms before the 
country can dollarize. 
 
7. (SBU) President Ricardo Maduro has commented publicly that 
while Central America is on the road to dollarization, 
Honduras is not ready.  He has been clear that the GOH will 
not pursue dollarization during his four-year administration. 
 
----------------------- 
USG Official Neutrality 
----------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Per U.S. policy, Embassy officials will not take a 
position on dollarization if asked.  EmbOffs will point out 
that this is a decision for the government of Honduras to 
make, after balancing the pros and cons.  If in the unlikely 
event that GOH officials ask our advice, Post will refer the 
inquiries to the Treasury Department. 
 
9. (SBU) Comment: The Embassy does share the GOH\'s assessment 
that the preconditions for dollarization do not exist in 
Honduras at this time.  The GOH has not achieved fiscal 
stability (fiscal deficit exceeded six percent of GDP in 
2001).  Inflation is declining but is still far higher than 
U.S. inflation rates, resulting in the need for gradual 
depreciation to avoid making exports uncompetitive.  The 
financial system is fragile, and despite improved supervision 
under the Maduro administration, much remains to be done. 
Exchange rate reserves, at about four months worth of 
imports, are adequate but not sufficient to ward off a 
financial crisis.  To date, we have not seen clear political 
commitment and civil society support for the types of 
structural reforms that would make dollarization feasible. 
Without these conditions in place, dollarization would lead 
to greater economic stagnation and unemployment because of 
the inability of the economy to adjust to external shocks. 
End comment. 
 
Pierce 
PIERCE 
"
"4149","10/31/2002 16:54","02TEGUCIGALPA3004","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 003004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, AND EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR, EXIM AND OPIC 
STATE PASS USED IDB, USED WB, AND USED IMF 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH Faces Unpalatable Choices on Increasing 
Government Revenues 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) A new IDB-sponsored diagnosis of structural 
problems in Honduras\'s tax policy documents the failure of 
the GOH to raise sufficient revenues to fund vital state 
functions, resulting in steady growth in the central 
government\'s fiscal deficit.   The authors recommend an 
immediate repeal of extensive tax exemptions and loopholes 
that have reduced the tax base significantly over the years, 
and a long-term structural overhaul of the tax system. 
These sensible and needed recommendations will be 
overwhelmingly difficult to implement in the Honduran 
political context and it remains to be seen how tough the 
IMF will be.  There is high-level political commitment to 
work on an equally important improvement of Honduras\' tax 
administration (collection and audits), with help from the 
U.S. Treasury Department\'s tax administration technical 
assistance office.  The high percentage of Honduran tax 
receipts collected by customs officials indicates that a 
customs service technical assistance project may be needed 
as well.  Washington agencies preparing for U.S.-Central 
American Free Trade Agreement (USCAFTA) negotiations may 
wish to consider carefully our position on GOH tax 
incentives for non-traditional exporters (including U.S. 
companies) in the context of the investment chapter.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Honduran Tax Collection: Too Low, Too Unfair and Too 
Uncontrolled 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
2. (SBU) A team of consultants hired by the IDB is currently 
putting the finishing touches on a report entitled 
\"Honduras: Toward a More Transparent and Diversified Tax 
System.\"  The study repeats the recommendations of earlier 
studies and analyses.  It is well-documented, albeit based 
on Honduras\' extremely limited statistical data base, and 
provides policymakers the kinds of details needed to target 
loopholes in Honduran tax law.  Obtaining a substantial 
increase in tax revenues in the near-term is going to be an 
important issue in upcoming Article IV review and discussion 
of a new three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility 
program with the IMF team that is expected to arrive 
November 4.  To ensure adequate attention and coordination 
on this aspect of macroeconomic policy, the USAID mission in 
Honduras has coordinated an extremely useful series of 
meetings of the G-15 Macroeconomic group to evaluate 
Honduras\' tax system.  At a recent meeting of this donor 
group, the key results of the IDB study were presented and 
discussed. 
 
3. (SBU) The scope of the problem is fairly clear.  Honduras 
collects (using official measures) taxes equivalent to 16 
percent of GDP.  Assuming GDP in Honduras is underestimated 
by 35 percent, this tax receipt measure falls to 12 percent 
of GDP using the appropriate estimate of GDP.  The World 
Bank advises that this is only half of the percentage that 
is considered healthy for a developing country.   This level 
of tax collection is not adequate to fund the key government 
services and investment that are needed; growth in tax 
receipts has not kept up with expenditure growth over the 
last ten years, resulting in ever growing deficits (with the 
exception of 1995-98).  The percentage of government 
expenditures that were covered by tax revenues has declined 
from 88 percent of GDP in 1998 to only 63 percent in 2001. 
The tax structure also is highly regressive, since most of 
the tax exemptions are provided to the wealthy.  The poorest 
Hondurans pay a percentage of their income in taxes that is 
75 percent higher than the average taxpayer, whereas the 
richest Hondurans pay a percentage of their income in taxes 
that is 20 percent lower than average. 
 
4. (SBU) The IDB consultants noted that the rapid growth in 
the public sector wage bill in recent years (up from 45 
percent of tax receipts in 1997 to more than 60 percent in 
2001) as a result of the wage provisions in the special 
framework laws (estatutos) for teachers and health service 
professionals.  They also commented that the size of the 
state is not the real problem.  They noted that Honduras\' 
central government budget as a percentage of GDP is smaller 
than even Nicaragua\'s.  The state simply does not collect 
enough revenue.  Finally, the lack of sufficient income has 
led the GOH to fail to transfer five percent of net 
government income to municipalities, as required by the 
Municipality Law that went into effect in January 1991. 
 
5. (SBU) As the GOH began to reduce customs tariffs in 1991 
in an effort to liberalize trade, the sales tax (a modified 
VAT tax) has gradually grown in importance and now accounts 
for 33 percent of total government tax revenues.  Income tax 
accounts for 22 percent of tax receipts, and taxes on oil 
and oil products come in third, representing 21 percent of 
total taxes.  The 1990s were also a period of export 
promotion, resulting in a web of generous tax incentives for 
textile and apparel companies, mining, and tourism services. 
The IDB team notes that the country has paid a high price 
for these incentives, in terms of transparency, fair 
treatment across taxpaying groups, and control of its own 
tax administration. 
 
6. (SBU) Although only 12 percent of tax receipts come from 
import duties, the IDB report notes that 50 percent of all 
tax revenues (including customs duties, sales tax, excise 
taxes, etc.) are collected by the customs service.  Tax 
payments are highly concentrated.  In the year 2000, 703 
large companies paid 77 percent of the income tax and 1,129 
large firms accounted for three-quarters of sales tax 
payments. 
 
7. (SBU) The IDB study also noted the weakness of the 
Honduran tax and customs service, the DEI.  Although some 
improvements have been made (including the new installation 
of an automated tax payment transfer system integrated with 
the commercial banks, a project paid for by the IDB), there 
remains a great deal of work to do.  Note: The U.S. 
Department of Treasury\'s tax administration technical 
assistance project begins in earnest at the beginning of 
November.  This work will focus on tax collection and 
auditing.  The Treasury experts have recommended that the 
Embassy also contact U.S. Customs about possible technical 
assistance for the DEI\'s customs operations.  End Note. 
 
8. (SBU) Extensive exemptions are provided in almost all the 
tax categories, resulting in a greatly reduced tax base.  A 
wide range of companies receive exemptions from the sales 
tax for purchases of raw materials and other inputs.  As 
result of the granting of extensive exemptions from customs 
duties, revenues from this tax source are only 56 percent of 
the theoretical tax collection (calculated by multiplying 
the value of imports by the appropriate ad valorem tariff). 
In addition, the consultants estimate that 41 percent of 
imported goods enter the country exempt from sales tax as 
well. 
 
9. (SBU) Tax incentives have been provided to the majority 
of manufacturing and assembly firms (operating in free trade 
zones of several types) and companies in the tourism, mining 
and energy fields, providing these companies with exemptions 
from customs duties, sales tax, and income tax.  Current 
administration of these exemptions provides ample 
opportunity for abuse.  It is believed that at least one 
firm in the power sector is reselling large quantities of 
fuel to gas stations, instead of using the tax-exempt 
product strictly for electricity generation.  Many goods 
imported duty-free as inputs for assembly or manufacturing 
are instead sold on the retail market. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Solutions Are All Politically Unpalatable 
----------------------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) The IDB team recommended a series of changes to 
the tax code, for the short term, designed to broaden the 
tax base for the GOH\'s main revenue sources.  They believe 
these measures would increase tax collections by two percent 
of GDP, annually.  The key provisions in this list are the 
elimination or dramatic reduction of tax exemptions and the 
application of minimum amounts of taxes to limit tax 
avoidance schemes.  As these tax exemptions benefit the 
largest and most important companies and individuals in the 
country, and in many cases these changes would be tantamount 
to violation of contractual terms and shifting rules of the 
game for investors, many donors are skeptical that 
sufficient political will exists for major tax policy 
shifts. 
 
11. (SBU) For this reason, some experts are proposing that 
the GOH raise the sales tax in order to increase revenues 
quickly, lower the fiscal deficit, and allow the government 
to reach an agreement with the IMF.  Some of these observers 
cite the case of Chile, in which an eighteen percent tariff 
is applied across the board, with almost no exceptions.  In 
Chile and Mexico, these analysts noted, the sales tax is not 
nearly as regressive as one would think, because the 
elimination of exemptions and incentives ensures that the 
wealthier part of the population is not able to avoid taxes. 
While the simplicity and effectiveness of this approach is 
attractive (and senior advisors in the GOH have noted that 
this was the case when the sales tax was raised from seven 
to twelve percent in 1998), it would put the GOH on the 
political defensive for raising taxes on the poor and 
allowing the rich to continue receiving exemptions. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
12. (SBU) We expect that the IMF will push the GOH to 
increase tax revenue in order to help achieve macroeconomic 
stability.  The GOH is well advised to improve its tax 
administration, but this will not be sufficient to achieve 
fiscal balance.  At least some tax exemptions will need to 
be eliminated to help reduce the budget deficit.  While 
raising the sales tax represents a simple alternative, we 
believe it would be politically difficult in the current 
context of high unemployment and slow growth.  The GOH may 
also look to privatization and concessions of government 
infrastructure projects, as a way of both increasing 
government revenues and improving efficiency (currently, the 
only privatization proceeds that are included in the 2003 
budget are the planned sale of a wireless phone concession). 
The final important factor is economic growth.  If Honduras 
can find a way to improve its investment climate 
sufficiently, it may be able to grow itself out of the 
conundrum it finds itself in. 
 
Pierce 
"
"4150","10/31/2002 20:55","02TEGUCIGALPA3012","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003012 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DS/ICI/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2012 
TAGS: PARM, PGOV, KCRM, HO, ASEC 
SUBJECT: AMBITIOUS NEW GUN CONTROLS IN EFFECT--BUT WILL 
THEY BE EFFECTIVE? 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: On October 12, a new Honduran gun control 
law went into effect, requiring registration of all pistols, 
revolvers, rifles and shotguns with the National Criminal 
Investigation Division (DGIC) of the Ministry of Public 
Security (MoPS).  The new law requires registration by both 
individuals and businesses.  It also mandates that 
registrants present both the firearm and samples of the 
appropriate ammunition, so that ballistic fingerprints can be 
recorded--although the GOH lacks the technological capability 
to record or use such potential evidence.  In exchange, 
owners will receive registration documentation, including a 
license to carry the weapon.  The new law prohibits civilians 
from owning or possessing automatic weapons such as AK-47s, 
M-16s and Uzis.  On October 17, the GOH announced a delay in 
the implementation of the law until November.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
NEW LAW IN EFFECT 
----------------- 
 
2.  (U) On October 12, the new Honduran Law for the Control 
of Firearms, Munitions and Explosives went into effect, 
requiring registration of all pistols, revolvers, rifles and 
shotguns with the National Criminal Investigation Division 
(DGIC) of the Ministry of Public Security (MoPS).  The law 
requires all gun owners, both individual and commercial, to 
register their weapons.  (NOTE: Due to the shortage of police 
personnel in Honduras, there exists a plethora of private 
security firms that arm their guards.  Approximately 35,000 
to 40,000 men work as security guards, with 20,000 working as 
armed guards for registered and non-registered companies. 
END NOTE.)  Registration was to commence October 22, with 
owners having six months to register their firearms. 
Registration was to be done alphabetically--for example, in 
October individuals whose last names begin with A through Ch 
were to register, in November D through G, etc.  However, on 
October 17 the GOH announced that the registration would not 
commence until November--presumably to allow the GOH 
additional time to educate the public about the new 
requirements.  (NOTE:  Interestingly, gun owners need not 
provide specific proof of ownership during this initial 
six-month period in order to register their gun.  Thereafter, 
owners must have specific information such as the date the 
firearm is acquired, the place of purchase and from whom the 
firearm is purchased.  END NOTE.) 
 
3.  (U) The law requires gun owners to appear in person at 
the DGIC offices in Tegucigalpa or San Pedro Sula, since the 
lack of government resources makes it impossible for 
registration to take place in other locations.  Individuals 
must pay a $30 registration fee for each firearm registered, 
and may register up to five firearms.  Should an owner lose 
his permit, there is a $12 fee to replace it.  Additionally, 
residents of Tegucigalpa must pay a $12 tax to the city and 
present proof of payment at the time of registration with the 
DGIC. 
 
4.  (U) In addition to the requisite fees, applicants must 
present their national identification card (along with a 
photocopy for the DGIC to retain), two (according to some 
accounts four) recent photographs of themselves and 
documentation that they own the firearms.  Moreover, the law 
requires that gun owners bring the gun itself, along with 
three (3) rounds of ammunition.  This requirement is designed 
to enable the GOH to do ballistic \"fingerprinting,\" though 
reportedly the GOH lacks the technology to actually develop 
and utilize ballistic fingerprinting evidence. 
 
5.  (U) Registration for businesses that own firearms differs 
somewhat from individual registration.  Businesses provide a 
variety of information, including the name and type of the 
business, type of legal entity (e.g., corporation), chamber 
of commerce registration number, proof of municipal business 
registration, tax identification number, name of its legal 
representative, the number and type of arms to be registered 
and a list of people who will be carrying the arms.  As in 
the case of individual registration, businesses must present 
three (3) rounds of ammunition for each firearm, in order to 
allow for ballistic fingerprinting.  All registrants (both 
individual and commercial) receive documentation that their 
firearms are properly registered, as well as licenses to 
carry the weapons.  (NOTE:  The RSO points out that the GOH 
track record for attempting to register security companies is 
poor.  Over a year ago, the previous Minister of Public 
Security (Gautauma Fonseca) mandated that security companies 
register.  A number of firms complied with the onerous and 
detailed requirements, including Post\'s contractor InterCon. 
To date, not one security firm has received a license from 
the MoPS.  END NOTE.) 
 
6.  (U) Honduras\' new Law for the Control of Firearms, 
Munitions and Explosives prohibits civilians from owning or 
possessing automatic weapons such as AK-47s, M-16s and Uzis. 
Persons carrying any firearm without the appropriate 
registration and permit are subject to fines. 
 
------------------ 
EFFECTIVE NEW LAW? 
------------------ 
 
7.  (U) Honduras is still suffering from serious problems 
with crime, despite President Maduro\'s so-called Zero 
Tolerance campaign that he implemented shortly after his 
inauguration in January 2002.  The Maduro Administration has 
consistently voiced its concern about the proliferation of 
weapons in Honduras, and despite deploying the Honduran Armed 
Forces to assist the police, crime remains a significant 
issue.  Honduras has the third highest homicide rate in Latin 
America--trailing only Colombia and El Salvador.  Gang 
violence continues to be a grave problem in the larger 
cities, as are both arms smuggling and drug trafficking. 
 
8.  (U) Until passage of this law, Honduras had no effective 
arms control or regulation of firearms.  Honduras is known 
for having a significant number of firearms in the hands of 
its civilian population.  Moreover, according to the RSO, 
approximately 80% of the firearms in Honduras are illegally 
obtained.  La Armeria (an entity connected to the Honduran 
Armed Forces) is the sole legal distributor/seller of 
firearms in Honduras. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9.  (C) The passage of this law underscores the Maduro 
Administration\'s commitment to tackle the firearms dilemma 
that exists in Honduras.  At this stage, it is unclear as to 
whether or not Honduras\' new gun control law will be 
effective.  Some sources charge that while the new law is 
intended to appear consistent with the GOH\'s anti-crime 
goals, the real motivation is to generate sorely-needed 
revenue (with some municipalities hopping on the bandwagon). 
The cost will be great for security companies with thousands 
of weapons, and one of the hardest hit will be the U.S.-based 
InterCon.  Moreover, the ability of the police to safeguard 
gun owners\' names, addresses and weapons information is 
questionable at best, thereby raising some additional 
security concerns.  To a large extent, the success of the new 
law will depend not only upon efficient administration of the 
system for registering guns and issuing permits, but also on 
the ability to prosecute offenders who violate the law.  The 
current inability of authorities to fairly and evenhandedly 
prosecute common criminals raises questions about the GOH\'s 
ability to guarantee the proper enforcement and 
implementation of this new gun law. 
 
10.  (C) An RSO source reports that one cause for the delay 
in the implementation of the new law is that the DGIC wants 
to receive its portion of related fees in cash.  Reportedly, 
the relevant parties are unable to agree how to handle the 
municipality\'s share of the fees.  Moreover, to date Honduras 
does not have the equipment, technical expertise or 
procedures required to actually do the ballistic 
fingerprinting.  There are unconfirmed allegations that a 
company named ATESA (with connections to Maduro\'s inner 
circle) may be seeking to provide the GOH with the necessary 
equipment to do ballistic fingerprinting. 
PALMER 
"
"4166","11/1/2002 14:19","02TEGUCIGALPA3017","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003017 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL, EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/01/2012 
TAGS: KJUS, PHUM, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: PEELING A ROTTEN ONION-SUPREME COURT OUSTS ENTIRE 
COURT OF APPEALS OVER CORRUPTION ALLEGATION 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY: On October 23, 2002, in an unprecedented 
move the Supreme Court suspended all three magistrates of the 
Court of Appeals.  Magistrate Mario Alberto Guzman Zuniga 
(Guzman) was suspended pending the investigation of 
allegations that he took a bribe.  Guzman supposedly accepted 
money from various Honduras Air Force officers who are 
charged with pilfering money from the military retirement 
fund.  The other two Court of Appeals magistrates--Dagoberto 
Aspra Iglesias (Aspra) and Rita Ondina Nunez Barahona (Nunez) 
have also been suspended after having attempted to file a 
corruption claim against Guzman with the Inspector General of 
the Courts.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------- 
JUDICIAL CORRUPTION EXPOSED 
--------------------------- 
 
2.  (C) On October 28, 2002, the Honduran Supreme Court made 
a shocking and unprecedented move when it ratified the 
suspension of all three of the magistrates on the Honduran 
Court of Appeals.  The act temporarily rendered the Court of 
Appeals inoperative and raised serious questions about the 
stability of the judiciary.  One of the three magistrates, 
Mario Alberto Guzman Zuniga, was suspended pending the 
investigation of allegations of corruption.  On October 24, 
Aspra went public with allegations that Guzman accepted some 
$5400 in bribes from Honduran Air Force officers who are 
embroiled in a legal battle in which they are charged with 
pilfering money from the military retirement fund.  (COMMENT: 
Embassy sources indicate that much more substantial sums of 
bribe money are involved in connection with the lawsuit.  END 
COMMENT.)  Magistrates Aspra and Nunez were also suspended 
after they attempted to lodge a complaint against Guzman with 
the Inspector General of the Courts.  The Supreme Court 
appointed interim magistrates to serve on the Court of 
Appeals and will reportedly name permanent replacements by 
the end of the week. 
 
3.  (C) Nunez met with EmbOffs on October 29, 2002, to 
discuss her role in the controversy.  Nunez portrayed herself 
and Aspra as unwitting victims of a corrupt judicial system, 
and maintained that their suspensions are political 
retaliation for publicly blowing the whistle on their fellow 
judge.  Nunez told EmbOffs that when she and Aspra learned of 
the corrupt activities of Guzman, they attempted to lodge a 
complaint with the Inspector General of the Courts (IG).  The 
IG purportedly refused the complaint, asserting a lack of 
jurisdiction to deal with the issue.  Moreover, Nunez asserts 
that she and Aspra reported Guzman to the President of the 
Supreme Court (Vilma Morales) on October 9, and that Morales 
advised them she would \"take care of it.\"  The 
self-proclaimed whistleblowers heard nothing more about the 
matter for 15 days, when Aspra decided to go public with 
their allegations against Guzman. 
 
----------------- 
THE PLOT THICKENS 
----------------- 
 
4.  (C) Nunez insists that her and Aspra\'s suspensions are 
retaliation, and that there are corrupt judicial forces that 
seek to remove them from the bench for other ulterior motives 
unrelated to this case.  (NOTE:  She claims that she and her 
family have received death threats, a common occurrence in 
Honduras.  END NOTE.)  Nunez mentioned that there are at 
least two other major lawsuits pending before the Court of 
Appeals.  She charges these forces want the two of them 
removed prior to the trials of the two cases.  She stated 
that members of the Supreme Court--including Morales 
herself--have personal interest in the other cases.  On the 
morning of October 29, 2002, Morales told an AID official 
that the Supreme Court has evidence that all three 
magistrates are involved in the bribery scheme.  The Public 
Ministry (Office of the Attorney General) is investigating 
the entire matter, and Attorney General Roy Medina publicly 
stated that, under the circumstances, the suspension of all 
three judges is appropriate.  On October 31, the Supreme 
Court is supposed to determine the fates of the judges in 
question.  Nunez anticipates she and Aspra will be 
terminated. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5.  (C) This public airing of judicial corruption opens a new 
chapter in the ongoing saga of the Honduran judiciary, which 
has historically been fraught with corruption and subject to 
political influence.  The 15 Supreme Court justices are the 
first to be selected under a new system designed to 
depoliticize the Honduran high court.  Supreme Court 
President Vilma Morales has repeatedly declared her 
commitment to clean up the court system and battle judicial 
corruption.  This case could eventually result in the first 
prosecution of a corrupt appeals court judge.  However, a 
contact in the Casa Presidencial told the PolChief that the 
removal of Nunez and Aspra was not a positive development and 
was being engineered by Supreme Court justices who seek to 
control the appeals court.  It is unclear whether or not 
Morales is involved, but the Maduro cabinet official 
indicated his concern about Supreme Court intervention in the 
business of the Court of Appeals is not focused on her, but 
on other Supreme Court judges. 
PALMER 
"
"4176","11/1/2002 19:35","02TEGUCIGALPA3023","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02Tegucigalpa3004","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR, EXIM, OPIC 
STATE PASS USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Upcoming IMF Mission: Civil Service Reform is 
Number One Priority 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 3004 
 
1. (SBU) The long awaited IMF mission (originally planned 
for February 2002 and delayed several times to give the 
Maduro team time to understand the inherited fiscal problems 
and develop plans to address them) will arrive on November 
4.  The mission is scheduled to conduct an Article IV review 
and discuss the potential outlines of a new three-year 
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility program.  Both the IMF 
resident rep and the Central Bank President have confirmed 
that the key issue is the uncontrolled increase in public 
sector salaries. 
 
2. (SBU) The Fund will push hard for introduction and 
passage of a comprehensive civil service law that would 
provide the legal framework for having a sensible wage 
policy.  Along with this provision, the IMF would like to 
see the GOH provide a plan for reducing the percentage that 
central government salaries represent of GDP (this has risen 
from 45 percent of GDP in 1997 to an estimated 67 percent in 
2002).  The IMF will also push for better tax collection and 
elimination of tax exemptions to help reduce the fiscal 
deficit in the short-run (see reftel for description of the 
problems in the country\'s tax policy). 
 
3. (SBU) The IMF is emphasizing the civil service law (which 
was a prominent commitment in the GOH\'s earlier IMF program 
as well, but was never implemented) for two important 
reasons.  First, the uncontrolled increase in the central 
government wage bill is leading to a fiscal imbalance of 
eventually crisis proportions.  Second, the country badly 
needs institutional strengthening throughout the government 
and this can only be achieved with a strong legal framework 
creating a career civil service.  The Interamerican 
Development Bank and World Bank reps here agree with the 
view that the Civil Service Law is a key policy change 
needed to control government expenditures and increase GOH 
effectiveness. 
 
4. (SBU) We understand from other members of the donor 
community that the IMF mission may also push the GOH to 
develop a more realistic plan of social projects, as 
outlined in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). 
This would require revision of the PRSP (which has already 
been approved by Congress) with extensive consultation with 
civil society.  The government clearly does not have the 
financial resources to comply with its commitments in the 
PRSP, in the current macroeconomic climate and without HIPC 
debt relief. 
 
5. (SBU) Structural reforms, such as liberalization of the 
energy and telecommunications sectors, are not currently 
being discussed in the context of the IMF program.  The Fund 
has decided to focus strictly on macroeconomic policy. 
 
6. (SBU) The fragile financial sector continues to be of 
great importance in Honduras, but the GOH has complied with 
most of the conditions in the previous IMF plan and is 
acting responsibly in addressing this problem.  The World 
Bank and IDB are continuing their work in the sector, 
including a full assessment of the financial sector, on-site 
reviews of each bank with subsequent development of action 
plans to ensure full compliance with regulatory 
requirements, and improvement in the legal framework to 
allow for strengthened supervision in the non-bank 
institutions. 
 
7. (SBU) The IMF appears to be impressed with the political 
will in Maduro\'s team (primarily Banking Commission 
President Ana Cristina Pereira and Central Bank President 
Maria Elena Mondragon) to strengthen financial sector 
supervision and compliance with the Basel accords. 
 
8. (SBU) The passage of legislation in July to reduce the 
cap on related lending from 120 percent of capital to 20 
percent of capital within three years was viewed favorably 
by the IFIs.  The decision to take over two banks in the 
spring (instead of liquidating them) was supported by the 
IMF because it reduced the up-front cost to the government. 
The Fund also was supportive of the decision to extend the 
100 percent deposit insurance for another three years, to 
avoid a run on the smaller banks. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4251","11/7/2002 16:56","02TEGUCIGALPA3062","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY) 
INFO IIP 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, Ios, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION:  FREE TRADE OF THE AMERICAS 
 
 
  1.   Orlando Henrquez writing in \"La Tribuna\" Tegucigalpa- 
     based daily (11/05): \"The Free Trade of the Americas even 
     though it is viewed with skepticism and opposition by many 
     Latin American countries, especially for the subsidy that 
     U.S. agricultural sectors receive-- the treaty is an 
     irreversible reality.\" Honduras is an abandoned, wretched 
     and beggared country with no authority to reject the treaty 
     or not participate in it.\" 
 
     \"But we should be conscious that if we do not start 
     seeking now a formula to be part of the treaty-- when 
     it becomes a reality-- we will be undressed and 
     helpless.\" The Free Trade Agreement could provide us 
     unanticipated benefits if we can manage it as a tool of 
     progress.\" 
 
 
  2.   Marel Medina Bardales writing in \"Tiempo\" the San Pedro 
     Sula-based daily (11/05): \"The Lover of the Free Trade of 
     the Americas\" The FTAA is a two-faced phenomenon-- One face 
     is smooth and with pieces of jewelry as well as hellacious 
     avenues, the other is rugged and wrinkled\". That is why many 
     organizations such as the Nicaraguan organization MANANFA, 
     Sinti-Techan from El Salvador, Guatemalan  Native and Rural 
     Coordinator, Honduran Community Commercialization Network, 
     and the Honduran Popular Group have been protesting against 
     the FTAA. 
 
     \"It is not true that it brings sustainable and stable 
     growth, or more or fewer job opportunities; it destroys 
     the national sovereignty, it threatens the process of 
     democracy and increases the external debt.  It is a 
     project that provides the control of our continent to 
     benefit U.S., European and Asian transnational 
     companies.\" 
 
 
     Palmer 
"
"4252","11/7/2002 21:29","02TEGUCIGALPA3196","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA3017","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 003196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D  COPY - classification markings para 13 
 
STATE FOR INR/B, PPC, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2012 
TAGS: KJUS, PREL, PINR, PGOV, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: THE LATEST CHAPTER IN THE JUDICIAL TALE: A NEW 
COURT OF APPEALS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 03017 
     B. 072129Z NOV 02 
 
Classified By: PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: On November 5, the Supreme Court of Honduras 
named a new panel of Court of Appeals magistrates, after 
having ousted the entire court on October 23 in the midst of 
allegations of corruption and impropriety.  We are providing 
biographic summaries on the newly appointed Court of Appeals 
magistrates, Maria Elizabeth Chiuz Sierra  ((Chiuz Sierra)), 
Edith Urtecho Lopez ((Urtecho Lopez)) and Jose Francisco Ruiz 
Gaekel (a/k/a Francisco Alberto Ruiz Fernandez) ((Ruiz)). 
 
----------------- 
SETTING THE SCENE 
----------------- 
 
2.  (C) On October 23, the Supreme Court suspended all three 
Court of Appeals magistrates in the wake of allegations of 
corruption and impropriety.  One judge (Mario Alberto Guzman 
Zuniga) was accused of accepting bribes from Honduran Air 
Force colonels, who were defendants in a case wherein they 
allegedly pilfered money from the military retirement fund. 
The other two judges (Dagoberto Aspra Iglesias and Rita 
Ondina Nunez Barahona) were suspended for using improper 
channels to expose the first judge.  On November 1, all three 
judges were discharged, and shortly thereafter the Supreme 
Court indicated that all three are suspected of wrongdoing. 
(NOTE: There are rumors that Aspra and Nunez may have been 
parties to the corruption, but to date this has not been 
substantiated.  END NOTE.)  See reftels for additional 
details on the unseating of these judges.  On November 5, the 
Supreme Court named a new panel of Court of Appeals 
magistrates, for whom we are providing biographic summaries 
and Post\'s initial assessment. 
 
At their swearing-in ceremony, the new magistrates promised 
to promote honesty and transparency in the judicial process. 
Supreme Court President Vilma Morales stated that these three 
justices were selected solely on the basis of their legal 
experience and professional qualifications, emphasizing that 
the Supreme Court also sought individuals who are impartial, 
independent and honest. 
 
When talking to the press, all three of the new magistrates 
seized the opportunity to assure the public of their 
commitment fairness and justice.  Chiuz Sierra pointed out 
that she is capable of applying the law and meting out 
justice without being swayed by famous names of litigants. 
Urtecho promised to enforce the law fairly and to remain 
independent.  Likewise, Ruiz commented that the position is 
one that requires \"nerves of steel,\" and that he is ready to 
tackle the challenges that come with the job. 
 
---------------------------- 
MARIA ELIZABETH CHIUZ SIERRA 
---------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) Maria Elizabeth Chiuz Sierra ((Chiuz Sierra)) was 
born in Tegucigalpa on November 29, 1939.  She received a law 
degree in 1972 from the National Autonomous University of 
Honduras (UNAH), after having received a Bachelor\'s degree in 
1964.  She has served in a number of government positions, 
and as a prosecutor and judge within the Honduran court 
system. 
 
4.  (U) From 1973 to 1975, she served as a criminal court 
judge in the Tegucigalpa judicial district and as an 
Assistant Attorney General.  She served as Director General 
for Salaries at the Ministry of Labor and as an assistant 
prosecutor in appellate court from 1975 to 1977.  Chiuz 
Sierra also served as the alternate president of the National 
Elections Board (TNE) from 1980 to 1982.  Additionally, from 
1977 to 1982, she was senior partner in her own law firm 
located in Tegucigalpa.  During the Roberto Suazo Cordova 
presidency (1982-1986), Chiuz Sierra held the post of 
Procurador General (similar to Solicitor General or Inspector 
General in the U.S.).  From 1987 to 1988, she was President 
of the Honduran Bar Association. 
 
5.  (C) In 1998, then-President Carlos Flores named her 
Minister of Public Security (MoPS), a post created by law 
July 15, 1998, when the public security forces made the 
transition from military to civilian control.  (NOTE: Many 
observers considered her a longtime confidante of Flores. 
END NOTE.)  In this position, Chiuz Sierra was responsible 
for both the national police and the investigative force 
(DGIC).  A serious conflict between Chiuz Sierra and DGIC 
Chief Wilfredo Alvarado erupted in July 1999.  The fray 
reached its peak when she publicly accused Alvarado\'s unit of 
spying on her--a statement she later retracted.  Alvarado 
claimed that Chiuz Sierra favored National Police Chief 
Alvaro Manuel Flores Ponce ((Flores Ponce)), and publicly 
questioned her managerial skills.  The media also raised 
issues about Chiuz Sierra\'s performance during her tenure as 
Minister.  She held onto the post until 2000, when President 
Flores replaced her with Gautama Fonseca. 
 
6.  (C) In 2002, Chiuz Sierra nominated herself for 
consideration by the Supreme Court Nominating Commission. 
EmbOffs and USAID officials expressed the opinion that she is 
an \"old-minded\" attorney, and that she was supposedly 
dismissed from the MoPS post due to lack of leadership 
capability.  Post ultimately categorized her as \"not 
recommended\" for service on the Supreme Court.  Moreover, 
civil society questioned her ability to service in a position 
of judicial leadership, due to incompetence and lack of 
qualifications (she does not have much litigation experience). 
 
7.  (C) It is generally believed that she performed better in 
the position of Procurador General, and that she was not an 
effective MoPS.  Supposedly, former President Flores replaced 
her due to nonfeasance and permitting unchecked corruption at 
the highest level of the National Police (PN), which exploded 
in August 2000 when both PN Sub-Director Andres Wilfredo 
Urtecho Jeanborde and PN Director Alvaro Manuel Flores Ponce 
were connected to a Colombian air off-load on the north coast 
of Honduras. 
 
8.  (C)  While Chiuz Sierra\'s failure to perform well as MoPS 
does not necessarily mean that she is not suitable for the 
Court of Appeals, there remain some doubts as to her 
competence.  Post has no information besmirching her 
integrity, or indicating that she ever abused her position. 
While AID has had limited contact with this judge, their 
impression was that she was not engaged in reform of the 
Criminal Procedure Code. 
 
9.  (C) Chiuz Sierra is a member of the Liberal Party, and 
some people consider her to be from the \"leftist\" wing of the 
party.  She is single, and has one son, Gerardo Emilio 
Pacheco Chiuz, and two grandsons, Emerson Pacheco Echeverri 
and Gerson Pacheco Echeverri.  Her son is a computer expert 
and works in the private sector. 
 
------------------- 
EDITH URTECHO LOPEZ 
------------------- 
 
10.  (U) Edith Urtecho Lopez was born in Tegucigalpa on 
December 5, 1951.  She earned a Bachelor\'s degree and law 
degree at UNAH.  Most recently, she was Director of the 
National Public Defender\'s Office--she is a Nationalist 
appointed by the Maduro Administration.  Additionally, 
Urtecho Lopez has served as a civil court judge, an assistant 
fiscal and a fiscal (both are similar to assistant attorney 
general in the U.S.) in an AID/Supreme Court experimental 
criminal program and a legal advisor in the Ministry of 
Education.  She was a professor at both the Central American 
Technological University (UNITEC) and UNAH. 
 
11.  (C) AID staff members and contractors have worked with 
her as Public Defender, and all have an excellent impression 
of her.  They opine that she has a strong background and 
seems to be a highly credible individual.  The mission 
consensus is that she could emerge as a top-notch Court of 
Appeals magistrate.  One drawback of her appointment is that 
she is leaving the Public Defender position after only four 
months--a loss for the Public Defender\'s Office.  She was 
pushing for additional resources and was working to 
strengthen the office. 
 
12. (C) Nunez (one of the ousted judges) told PolOff that 
Urtecho Lopez is related to Andres Wilfredo Urtecho 
Jeanborde, the former Sub-Director of the PN under Flores 
Ponce who was fired in August 2000 because of involvement in 
narcotrafficking and other corrupt activities.  At this time, 
little is known about Urtecho Lopez\'s personal life and 
family. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
JOSE FRANCISCO RUIZ GAEKEL--ALSO KNOWN AS 
FRANCISCO ALBERTO RUIZ FERNANDEZ 
----------------------------------------- 
13. (C) All press accounts refer to this individual as Jose 
Francisco Ruiz Gaekel, but ORCA reports that this man says 
his name is Francisco Alberto Ruiz Fernandez ((Ruiz)).  He 
was born August 28, 1940 in Gracias, Lempira.  Until this 
appointment, Ruiz was an appellate judge in the San Pedro 
Sula district.  Additionally, he served as a trial judge in 
both Comayagua and Siguatepeque.  He was formerly a legal 
advisor to the Honduran Air Force, though in an interview 
with the Honduran press he declined to provide information 
about his rank.  (NOTE: It is uncertain as to whether he 
served in that capacity as a civilian or as a military 
officer. END NOTE.)  At one time, he was Registrar of 
Property.  Ruiz is reportedly a Nationalist.  At the time the 
appointments were announced, Ruiz did not have a curriculum 
vitae to provide to the press.  Likewise, Post currently has 
limited information on Ruiz. 
 
14.  (C)  This relatively unknown appointee remains somewhat 
of a mystery--from his actual name to his personal and 
professional background.  The fact that Ruiz is not 
particularly  well-known is of less concern to Post than the 
question about his true name and his apparent reticence to 
share details of his background.  This lack of details raises 
some red flags for us. 
PALMER 
"
"4253","11/7/2002 23:28","02TEGUCIGALPA3076","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","02STATE205386|02TEGUCIGALPA618","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003076 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/CCA 
STATE FOR INR, S/CT, AND DS/ICI/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: X1, X5, X6 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETTC, PINR, PTER, ASEC, EAID, HO, CU 
SUBJECT: (S) CUBAN NOMINEE FOR AMBASSADOR TO HONDURAS 
REPORTEDLY APPROVED BY GOH AND SOON TO BE ANNOUNCED; 
HONDURAN ARMED FORCES ALLEGE POLANCO IS CUBAN INTELLIGENCE 
OFFICER 
 
REF: A. OLSEN/TRIVELLI E-MAIL 11/05/02 
     B. STATE 205386 
     C. TD-314/39339-02 
     D. PALMIERI/TRIVELLI E-MAIL 08/20/02 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 618 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B), (C), and (D). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see para. 9. 
 
2. (S) Summary:  A Honduran Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
official has told the Embassy that the GOH has accepted the 
Cuban nomination of Dr. Elis Alberto Gonzalez Polanco, Chief 
of the Cuban Medical Brigades in Honduras, as the first Cuban 
Ambassador to Honduras since the GOH normalized diplomatic 
relations with Cuba January 26, 2002.  The same MFA official 
has said that this information would be made public shortly. 
ORCA sources have indicated that the Honduran Armed Forces 
have urged President Ricardo Maduro not to approve the 
nomination due to Polanco\'s alleged activities for Cuban 
intelligence.  It is unclear if President Maduro has in fact 
approved Polanco.  Post is disappointed by the GOH\'s action 
and requests urgent guidance on whether EmbOffs should 
attempt to persuade the GOH to disapprove Polanco\'s 
nomination.  End Summary. 
 
3. (S)  The GOH normalized diplomatic relations with Cuba 
January 26, 2002, 40 years after relations were broken, in 
one of the last acts of the outgoing Flores Administration 
(ref E).  Prior to the decision Honduras and Cuba had 
maintained interests sections.  The Embassy was not notified 
in advance of the GOH\'s action.  The decision, which incoming 
President Ricardo Maduro told EmbOffs took him by surprise, 
was quickly ratified, in essence, by a January 27 public 
statement made by Maduro\'s Foreign Minister, Guillermo 
Perez-Cadalso Arias.  Since then the Cuban diplomatic mission 
has been headed by a Charge d\'Affaires.  The GOH has not 
taken any concrete steps to name a Honduran Ambassador to 
Cuba. 
 
4. (C) EmbOffs have queried MFA officials since January for 
updates on the possible exchange of ambassadors between the 
GOC and the GOH (ref D).  While the MFA has been circumspect, 
PolOffs have requested advance notice before the public 
naming of ambassadors. 
 
5. (C) In a November 5 meeting between PolOff and MFA 
Director General for Foreign Policy Ambassador Mario Fortin 
to demarche the MFA on the issue of Cuban doctors (ref B), 
PolOff asked Fortin for an update on the status of diplomatic 
relations between Honduras and Cuba.  Fortin told PolOff that 
Cuba had nominated and the GOH had approved Dr. Elis Alberto 
\"Orestes\" Gonzalez Polanco, DPOB 25MAY1948 in San Pablo de 
Yao, Granma Province, Cuba, as the Cuban Ambassador to 
Honduras.  Dr. Polanco, as he is commonly referred to, has 
been the head of the Cuban Medical Brigades in Honduras since 
1998 (post-Hurricane Mitch).  (Note:  There are an estimated 
100 (GOH/MFA) to 300/400 (USAID/Honduras) Cuban doctors 
currently in Honduras.  See septel for more information on 
the issue of Cuban doctors in Honduras.  End Note.) 
 
6. (S) ORCA sources have indicated that the Honduran Armed 
Forces have urged President Maduro not to approve Polanco\'s 
nomination due to Polanco\'s alleged activities for Cuban 
intelligence.  (Note: See ref C for more information on 
Polanco.  End Note.)  ORCA has not been able to independently 
confirm that Polanco is a Cuban intelligence officer, but 
would not dispute that some of the Cuban \"doctors\" sent to 
Honduras may be Cuban intelligence officers. 
 
7. (S) Despite Fortin\'s statement that the GOH had already 
approved Polanco\'s nomination, Post does not know if 
President Maduro has in fact given his approval to Polanco. 
Fortin claimed that the approval of Polanco\'s nomination 
would be made public in the near future. 
 
8. (C) Fortin told PolOff that there was nothing new 
regarding the possible naming of a Honduran Ambassador to 
Cuba, something that Maduro had told Ambassador Almaguer 
February 1 would not be high on his list of priorities (ref 
E).  To date Post has not heard of any names being considered 
by the GOH to possibly fill this position. 
 
9. (S) Action request for WHA:  Post requests urgent guidance 
on whether EmbOffs should attempt to persuade the GOH to 
disapprove the nomination of Polanco as Cuban Ambassador to 
Honduras prior to the potentially imminent public 
announcement of Polanco\'s approval by the GOH. 
10. (C) Comment:  Post was disappointed to learn that the 
Maduro Administration has apparently approved and is set to 
announce a suspected Cuban intelligence officer as Cuban 
Ambassador to Honduras.  While the process for GOH acceptance 
of a Cuban Ambassador was set in motion in January, it is 
unclear why the GOH has not rejected Polanco and demanded 
that the GOC not nominate someone thought to be a Cuban 
intelligence officer by the GOH itself.  Post notes that the 
GOH does not appear to be making any movement toward 
nominating a Honduran Ambassador to Cuba.  In addition, the 
MFA\'s action to provide advance notice to the Embassy of the 
Maduro Administration\'s controversial decision on this issue 
is in stark contrast with the complete lack of advance 
warning by the Flores Administration to the USG.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"4325","11/14/2002 22:15","02TEGUCIGALPA3126","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003126 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DOC PASS TO PATRICE WILLIAMS, MARIANN CARRERA PAZ 
DOC FOR ADVOCACY CENTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, ECON, ENRG, BEXP, HO 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MADURO RESPONDS TO COMMERCE SECRETARY 
EVANS ON AES BID 
 
1. (SBU) During a November 12 meeting, Honduran President 
Maduro provided DCM a letter in response to Commerce 
Secretary Evans\' October 22 letter advocating for a fair and 
 
SIPDIS 
transparent process in the 210MW energy bid sent on behalf of 
AES.  The original letter was sent via FedEx 2 day delivery 
on November 13, 2002 to the Advocacy Center, Department of 
Commerce under tracking number 8368 2020 8426. 
 
2. (SBU) Begin text: 
 
November 4, 2002 
 
Mr. Donald L. Evans 
The Secretary of Commerce 
Washington, D.C. 20230 
 
Dear Mr. Evans: 
 
I acknowledge receipt of your letter of October 22, referring 
to ENEE\'s tender for the supply of 210MW of new electric 
capacity. 
 
Please rest assured that in my Administration, we are 
committed to ensure the transparency in all our endeavours. 
 
I also look forward to continue the close and strong ties 
between our Governments which, throughout the years, have 
been highly appreciated by our people for the support and 
assistance you have always provided to Honduras. 
 
With the assurances of my highest esteem, 
 
(signature) 
 
Ricardo Maduro 
President of the Republic of Honduras 
 
End Text. 
 
PALMER 
"
"4352","11/15/2002 21:16","02TEGUCIGALPA3132","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR INR, S/CT, DS/ICI/ITA, AND PRM 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2012 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PGOV, ETTC, PINR, SMIG, ASEC, HO, CU 
SUBJECT: (S) HONDURAS HAS MANY CUBAN DOCTORS; MADURO 
CONCERNED OVER INTELLIGENCE WORK BUT NO GOH PLANS TO 
CURTAIL GOC ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A. PIERCE/FISK E-MAIL NOVEMBER 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 3076 
     C. STATE 205386 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
1. (S) Summary:  There are approximately 100-225 Cuban 
doctors and nurses in Honduras.  A bilateral treaty between 
the GOH and the GOC governs the program.  In addition, there 
are approximately 500 Hondurans studying medicine in Cuba on 
GOC scholarships.  President Ricardo Maduro told Ambassador 
November 12 that he was very concerned with the intelligence 
activities of the Cuban Medical Brigade, and that he was not 
aware of any immediate plans to accept the Cuban nomination 
of Dr. Elis Alberto Gonzalez Polanco, Chief of the Cuban 
Medical Brigade, as the first Cuban Ambassador to Honduras. 
Nevertheless, the GOH is not likely to curtail any of its 
medical assistance programs with Cuba.  End Summary. 
 
Cuban Doctors and Nurses in Honduras 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) PolOff delivered reftel C demarche on Cuban doctors 
November 5 to MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin. 
PolOff emphasized talking points about the disadvantages of 
accepting Cuban doctors.  PolOff also gave Fortin detailed 
information on USAID and Peace Corps health projects in 
Honduras, which are substantial. 
 
3. (SBU)  Fortin told PolOff that the GOH had a bilateral 
treaty with the GOC governing the Cuban Medical Brigades 
program in Honduras.  Note:  USAID has asked the Ministry of 
Health for a copy of the treaty, which Post will fax to 
WHA/CEN and WHA/CCA if a copy is obtained.  End Note.  Fortin 
said that the GOH sets the total numbers of doctors the 
Cubans can bring to Honduras and decides where the doctors 
go.  Typically the Cuban doctors are sent to rural areas or 
other hard-to-staff areas where Honduran doctors do not want 
to go.  Note: PolOff and ConOff briefly met a Cuban doctor at 
the National Mental Hospital during a joint CONS/POL tour of 
the facility.  End Note. 
 
4. (SBU) Fortin estimated there are approximately 100 Cuban 
doctors in Honduras.  USAID estimates that there are 
approximately 227 Cuban doctors and nurses in Honduras at any 
given time, and that approximately one-third of the Cubans 
are women.  Fortin said that the Cuban doctors must return to 
Cuba when their six-month stay was complete.  He said there 
had not been any requests for political asylum or any other 
problems.  USAID has learned that 20 of the Cuban 
doctors/nurses have asked to stay in Honduras.  Fortin said 
that the GOH does not pay the doctors salaries, but does pay 
a small amount (approximately USD 75/doctor) via PAHO to the 
doctors. 
 
5. (C) Fortin claimed that the GOC had not used the 
assistance by the doctors to try to get GOH support for Cuba 
in multilateral fora. 
 
6. (S) President Ricardo Maduro told Ambassador November 12 
that he was very concerned with the intelligence activities 
of the Cuban Medical Brigade in Honduras, saying that he was 
convinced they were up to mischief (ref A).  In addition, 
Maduro said that he was not aware of any immediate plans to 
accept the Cuban nomination of Dr. Elis Alberto Gonzalez 
Polanco, Chief of the Cuban Medical Brigade, as the first 
Cuban Ambassador to Honduras since the GOH normalized 
diplomatic relations with Cuba January 26, 2002 (see ref B 
for more information on that issue).  Maduro reiterated that 
he was in no hurry to act on this issue and promised 
Ambassador that he would consult with the Embassy prior to 
any announcement of the acceptance of a Cuban ambassador. 
Maduro said that he would look very closely at the proposed 
candidate\'s background to assure that it was not problematic 
in terms of unacceptable activities, including human rights 
violations. 
 
Honduran Med Students in Cuba; Cuban Professors in Honduras 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
7. (SBU) In addition, Fortin said there are approximately 500 
Hondurans currently studying medicine in Cuba on GOC 
scholarships, with 100 starting each year.  Fortin said that 
several private universities also have agreements directly 
with the GOC to bring Cuban professors to Honduras to teach. 
He said that the professors are paid approximately USD 
200/month directly, not via the GOC, for a period of six 
months to one year.  He said there had not been any problems 
or requests for political asylum from the professors.  Post 
also notes that Minister of Public Health Elias Lizardo has 
traveled to Cuba a couple times in 2002 and that some 
Hondurans travel to Cuba for medical treatment. 
 
GTMO Cubans and Rafters 
----------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Fortin said that the lack of problems with the Cuban 
doctors and professors was in contrast to the Cubans who came 
to Honduras from Guantanamo.  Of the twelve families, Fortin 
said that most had left Honduras, with the majority of those 
going to Mexico or the U.S. illegally.  He termed the program 
a complete failure.  In an unrelated meeting with 
International Organization of Migration (IOM) official 
Norberto Giron November 13, Giron told PolOff that to the 
best of IOM\'s knowledge all of the Cubans resettled from 
Guantanamo had left Honduras illegally for either Mexico or 
the U.S.  Fortin also told PolOff that in the past a small 
number of rafters have arrived on the Caribbean coast of 
Honduras and have been granted political asylum. 
 
Honduras Willing to Accept Cuban Doctors Despite Negatives 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
9. (S) Comment:  It is apparent to Post that the GOH is not 
likely to curtail any of its medical assistance programs with 
Cuba.  As a poor, developing country with a limited public 
health system, the GOH is unlikely to turn down any offers of 
assistance, even when aspects of the program concern the 
president himself.  Post is pleased to note President 
Maduro\'s hesitancy in moving forward on the Cubans\' 
nomination of Polanco for ambassador.  Post expects that 
Maduro will stick to his promise to Ambassador to consult 
with the Embassy before making any announcement on a Cuban 
ambassador.  Post is hopeful that Maduro will either continue 
to delay a decision or reject Polanco\'s nomination outright. 
End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"4378","11/18/2002 22:53","02TEGUCIGALPA3140","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE214982","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003140 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR OES/OA, L/OES, WHA/CEN, WHA/CAR, AND WHA/MEX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, ETRD, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SUPPORTS MEXICO\'S CARIBBEAN MARITIME 
BOUNDARY INITIATIVE; MFA GIVES UPDATE ON PENDING BORDER 
DISPUTES 
 
REF: STATE 214982 
 
1. PolOff discussed Mexico\'s Caribbean maritime boundary 
initiative (reftel) November 5 with MFA DG for Foreign Policy 
AMB Mario Fortin.  Fortin said that the GOH had attended the 
first conference in May and welcomed the Mexican initiative. 
(Fortin told PolOff November 18 that the GOH had \"registered\" 
its Caribbean boundary disputes with Mexico.) 
 
2. Fortin said November 5 that with respect to Honduras\' 
boundary dispute with Nicaragua, the GOH was only using the 
International Court of Justice (ICJ) process, and not the 
Mexican initiative.  Post notes that although the overall 
issue of the Honduran-Nicaraguan Caribbean border is still 
pending, the ICJ recently ruled in favor of the GOH\'s 
petition against Nicaragua\'s 35 percent tariff on Honduran 
imports. 
 
3. Fortin said that the GOH had negotiations underway with 
Cuba and Jamaica on boundary disputes, had recently completed 
negotiations with the United Kingdom on the Grand Cayman 
Islands, and had helped support the OAS process of 
negotiations between Guatemala and Belize. 
 
4. In addition, Fortin noted that the ICJ had yet to rule on 
El Salvador\'s September 10 request for a revision of the 1992 
ICJ ruling that laid out shared areas of control in the Gulf 
of Fonseca and established the land border between Honduras 
and El Salvador. 
PALMER 
"
"4389","11/19/2002 14:20","02TEGUCIGALPA3142","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE232124","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 003142 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/AND, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2012 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, HO, VE 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SUPPORTIVE OF U.S. POSITION ON VENEZUELAN 
DEMOCRACY, BUT UNLIKELY TO TAKE LEAD ROLE 
 
REF: STATE 232124 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) PolOff delivered reftel demarche on Venezuelan 
democracy November 18 to MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario 
Fortin.  Fortin told PolOff that the GOH did not have any 
response to the demarche, other than to note that the GOH 
supported the USG\'s position on Venezuelan democracy outlined 
in the main demarche points. 
 
2. (C) Comment.  Post notes that while in general supportive 
of the USG\'s approach on Venezuela, the GOH is unlikely to 
take a leading role on the issue and its public statements 
and policies will likely be influenced by those of other 
Central American countries.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"4390","11/19/2002 14:32","02TEGUCIGALPA3145","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","02STATE205386|02TEGUCIGALPA3076","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003145 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR INR, S/CT, DS/ICI/ITA, AND PRM 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2012 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PGOV, ETTC, PINR, SMIG, ASEC, HO, CU 
SUBJECT: (S) HONDURAS HAS MANY CUBAN DOCTORS; MADURO 
CONCERNED OVER INTELLIGENCE WORK BUT NO GOH PLANS TO 
CURTAIL GOC ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A. PIERCE/FISK E-MAIL NOVEMBER 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 3076 
     C. STATE 205386 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (S) Summary:  There are approximately 100-225 Cuban 
doctors and nurses in Honduras.  A bilateral treaty between 
the GOH and the GOC governs the program.  In addition, there 
are approximately 500 Hondurans studying medicine in Cuba on 
GOC scholarships.  President Ricardo Maduro told Ambassador 
November 12 that he was very concerned with the intelligence 
activities of the Cuban Medical Brigade, and that he was not 
aware of any immediate plans to accept the Cuban nomination 
of Dr. Elis Alberto Gonzalez Polanco, Chief of the Cuban 
Medical Brigade, as the first Cuban Ambassador to Honduras. 
Nevertheless, the GOH is not likely to curtail any of its 
medical assistance programs with Cuba.  End Summary. 
 
Cuban Doctors and Nurses in Honduras 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) PolOff delivered reftel C demarche on Cuban doctors 
November 5 to MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin. 
PolOff emphasized talking points about the disadvantages of 
accepting Cuban doctors.  PolOff also gave Fortin detailed 
information on USAID and Peace Corps health projects in 
Honduras, which are substantial. 
 
3. (SBU)  Fortin told PolOff that the GOH had a bilateral 
treaty with the GOC governing the Cuban Medical Brigades 
program in Honduras.  Note:  USAID has asked the Ministry of 
Health for a copy of the treaty, which Post will fax to 
WHA/CEN and WHA/CCA if a copy is obtained.  End Note.  Fortin 
said that the GOH sets the total numbers of doctors the 
Cubans can bring to Honduras and decides where the doctors 
go.  Typically the Cuban doctors are sent to rural areas or 
other hard-to-staff areas where Honduran doctors do not want 
to go.  Note: PolOff and ConOff briefly met a Cuban doctor at 
the National Mental Hospital during a joint CONS/POL tour of 
the facility.  End Note. 
 
4. (SBU) Fortin estimated there are approximately 100 Cuban 
doctors in Honduras.  USAID estimates that there are 
approximately 227 Cuban doctors and nurses in Honduras at any 
given time, and that approximately one-third of the Cubans 
are women.  Fortin said that the Cuban doctors must return to 
Cuba when their six-month stay was complete.  He said there 
had not been any requests for political asylum or any other 
problems.  USAID has learned that 20 of the Cuban 
doctors/nurses have asked to stay in Honduras.  Fortin said 
that the GOH does not pay the doctors salaries, but does pay 
a small amount (approximately USD 75/doctor) via PAHO to the 
doctors. 
 
5. (C) Fortin claimed that the GOC had not used the 
assistance by the doctors to try to get GOH support for Cuba 
in multilateral fora. 
 
6. (S) President Ricardo Maduro told Ambassador November 12 
that he was very concerned with the intelligence activities 
of the Cuban Medical Brigade in Honduras, saying that he was 
convinced they were up to mischief (ref A).  In addition, 
Maduro said that he was not aware of any immediate plans to 
accept the Cuban nomination of Dr. Elis Alberto Gonzalez 
Polanco, Chief of the Cuban Medical Brigade, as the first 
Cuban Ambassador to Honduras since the GOH normalized 
diplomatic relations with Cuba January 26, 2002 (see ref B 
for more information on that issue).  Maduro reiterated that 
he was in no hurry to act on this issue and promised 
Ambassador that he would consult with the Embassy prior to 
any announcement of the acceptance of a Cuban ambassador. 
Maduro said that he would look very closely at the proposed 
candidate\'s background to assure that it was not problematic 
in terms of unacceptable activities, including human rights 
violations. 
 
Honduran Med Students in Cuba; Cuban Professors in Honduras 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
7. (SBU) In addition, Fortin said there are approximately 500 
Hondurans currently studying medicine in Cuba on GOC 
scholarships, with 100 starting each year.  Fortin said that 
several private universities also have agreements directly 
with the GOC to bring Cuban professors to Honduras to teach. 
He said that the professors are paid approximately USD 
200/month directly, not via the GOC, for a period of six 
months to one year.  He said there had not been any problems 
or requests for political asylum from the professors.  Post 
also notes that Minister of Public Health Elias Lizardo has 
traveled to Cuba a couple times in 2002 and that some 
Hondurans travel to Cuba for medical treatment. 
 
GTMO Cubans and Rafters 
----------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Fortin said that the lack of problems with the Cuban 
doctors and professors was in contrast to the Cubans who came 
to Honduras from Guantanamo.  Of the twelve families, Fortin 
said that most had left Honduras, with the majority of those 
going to Mexico or the U.S. illegally.  He termed the program 
a complete failure.  In an unrelated meeting with 
International Organization of Migration (IOM) official 
Norberto Giron November 13, Giron told PolOff that to the 
best of IOM\'s knowledge all of the Cubans resettled from 
Guantanamo had left Honduras illegally for either Mexico or 
the U.S.  Fortin also told PolOff that in the past a small 
number of rafters have arrived on the Caribbean coast of 
Honduras and have been granted political asylum. 
 
Honduras Willing to Accept Cuban Doctors Despite Negatives 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
9. (S) Comment:  It is apparent to Post that the GOH is not 
likely to curtail any of its medical assistance programs with 
Cuba.  As a poor, developing country with a limited public 
health system, the GOH is unlikely to turn down any offers of 
assistance, even when aspects of the program concern the 
president himself.  Post is pleased to note President 
Maduro\'s hesitancy in moving forward on the Cubans\' 
nomination of Polanco for ambassador.  Post expects that 
Maduro will stick to his promise to Ambassador to consult 
with the Embassy before making any announcement on a Cuban 
ambassador.  Post is hopeful that Maduro will either continue 
to delay a decision or reject Polanco\'s nomination outright. 
End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"4396","11/19/2002 17:07","02TEGUCIGALPA3149","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA3023","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 003149 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, DRL/IL, EB/EFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR, EXIM, OPIC 
STATE PASS USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2012 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, PGOV, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: IMF PROGRAM NEGOTIATIONS DELAYED UNTIL 
SPRING 2003, PENDING GOH PROGRESS ON ECONOMIC REFORM 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 3023 
 
Classified By: Economic Counselor Robin Matthewman; Reasons 1.5 (B) and 
 (D). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (C) As expected, the IMF mission did not/not reach 
agreement with the GOH on draft terms of a three-year Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility Program (PRGF) during its 
November 4-15 visit to Honduras.  In consultations with the 
IMF mission, the GOH developed a plan to improve the fiscal 
situation in the next few months.  If all goes well, the team 
will return to Honduras in March or April to begin 
negotiations on a program.  The delay of a program will put 
into jeopardy USD 240 million in debt relief, concessional 
loans and grants from some donors.  It also puts into doubt 
the utility of a Consultative Group meeting currently planned 
for February 3-4.  Two or three donors were highly critical 
of the IMF\'s approach.  The IMF countered that the situation 
is unsustainable, unless donors want to continue to fund 
public sector salaries for Honduras year in and year out, and 
watch investment in poverty reduction programs continue to 
dwindle.  Embassy recommends supporting the IMF on its push 
for real fiscal and economic reform in Honduras.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Deteriorating Finances Dragging Down the Economy 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (SBU) In a briefing for key donors (the G-15) on November 
15, the head of the IMF mission, Mario Garza, said that the 
IMF is very worried about the current economic situation. 
The economy remains depressed, primarily because of the 
fiscal policy pursued in 2001 and 2002.  If nothing is 
changed, the policy will continue to drag down the Honduran 
economy in 2003.  Garza commended the improvements in revenue 
collection which the GOH has realized since passage of the 
tax reforms last spring; however, he noted that this 
improvement in tax administration will only arrest the 
alarming growth in the government\'s budget deficit.  It will 
not put the GOH\'s finances on a sustainable path. 
 
3.  (SBU) Garza explained that the key figure the mission 
looked at is public sector savings (revenues minus current 
expenditures for the central government and other public 
sector entities), because it provides an indication of the 
amount of funds the government is able to generate for 
capital investment and discretionary social programs.  Public 
sector savings declined from nine percent of GDP in 1999 to 
two percent in 2002 (a staggering decline of seven percentage 
points).  With savings that weak, the government is unable to 
fund the needed social programs from its own resources; it 
has come to rely on foreign aid to do so.  To highlight the 
enormous size of the foregone public sector savings each 
year, IMF PermRep Chungsuk Cha added that the planned HIPC 
debt relief (a one-time benefit for government finances for 
Highly Indebted Poor Countries) is ten percent of GDP.  This 
figure pales in significance compared to losses every year of 
seven percent of GDP because of the GOH\'s current fiscal 
policy.  In its press release, the IMF mission pointed out 
that Honduran exports and imports have contracted and that 
the lack of investment was an important contributor to the 
problem (as well as the decline in key commodity prices). 
 
4. (SBU) Causes for the declining public sector savings can 
be found both on the expenditure and revenue sides.  For 
example, current expenditures (primarily salaries) for the 
central government rose from 16.7 percent of GDP in 1999 to 
18.6 percent in 2001 and 18.9 percent in 2002.  At the same 
time, taxes declined from 17.5 percent of GDP in 1999 to 16.2 
percent in 2001 and 15.6 percent in 2002.  The public sector 
wage bill has risen from 8 percent of GDP in 1999 to 10 
percent of GDP in 2001 and almost eleven percent in 2002. 
The average figure for the public sector wage bill in other 
PRGF countries is five to six percent of GDP, according to 
the IMF. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Need for GOH to Develop Plan of Action 
-------------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) Garza said that the government clearly sees the 
problem but is finding it difficult to quickly turn around 
the inherited problems.  President Ricardo Maduro announced 
his intentions (on November 13) to push for a Fiscal 
Responsibility Pact with all sectors of society.  The GOH 
intends to show the public the gap between revenues and 
needed expenditures and to engender enough public 
understanding to undertake the needed structural changes. 
The government will be working in the next few months on: 1) 
an assessment of tax policy; 2) a study of current 
expenditures to identify priority areas; 3) a review of the 
subsidy policy, to see where subsidies can be targeted to the 
sectors of society most in need; 4) a review of the financial 
situation of public enterprises, where savings have been 
declining over time; and 5) public sector administrative 
reform.  The IMF mission also recommended that the GOH take a 
fresh look at the poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) 
first prepared in 2001 and identify the priority areas of 
public expenditures, given current macroeconomic constraints. 
 
6. (C) The government believes it can identify necessary 
measures by March or April and would like to restart 
negotiations with the IMF at that time.  This would mean that 
under the best case scenario, it will be June or July before 
Honduras once again has an IMF program.  Until that time, 
many World Bank and IDB loans, grants from some donors, and 
debt relief will be held up.  Garza estimated these add to 
USD 240 million in 2003.  A large amount of this sum is Paris 
Club debt service.  PermRep Cha indicated that the IMF will 
continue to be positive in its communications with the Paris 
Club about its continued work with the GOH.  The IMF does not 
expect creditor countries in the Paris Club to push for 
resumption of debt service payments (only Germany indicated 
that it has been receiving demarches from its capital pushing 
the GOH to pay its Paris Club debt).  On the margins of the 
meeting, the World Bank rep - just back from consultations in 
Washington - noted that while existing projects will continue 
(which includes its Reengineering Government project), new 
lending will be limited to what it considers its Low Case 
scenario. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Is the IMF Being Fair to Maduro? 
-------------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) Garza dodged questions from the G-15 and the press on 
reasons the Fund gave a favorable review of the GOH\'s 
financial performance in September 2001, despite the 
existence of the same problems at that time.  The German 
Ambassador, the Italian Ambassador, the Swedish counselor, 
and the UNDP rep all criticized the Fund\'s stance as unfair 
to the Maduro administration.  They noted that the bulk of 
the growth in the current government expenditures (especially 
the wage bill) occurred during the Flores government, and the 
IMF did not declare the GOH off its program at that time. 
They argued that the IMF\'s position basically punishes the 
wrong people and that the economic difficulties the 
government will soon face because of its lack of an IMF 
program will result in destabilization of this reformist 
government.  Other donors emphasized that the lack of an IMF 
program puts into doubt the utility of a Consultative Group 
meeting currently planned for February 3-4. 
 
8.  (C) In turn, the IMF reps urged the G-15 Ambassadors to 
encourage the GOH to seize the moment and make the necessary 
structural reforms.  The IMF reps noted that the situation is 
not sustainable except in the unlikely circumstance that 
donors are willing to finance the government\'s fiscal deficit 
indefinitely (in addition to needed poverty reduction 
programs).  They stated that they saw genuine commitment on 
behalf of the GOH to make these changes in the context of a 
Fiscal Responsibility Pact, and GOH needs the support of the 
donors to get it done.  This window of opportunity would not 
last very long and may not come again, explained the IMF 
officials.  In response to a question on the IMF\'s 
recommendations on tax policy, Garza noted that the 
discussions with the GOH centered on elimination of sales and 
income tax exemptions and not on increases in tax rates. 
 
9.  (U) In statements to the press, the IMF mission noted 
that actions by the National Banking and Insurance Commission 
(CNBS) had been satisfactory and that the Central Bank\'s 
policy of gradual depreciation of the lempiras is 
appropriate.  They also mentioned that foreign reserves (four 
and a half months of imports) are adequate. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  (C) The IMF\'s approval of the GOH\'s macroeconomic 
performance last year was based on projections on spending 
and tax collection that proved fallacious.  At the end of the 
Flores administration traditional election year overspending 
was only delayed rather than avoided.  To make the 2002 
budget numbers work, then Finance Minister Gabriela Nunez 
apparently assumed an impractical 20 percent increase in tax 
revenues at the same time the Congress was enacting (and 
Flores was signing) a series of new tax exemptions and 
unfounded spending initiatives. 
 
11.  (C) Past inaction on macroeconomic and structural 
reforms has resulted in a stagnant economy and an 
unsustainable central government fiscal deficit.  Post 
believes that the GOH macroeconomic team is committed to 
working toward the necessary changes in fiscal policy. 
However, all of these reforms will require political will on 
the part of a government that has a very slim coalition 
majority in Congress.  High level officials in the Maduro 
government have continually asked the USG and other donors to 
push the IMF for flexibility and to understand what it views 
as political realities. 
 
12. (C) Except in the area of improved tax administration, 
Post is not sanguine about the GOH\'s commitment and ability 
to push through long-lasting and structural economic reforms. 
 Many of the measures that the GOH is only now trying to 
analyze - such as consolidation of ministries, improvement of 
the finances of the public enterprises and the reorientation 
of resources in the education ministry to teaching and away 
from administrative resources - could have been undertaken 
during the past ten months but were not.  By the time this 
government is done with its study and analysis, its finances 
will only be that much further in the hole.  While the Maduro 
government\'s rhetoric is strongly reformist, its actual 
performance to date indicates that it is unwilling to act and 
follow through on unpopular, but necessary, policy 
prescriptions.  Embassy recommends supporting the IMF on its 
push for real fiscal and economic reform in Honduras.  End 
Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"4397","11/19/2002 21:23","02TEGUCIGALPA3150","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR GUATEMALA COMMATT:DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, EINV, HO 
SUBJECT: Congress Issues Favorable Report on InterAirports 
 
1.  Summary.  On November 11, a congressional commission 
released a favorable report finding that U.S.-led consortium 
InterAirports, which was awarded the contract to manage 
Honduras\' four international airports in October 2000, has 
complied with all the terms of the concession contract. 
InterAirport officials hope that the inquiry will clear the 
consortium of any perceived non-compliance of the contract 
and allow them to proceed with the next stages of the 
project, principally the improvements in the airport in 
Tegucigalpa.  InterAiports representatives thanked the 
Embassy for its support and advice throughout.  End summary. 
 
2.  After a series of media attacks and complaints by 
private sector groups, the National Congress named a special 
commission in July to investigate InterAirports for possible 
breach of contract.  The U.S.-led Interairports consortium 
(51 percent U.S.-owned) took management control of Honduras\' 
four international airports in October 2000.  Critics 
charged that the San Francisco Airport Authority was not an 
active, full partner in the consortium (participation of a 
major airport was a requirement in the public tender and 
subsequent contract) and that the company had not followed 
through with investments.  They have also been criticized 
for fee increases and critics questioned the concession 
process itself. 
 
3.  The commission was comprised of seven congress deputies 
and was charged with investigating the bidding process, the 
contract and subcontracts and contract implementation plans. 
The commission also held a series of meetings with private 
sector associations and current and former GOH officials 
responsible for negotiating and implementing the concession 
contract.  InterAirports representatives provided over 2,000 
pages of supporting documentation to the commission. 
 
4.  On November 11, the congressional committee issued a 
favorable report, finding that the concession process was 
transparent and that Interairports has complied with all its 
commitments under the concession contract, including correct 
and appropriate involvement of San Francisco Airport 
Authority.  The commission also found that delays in 
contract-mandated investments, such as extending the runway 
at the Tegucigalpa airport and building a new terminal, are 
the result of government delays and inaction.  Construction 
of the terminal is underway after the GOH settled a legal 
dispute with a private party, permitting the demolition of 
an old hangar on adjacent land that had been embargoed per a 
court order. 
 
5.  The commission made a number of recommendations, mostly 
directed toward the GOH, including expediting the 
expropriation of land so that InterAirports can begin 
extending the runway, providing the Superintendent of 
Concessions with enough resources to supervise the 
implementation of the concession contract and requiring the 
Superintendent to submit a quarterly report to Congress on 
the implementation of the contract. 
 
6.  In response to customer service complaints, 
InterAirports representatives stated that they have begun to 
focus on customer service training for Interairports 
personnel.  They are trying to work more cooperatively with 
the airlines on reducing landing fees at the four airports 
and aircraft parking charges at the San Pedro Sula airport. 
 
7.  In a meeting with InterAirports representatives after 
the commission reported its findings to Congress, Minister 
without portfolio for investment Camilo Atala stated that 
the GOH would support InterAirports and the terms of the 
contract.  Before the study, President Maduro and other 
government officials had publicly stated that InterAirports 
had complied with the contract. 
 
8.  In a meeting with Emboffs, InterAirports thanked the 
Embassy for its advocacy and advice.  They believe that the 
Tegucigalpa airport construction will now proceed and that 
the GOH will provide them long overdue documentation that 
will allow them to solidify financing for the next stages. 
In addition, they are interested in having the GOH complete 
an inventory of the airport and stop aircraft with unpaid 
bills from using the airport, both GOH commitments. 
 
9.  On an issue unrelated to the congressional inquiry, 
InterAirports representatives indicated that the consortium 
is willing to help the GOH build an international airport in 
Copan in western Honduras, if desired.  The GOH and private 
sector have been discussing the feasibility of building an 
airport near the site of one of Honduras\' main tourism 
attractions, the Mayan ruins of Copan.  The terms of the 
concession contract prohibit the GOH from using government 
financing to build a new international airport without the 
consent of InterAirports. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  Despite the fact that Adolfo Facusse, President of the 
National Association of Industrialists (ANDI) and the person 
who has been behind many of the attacks on InterAirports, 
offered to cooperate with InterAirports representatives 
during a recent meeting, we expect continued private sector 
sniping.  Delays in construction projects, particularly at 
the Tegucigalpa airport, have contributed to a souring of 
public opinion of the concession process in general.  We 
believe that the consortium is dedicated to improving their 
public image and providing the users with better service. 
End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4398","11/19/2002 21:28","02TEGUCIGALPA3151","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA2043|02TEGUCIGALPA2563","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003151 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP, EB/CBA 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EINV, KPRV, HO 
SUBJECT: CELLULAR PROVIDERS PRE-QUALIFIED 
 
REF: a) TEGUCIGALPA 02043  b) TEGUCIGALPA 02563 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Bellsouth was one of three firms found to 
prequalify to participate in the upcoming 25-year wireless 
telephone service concession on November 7, along with the 
Chilean company ENTEL and a Swiss-Honduran consortium. 
Digicel Honduras, a company with partial U.S. ownership, was 
disqualified on the basis that it did not adequately 
demonstrate its ties to an operating telecom company 
(Digitel of Venezuela).  Digicel officials will soon present 
clarifying documentation and ask Conatel to reverse the 
disqualification.  Econoffs have discussed the issue with 
Conatel officials and worked with Digicel reps to understand 
the key reasons for disqualification and possible routes for 
remedy.  At this point, the company has not asked for any 
specific USG advocacy.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Of the six companies who submitted paperwork to pre- 
qualify for the upcoming 25-year wireless telephone services 
concession, three were found eligible by the Honduran 
telecom regulator, CONATEL, on November 7.  These three 
firms were: the U.S.\'s  Bellsouth, Chilean company Empresa 
Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (ENTEL), and a Swiss-Honduran 
consortium Megatel-Emce.  Among the three disqualified 
bidders was the other company with U.S. participation - 
Digicel Honduras - and two firms related to the Mexican 
utility Telemex.  Conatel is giving the disqualified 
companies time to file a rebuttal to the disqualification. 
The issuance of the tender package is now delayed until 
approximately January of 2003 and the opening of the bids 
estimated for sometime in March 2003.  Digicel 
representatives visited the Embassy on November 14 to 
explain their concern about the company\'s disqualification. 
Bellsouth has not been in contact with the Embassy to date. 
 
3. (SBU) CONATEL provided a long list of legal, technical 
and financial deficiencies in Digicel\'s prequalification 
package.  Some are spurious and easily clarified.  However, 
the key requirement for prequalification was a demonstration 
that the bidder was a significant participant (20 percent or 
more) in an operating wireless telecom company.  Digicel 
Honduras is claiming that its shareholders\' participation in 
the Venezuelan telephone company Digitel de Venezuela 
satisfies this requirement.  However, the complexity of the 
consortium\'s financial structure apparently raised serious 
questions in Conatel that the requirement was satisfactorily 
met. 
 
4. (SBU) Digicel Honduras consists of Digicel Holdings Ltd. 
(61 percent), Venezuelan Ventures (35 percent) and other 
unspecified shareholders (4 percent).  Venezuelan Ventures 
is itself a consortium of four firms that together represent 
21 percent of the shares of Digitel de Venezuela (slightly 
higher than the required 20 percent): GSM Venezuela (2.78 
percent), Venconsul (16.04 percent), Norconsult Telematics 
Americas (1.0 percent) and Citibank through its subsidiary 
Latin Investment (1.88 percent).   Conatel raised questions 
about the following issues: 
 
-- Conatel did not credit Latin Investment\'s 1.88 percent of 
Digitel as counting in the calculation of the amount 
controlled by Venezuelan Ventures because the bid documents 
did not adequately identify the firm as a Citibank 
subsidiary.  This left Venezuelan Ventures slightly short of 
the required 20 percent holdings in Digitel.  Digicel plans 
to provide further documentation showing the financial ties 
between Latin Investment and Citibank, and hopes that will 
resolve the problem. 
 
-- Digicel Honduras provided financial statements for (the 
non-qualifying) Venezuelan Ventures rather than for the 
individual consortium members in Venezuelan Ventures.  This 
deficiency will also be eliminated as a problem, if Conatel 
accepts Latin Investment\'s ownership by Citibank and thus 
Venezuelan Venture\'s status as a significant participant in 
Digitel de Venezuela. 
 
-- Digicel\'s regional representative Marnie Martin signed 
the bid documents as regional representative of Digicel 
Holdings.  The prequalification package, according to 
Conatel, was missing a sworn declaration indicating that Ms. 
Martin is the legal representative of Digitel de Venezuela. 
The package also omitted the legal domicile and exact 
address of the financial associate, technical associate and 
the company through which the technical credentials were 
presented.  Conatel indicates that these legal requirements 
are considered disqualifying; documents cannot be 
substituted or added to clarify or qualify this missing 
information. 
 
5. (SBU) At this point, Digicel has not requested Embassy 
assistance on their disqualification.  An earlier advocacy 
request by Digicel -- for assistance in convincing the GOH 
to change the terms of the concession to allow for more than 
one wireless contract - has been overtaken by their 
disqualification for the moment. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment.  Requirement that the bidders in a 
concession have a track record of operating a similar 
company elsewhere is a common way of determining bona fides 
of companies prior to the opening of the concession process 
(a similar requirement was included in the concession of 
Honduras\' international airports in 2000).  Digicel\'s 
relatively complex financial structure appears to have made 
this determination more difficult than is the case for other 
companies. Conatel fanned the fires a bit by adding to its 
legitimate concerns a series of spurious documentation 
problems (like the alleged omission of a table of contents). 
However, Embassy believes Digicel executives now understand 
the key challenges ahead to getting the disqualification 
dismissed.  End Comment. 
 
 
PALMER 
"
"4422","11/20/2002 22:15","02TEGUCIGALPA3170","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY) 
INFO IIP 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, Ios, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION:\"GREEN LIGHT\" 
 
Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based daily \"La Tribuna\"(liberal 
party periodical) (11/16),\"Green Light\": The victory of the 
Republicans in the recent elections has given Bush a 
majority in both the Senate and the House, which has not 
occurred since President Eisenhower. 
 
\"The vast majority of the voters relegated to second 
priority their normal concerns with the economy and their 
personal well-being.\" 
 
\"The Democrats underestimated Bush\'s popularity. In all the 
elections, Bush made the difference.  His campaign expert 
Karl Rove did not allow the voters to forget the terrorist 
attacks. And coincidentally, during the two weeks preceding 
the election, a sniper was terrorizing Washington, D.C.-- 
individual security, collective security, the security of 
the nation were the only real themes of this election\". 
 
\"The final triumph of Bush is the victory he obtained in the 
Security Council of the UN. Any negative reaction by Sadam 
would now give Bush the green light he needs to invade Iraq 
with the consent of the entire international community. 
Bush does not want to disarm Iraq -- he wants to eliminate 
Hussein. It has been a long time since a U.S. President has 
had such support for his initiatives. This victory presages 
a much greater role for the imperial power in world 
politics.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"4451","11/21/2002 15:29","02TEGUCIGALPA3184","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","01TEGUCIGALPA2872","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 003184 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN AND EB/CBA 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/21/2012 
TAGS: ENRG, BEXP, EINV, ECON, EAID, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: AES AND ELECTRICITY TENDER: GOH AWARDS TO LUFUSSA 
DESPITE FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH BID REQUIREMENTS 
 
REF: A. (A) 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2872 
 
     B. (B) TEGUCIGALPA 02207 
     C. (C) TEGUCIGALPA 02857 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) The Honduran state-owned electricity company ENEE 
announced that Honduran company Lufussa was the winner of the 
210MW electricity tender, ignoring Lufussa\'s failure to 
comply with bid requirements and serious allegations of 
impropriety.  ENEE\'s decision represents a heavy blow for 
U.S. company AES, which seeks to build a USD 600 million 
combined cycle plant producing 850 MW of energy, fueled by 
liquefied natural gas.  AES has identified a number of 
weaknesses in the decision and plans to challenge the 
contract award through administrative and judicial channels, 
if necessary.  The GOH has not adequately explained these 
apparent discrepancies to date.  Embassy recommends that the 
USG support AES in its challenge of the bid results.  While 
post does not necessarily recommend a direct linkage between 
this issue and USG assistance, it would be helpful to delay 
any announcements of new assistance or initiatives at this 
time.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
ENEE ANNOUNCES LUFUSSA BEAT OUT AES, WITHOUT SUBSTANTIATION 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
2. (C) On November 15, the Board of Directors of the 
state-owned electricity company ENEE announced Honduran 
company Lufussa (owned by the Kafie family) was the winner of 
the 210MW electricity tender.  ENEE indicated that Lufussa 
had provided the lowest evaluated price per kilowatt hour of 
$.04638, followed by Comercial Laeisz at $.04797, AES at 
$.04825, ENERSA at $.04847, NAINSA at $.05078 and El Triunfo 
at $.05337.  No documentation was provided on the assumptions 
underlying these calculations.  The official notification of 
the results was delivered to the bidders on November 19. 
 
3. (C) ENEE\'s decision, if not overturned, represents a heavy 
blow for U.S. company AES, which seeks to build a USD 600 
million combined cycle plant producing 850 MW of energy, 
fueled by liquefied natural gas.  Successful acquisition of 
this contract would have provided AES sufficient security of 
demand, along with its contracts in El Salvador, to complete 
financing arrangements and begin construction of the plant 
and LNG terminal.  AES is concerned about perceived 
irregularities and a lack of transparency in the evaluation 
process.  They continue to seek the supporting documentation. 
 Post expects the company to issue a challenge to the bid 
award by November 26.  If the appeal is denied and AES 
decides to sue in the courts for redress, this challenge 
could tie up the tender for months or even years, thus 
delaying the GOH\'s phase-out of extremely expensive 
short-term electricity contracts. 
 
4. (C) The USG (both at the Embassy and in Washington) has 
heavily advocated for a fair and transparent process (ref c). 
 In the past month, Embassy approaches have been complemented 
by letters from Commerce Secretary Evans and Under Secretary 
of State for Economic, Business and Agricultural Affairs Alan 
Larson.  EmbOffs have been repeatedly assured by numerous 
high level Honduran officials, including President Maduro, of 
their commitment to a transparent and technically correct 
process.  Nonetheless, serious flaws in the GOH\'s management 
of the process have emerged. 
 
5. (C) On November 18, Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza and presidential counselor Ramon Medina Luna met with 
Ambassador and DCM to explain the GOH\'s position on the 
results of the project.  Cosenza started by explaining the 
process used to ensure fairness and transparency - the 
Evaluation Committee included representatives from Probidad 
Administrativa (the GOH\'s ethics office), the Attorney 
General\'s office, and the Controleria (akin to the OMB or 
GAO).  A transparency committee of outside observers was also 
formed to certify that all procedures were followed 
correctly.  There was unanimity among all the representatives 
on the results of the bid.  Given this unanimity, Cosenza 
asserted that there was no defendable way for the Board of 
Directors of ENEE to disregard the recommendation or for the 
President to refuse to sign off on it.  Cosenza also 
explained that there was a five-week delay in announcement of 
the bid results to accommodate a request from new officials 
in Probidad Administrativa to have time to review the whole 
process.  Although the GOH was aware that the delay would add 
to questions about the fairness of the process, it was 
necessary to let Probidad\'s review take its course. 
6. (C) During the meeting with Cosenza, Ambassador and DCM 
questioned the lack of availability of the data on which the 
decision was based, the lack of action on allegations of 
impropriety, and the failure to disqualify national firms 
early in the process who failed to meet the minimum 
requirements of the bid.  Cosenza was apparently nervous and 
defensive throughout the meeting, but did not acknowledge GOH 
failings in these areas.  At the end of the meeting, Cosenza 
offered to send the members of the transparency committee to 
the Embassy to brief the Ambassador personally.  The meeting 
is scheduled to take place on Friday morning, November 22. 
 
---------------- 
AREAS OF CONCERN 
---------------- 
 
7. (C) AES has identified a number of categories of problems 
in the transparency and fairness of the bid process, 
including lack of transparency and data, unfair evaluation 
criteria, and a lack of action by the GOH on possible 
corruption among the participants in the evaluation.  The 
GOH\'s responses have been legalistic and vague, to date. 
 
Unsubstantiated Price Calculations 
---------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) AES alleges a lack of transparency and fairness on the 
calculation of evaluated price: no documentation regarding 
price analysis or methodology has been received to date.  In 
response to separate Embassy and AES inquiries, the GOH has 
promised that the transparency committee, established by ENEE 
to monitor the evaluation committee\'s work, will give 
briefings on the process.  This clearly begs the question. 
Customarily, an evaluation of price consists of application 
of a formula based on price bids, estimates on fuel costs and 
estimates of transmission loss. 
 
9. (C) AES calculates that with some assumptions, Lufussa 
could have had a lower evaluated price before transmission 
loss, but after transmission loss is taken into account 
(since its transmission losses should be about 20 percent 
lower than Lufussa\'s) AES would come into first place albeit 
at a small margin.  According to AES\' calculations, there are 
no scenarios under which Comercial Laiesz could have had a 
lower cost.   Note: Minister of the Presidency Cosenza and 
ENEE General Manager Botazzi, although both are electrical 
engineers, have professed lack of familiarity with the 
evaluation formula and the results.  They claim to have 
relied totally on the results of the Evaluation Committee and 
the Transparency Committee.  AES terms it \"incredible\" that 
the GOH would have announced a winner without even doing a 
cursory view of the calculations or having the information 
ready.  End Note. 
 
Lack of Disqualification of top bidders for failures of their 
bids to meet tender package requirements 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
10. (C) AES has strongly argued all along that Lufussa should 
have been disqualified by ENEE for failure to include in its 
offer a transmission line and all related infrastructure. 
Clause 2.1 of the draft contract and Addendum 4 of the 
package, required transmission lines and all related 
infrastructure needed to deliver committed capacity and 
energy be included.  According to AES, Lufussa did not make a 
commitment to build the $20 million transmission line until 
it received the second round of requests for clarification by 
the evaluation committee.  In the case of Comercial Laeisz, 
AES believes that the company\'s offer of 155 separate 1.7 MW 
motors does not meet the intent of the ENEE to receive bids 
for \"base load\" capacity. 
 
11. (C) GOH officials (including Cosenza, ENEE leadership and 
all participants in the evaluation and transparency 
committees) are insisting that Honduran law allows Lufussa to 
remedy the initial lack of transmission capability in a later 
round of clarifications.  AES flatly refutes this, noting 
that transmission capability was a required technical 
parameter and a variable that impacts the economic offer and 
that Lufussa should have been disqualified at that point. 
The GOH has given no explanation of the lack of 
disqualification of Comercial Laiesz. 
 
Price Evaluation Methodology 
---------------------------- 
 
12. (C) ENEE issued changes to the price evaluation 
methodology throughout the spring of 2002, in light of 
comments and questions made by participants in the tender. 
AES contested the key points in the methodology (fuel 
evaluation, variable costs, economic dispatch and others) in 
a letter on June 5 but received no response from ENEE as 
required under bid terms. 
 
13. (C) AES complains that one of these changes allowed high 
fuel prices in April 2002 to give a 16 percent advantage on 
variable fuel costs to the evaluated prices of bidders using 
bunker fuel (a counterintuitive result since high oil prices 
should not make a bidder more attractive).   Variable fuel 
costs represent approximately one-half of the overall price. 
AES\' competitors were also given a large advantage when ENEE 
decided not to take into account the fact that AES\' total 
variable costs are 45 percent lower than Lufussa because of 
the efficiency of combined cycle technology.  The GOH\'s bland 
response to these arguments is that ENEE tried to be balanced 
in deciding on the evaluation criteria, adding that \"while 
some decisions may have worked to AES\' disadvantage, others 
worked in their favor\" (e.g. the decision to allow 24 months 
for plant construction). 
 
GOH Allowed Opportunities for Manipulation of the Process 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
14. (C) AES reports that on at least four separate occasions, 
individuals purporting to either represent other bidders or 
to have influence with the GOH have contacted AES regarding 
the possibility of a negotiated solution, such as dividing 
the bid among certain participants or suggesting that AES 
Honduras could be allowed to win, for a fee.  On two other 
occasions, internal documents belonging to the evaluation 
committee were offered for sale to AES Honduras (and 
refused).  GOH officials acknowledged that they were aware of 
these allegations but because \"they did not affect the final 
decision\" took no action to investigate.  AES argues that 
this lack of action, combined with the GOH\'s continuous 
insistence that the process was transparent, sent a message 
that there would be no serious consequences for such action. 
 
 
AES had the better project 
-------------------------- 
 
15. (C) AES argues that any of the above factors should have 
allowed the ENEE and GOH to award the contract to AES.  In 
addition, AES thinks that the government should have 
considered the additional benefits of the AES project: the 
AES project would entail a USD 600 million investment, three 
times the size of the closest competition, with attendant 
benefits for government tax revenue, export promotion, 
foreign exchange earnings, regional integration, energy 
diversification and competitiveness of Honduran industry. 
 
16. (C) GOH officials, however, have not been in agreement 
with this concept.  In conversations with Ambassador and DCM 
over the last few months, they have repeatedly emphasized 
that the bids need to be decided on the basis of the 
evaluation criteria established in the tender package.  This 
argument is somewhat disingenuous.  ENEE is a state-owned 
company and should have designed evaluation criteria that 
would attract the best possible project. 
 
---------------------------------- 
PUBLIC REACTION AND PRESS COVERAGE 
---------------------------------- 
 
17. (U) Reporting on this issue ranges from straight 
reporting to wait-and-see to critical.  El Heraldo and La 
Prensa have been especially caustic, reporting that the 
winning company had failed to meet the requirements of the 
solicitation and that it should never have been allowed to 
participate.  Reporting on the Ambassador\'s comments to media 
following his November 18 meeting with Cosenza and Medina, an 
HRN radio editorial agreed with the Ambassador that the 
decision could have an adverse impact on foreign investment 
and would make it more difficult for average citizens to 
receive a low-priced, efficient and environmentally clean 
energy system.  HRN also said that it had warned people that 
various sectors of society had an interest in having the 
contract go to Lufussa, in spite of its failure to comply 
with the norms.  The program director of Hoy Mismo, a widely 
respected national television news program, discussed the 
Ambassador\'s comments with COHEP president Regalado on the 
evening program yesterday.  The director said that there were 
many questions about the process, among them the question of 
who had appointed the Commission on Transparency and what 
their qualifications were.  He asked why COHEP was not asking 
some of the same questions about the process and was told 
that the government had assured COHEP that the process was 
transparent and fair. 
18. (U) An editorial in his newspaper, Tiempo, by Jaime 
Rosenthal -- Congressional deputy, businessman and long-time 
critic of the AES project -- predicted that within a year, 
the government would open another bidding process for an 
additional 200 megawatts, since he doesn\'t think that Lufussa 
can produce additional electricity with the outdated plants 
that they will have to continue using.  He also said that a 
culture of suspicion is the sad reality of Honduras and 
worse, that the trials take place in the media, (not in the 
courts). 
 
---------------------- 
NEXT STEPS OPEN TO AES 
---------------------- 
 
19. (C) AES and other bidders have the right to appeal the 
tender award within five to ten days of the official 
notification of the result.  The appeal would be decided by 
the Board of Directors of ENEE.  Once the appeal is received, 
ENEE would have 40 to 60 days to decide on the motion.  Once 
administrative procedures are completed, AES would be free to 
present its case to the lower courts and eventually the 
Supreme Court. (Note: the periods and procedures listed here 
are imprecise because attorneys are uncertain of the effect 
of a newly adopted Simplification of Administrative 
Procedures law, which is only now entering into force). 
 
20. (C) Upon announcement of the decision on November 15, 
members of the transparency committee took it upon themselves 
to discourage any challenges by losing companies.  AES has 
taken exception to this action.  Luis Cosenza told Ambassador 
on November 18 that this discouragement of appeals was 
regrettable.  The GOH reasserted the right of all bidders to 
pursue potential administrative and legal avenues. 
 
21. (C) AES Honduras representatives are in close and 
frequent contact with the Embassy.  They have asked for 
continued support and advocacy, and in particular, to 
highlight in our public statements our concerns about 
potential discrepancies.  While their first impulse is to 
appeal the decision both administratively and legally, 
company representatives also are starting to think about 
creative redress solutions that could be negotiated (such as 
a second tender offer for fuel sources other than bunker and 
diesel). 
 
---------------------------------- 
EMBASSY COMMENT AND RECOMMENDATION 
---------------------------------- 
 
22. (C) The Embassy has always viewed this electricity 
contract as a bellwether project.  If done correctly, the 
government\'s management of this process could have held the 
potential to reduce electricity costs dramatically, improve 
government finances, improve Honduran competitiveness, 
provide a large infusion of investment at a time of stagnant 
economic activity, and in addition demonstrate to the inward 
looking private sector that rent-seeking behavior would no 
longer be tolerated. 
 
23. (C) Instead, the GOH has now painted itself into a corner 
from which no easy escape appears possible.  First, by 
failing to provide clear leadership and guidance in the 
development of the evaluation criteria, the GOH has allowed 
ENEE to tilt the playing field toward the domestic companies. 
 Representatives of Duke Energy, another U.S. company that 
had been following the tender with interest, told 
then-Ambassador Almaguer in March that the company would 
probably not participate in the tender because of this 
tendency (and Duke in fact decided not to bid).  Second, by 
allowing Lufussa to win the bid despite an obvious attempt to 
escape a commitment to build the costly transmission lines, 
the GOH seriously discredits government procurement rules. 
Third, by not making available the data on which the 
evaluated prices were determined, the government has raised 
the specter of real manipulation of the numbers (with the 
collusion of all parts of the GOH) while at the same time 
undermining its constant assertions that the process was 
transparent.  Fourth, the GOH has requested USG assistance on 
many economic fronts (a donation of wheat, help in urging 
flexibility with the IMF, technical assistance in trade 
capacity building, money laundering, tax administration, and 
in a variety of other fields) at the same time that it 
appears to be placing domestic political accommodation above 
fairness to U.S. investors. 
 
24. (C) Embassy recommends that the USG support AES in its 
challenge of the bid results.  The USG should be supportive 
of AES\' attempt to obtain the documentation underlining the 
ENEE decision and continue to highlight publicly our 
questions about the fairness of the process.  We will also 
encourage the GOH to review the decision carefully and to be 
willing to overturn it if mistakes were made.  Allegations of 
impropriety should be investigated by the GOH ambitiously. 
While Post does not necessarily recommend a direct linkage 
between this issue and USG assistance or support with 
international financial institutions, it would be helpful to 
delay any announcements of new assistance or initiatives at 
this time. 
PALMER 
"
"4474","11/22/2002 23:07","02TEGUCIGALPA3204","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE237324","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 003204 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/USOAS, WHA/CEN, WHA/AND, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/22/2012 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, HO, VE 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS PLEDGES TO BE SUPPORTIVE OF OAS SYG 
GAVIRIA\'S MISSION IN VENEZUELA 
 
REF: A. STATE 237324 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 3142 
     C. STATE 232124 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
(C) Ambassador delivered reftel A demarche November 21 on 
building hemispheric support for OAS Secretary General 
Gaviria\'s mission in Venezuela to Honduran Foreign Minister 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias.  FM Perez-Cadalso told 
Ambassador that he would talk to the Honduran Perm Rep at the 
OAS and urge him to be supportive of Gaviria\'s mission in 
Venezuela in both private and public statements. 
PALMER 
"
"4475","11/22/2002 23:08","02TEGUCIGALPA3205","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","02STATE237294","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 003205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR M, S/CT, DS, INR, CA, WHA, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/22/2012 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER, CASC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS GIVEN ASSESSMENTS OF TERRORIST THREATS 
AND UBL STATEMENT; NO IMMEDIATE REACTION 
 
REF: STATE 237294 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5 (B), (C), and (D). 
 
(S) Ambassador met November 21 with Honduran Foreign Minister 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias and provided ORCA\'s assessment 
of terrorist threats and the Usama Bin Ladin statement.  FM 
Perez-Cadalso thanked Ambassador for the information but had 
no immediate reaction. 
PALMER 
"
"4476","11/22/2002 23:10","02TEGUCIGALPA3206","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 003206 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR INR, S/CT, AND DS/ICI/ITA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: X1, X5, X6 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, PGOV, ETTC, PINR, ASEC, HO, CU 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN FM TELLS AMBASSADOR GOH HAS ACCEPTED 
CUBAN AMBASSADORIAL NOMINEE POLANCO 
 
REF: A. CARHART/PALMER E-MAIL NOVEMBER 19 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 3145 
     C. PIERCE/FISK E-MAIL NOVEMBER 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 3076 
     E. STATE 205386 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B), (C) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador met with Honduran Foreign Minister 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias November 21 at Perez-Cadalso\'s 
request.  FM Perez-Cadalso told Ambassador that the GOH had 
decided to accept the Cuban nomination of Dr. Elis Alberto 
Gonzalez Polanco, Chief of the Cuban Medical Brigade, as the 
first Cuban ambassador to Honduras. 
 
2. (S) The GOH approved Polanco despite the fact that ORCA 
sources have indicated that the Honduran Armed Forces had 
urged President Maduro not to approve Polanco\'s nomination 
because of Polanco\'s alleged activities for Cuban 
intelligence.  (Note: As noted in ref A, ORCA has not been 
able to independently confirm that Polanco is a Cuban 
intelligence officer, but ORCA would not dispute that some of 
the Cuban \"doctors\" sent to Honduras may be Cuban 
intelligence officers.  End Note.) 
 
3. (U) FM Perez-Cadalso announced the news of the GOH\'s 
acceptance of Polanco to reporters shortly after meeting with 
Ambassador.  Perez-Cadalso said that the GOH would not name a 
Honduran ambassador to Cuba until 2003.  Cuban diplomatic 
sources had previously leaked the news of the GOH\'s 
acceptance of Polanco to the press and it was reported in 
Honduran papers the morning of November 21, prior to 
Ambassador\'s meeting with Perez-Cadalso. 
 
4. (S) Comment:  Post notes that the MFA obeyed the letter 
but not the spirit of President Ricardo Maduro November 12 
pledge to Ambassador to consult with the Embassy prior to any 
announcement of the acceptance of a Cuban ambassador (ref B). 
 Since the news of the GOH\'s acceptance of Polanco had 
already been leaked to the press prior to the FM\'s meeting 
with Ambassador, the meeting was more of a formal 
notification than a consultation.  Post is disappointed that 
Maduro did not continue to delay a decision or reject 
Polanco\'s nomination outright.  Post notes that 
Perez-Cadalso\'s statement that the GOH will not name a 
Honduran ambassador to Cuba until 2003 is in line with 
Maduro\'s statements to Ambassador November 12.  Post also has 
heard rumors that former Human Rights Ombudsman Leo 
Valladares may be under consideration for the post.  If true, 
his appointment would highlight the USG\'s and GOH\'s human 
rights concerns in Cuba.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"4594","12/3/2002 21:08","02TEGUCIGALPA3273","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND EB/CBA 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, BEXP, EINV, ECON, EAID, PREL, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: AES WILL CHALLENGE HONDURAN ELECTRICITY BID RESULTS 
 
REF:  a) 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2872, b) TEGUCIGALPA 02207, 
 
c) TEGUCIGALPA 02857 d) TEGUCIGALPA 03184 
 
THIS CABLE REPLACES TEGUCIGALPA 03263 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  AES and two other companies presented 
challenges to the State-owned electricity enterprise ENEE\'s 
decision to award Lufussa the contract for the 210MW bid. 
AES challenged ENEE\'s failure to disqualify Lufussa for the 
lack of inclusion of sufficient transmission facilities in 
its original bid, charging that Honduran law clearly did not 
permit the omission. AES has also charged that other 
companies should have been disqualified for not explicitly 
including their proposed type of fuel in the bid.  AES also 
found mathematical errors in the calculations used to 
determine the evaluated price that change the competitive 
order of company prices.  ENEE officials initially 
threatened to sue companies that used the legal appeals 
process, but GOH officials have discounted those threats. 
The prosecutor for anti-corruption and the Honduran 
Inspector General\'s office have both also announced they 
will investigate ENEE\'s conduct of the tender.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On November 26th, AES, Comercial Laeisz and the 
National Engineers\' group all challenged the results of the 
210MW bid, arguing that Lufussa should have been 
disqualified as they did not include a required transmission 
line.  The challenges by the three companies also prompted 
investigations by the prosecutor for anti-corruption and the 
Honduran Inspector General\'s office who both announced 
November 27 that they too would be investigating the tender 
process.  The ENEE board of directors, by law, should decide 
on the three companies\' appeals within five business days, 
although most expect it will take longer. 
 
3. (SBU) AES\' challenge is based on the fact that Lufussa 
was allowed to modify its bid to include transmission lines 
which it omitted from the original bid packet; Lufussa added 
the transmission lines and substations after the July 26 bid 
opening when the company was able to review its competitors\' 
bids.  AES believes this allowed Lufussa to design 
transmission capacity that ensured it the lowest 
transmission losses and therefore lowered its overall 
evaluated price per kilowatt hour (transmission losses play 
an important part in the calculation of evaluated price). 
In addition, neither Lufussa nor Comercial Laeisz included 
the type of fuel to be used, an automatic disqualification. 
AES believes it has a very strong legal case and at this 
point is willing to challenge the bid decision through the 
Supreme Court level if necessary. 
 
4. (SBU) With the help of considerable Embassy advocacy, AES 
finally received (on the day before the deadline to 
challenge the tender award) the data on assumptions and 
calculations that ENEE used to arrive at the evaluated 
price.  AES ran the numbers through the model and believe 
they found mathematical errors that would change the 
results, with Comercial Laeisz falling to third place and 
AES moving into a close second behind Lufussa.  The ENEE 
data also demonstrated that Lufussa did, in fact, have the 
lowest transmission losses.  AES strongly believes this was 
only possible due to Lufussa\'s ability to delay providing 
details on transmission until after seeing its competitors\' 
bids. 
 
5. (SBU) ENEE and Honduran officials tried desperately to 
discourage these bid challenges.  Members of the \"notables\" 
committee charged with overseeing the process repeatedly 
stated no company should challenge the decision as it was 
unanimous, fair and transparent.  ENEE General Manager, 
Angelo Botazzi, told reporters the ENEE would counter-sue 
any company presenting a challenge to the bid (implicitly 
aiming this threat at AES).  Now that Honduran companies 
Comercial Laeisz and the National Engineers group have also 
challenged the result, there has been less talk of a counter 
suit.  GOH officials (ENEE board members, some Ministers and 
various Congressmen) have also tried to condition public 
opinion by claiming that the challenges will result in 
future blackouts and a potential energy crisis (since the 
appeals process could bog down in court cases).  AES\'s 
public comments have emphasized that it has only asked, at 
this time, for an administrative review by the ENEE board of 
directors, which shouldn\'t take more than 5-15 days. 
 
 
PIERCE 
"
"4595","12/3/2002 23:04","02TEGUCIGALPA3276","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA1861","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003276 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
USDA FOR FAS 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EINV, EAGR, ETRD, PGOV, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: LABOR PROBLEMS AT CHIQUITA: MANAGEMENT BEGINS 
DISCUSSIONS WITH UNION TO DISMISS ALLEGEDLY ABSENTEE WORKERS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1861 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Chiquita and its union have begun 
case-by-case discussions over the contentious issue of 
alleged absenteeism by a high percentage of its workforce. 
EmbOffs recently toured Chiquita\'s plantation and met with 
both management and labor.  EmbOffs urged them to continue 
dialogue.  Both sides are seeking a mutually agreeable 
solution to the problem using procedures set forth in the 
collective bargaining agreement.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Ambassador, EconOffs, and LabAtt visited Chiquita\'s 
Honduran subsidiary, Tela Railroad Company, November 26 
during Ambassador\'s first trip to San Pedro Sula.  EmbOffs 
met with several Chiquita representatives, including VP 
Fernando Sanchez (a former Foreign Service Officer) and GM 
Jose Luis Valverde, toured the plantation and packing 
facility, and met with several Union of Tela Railroad Company 
Workers (SITRATERCO) representatives including Secretary 
General Eduardo Rivas (SITRATERCO President Oscar Amaya was 
out of the country).  SITRATERCO is part of the United 
Confederation of Honduran Workers (CUTH), led by Israel 
Salinas.  The CUTH is one of three labor confederations in 
Honduras and does not have an international affiliation. 
 
Chiquita and Union both on Downward Trend in Honduras 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3. (SBU) The banana sector has long been a key aspect of U.S. 
investment in Honduras, a critical part of the economy, and 
the backbone of the organized labor movement.  This has all 
been on a downward trend hastened by Hurricane Mitch in 1998 
that destroyed Honduras\' banana crops.   Chiquita has since 
replanted 67 percent of the land that was previously 
cultivated.  Production, which was once at 35 million 
boxes/year in the 1980s, is now at 12-14 million boxes/year, 
but since Mitch Chiquita has been able to boost productivity 
through investment and a higher yield from its smaller amount 
of land.  (Chiquita currently has 5,000 hectares under 
cultivation in Honduras.)  SITRATERCO once had approximately 
18,000 members, but now has only approximately 2,200 members 
as the workforce has shrunk dramatically over the years. 
Chiquita suffered a brief wildcat strike in June (reftel) 
which, combined with pest problems, kept 2002 production 
levels lower than Chiquita\'s goal.  One issue related to a 
pest problem, the application of pesticide-treated bags 
around bananas on the plants, was solved this summer after an 
independent panel ruled the practice safe and Chiquita raised 
the pay for workers involved in the process. 
 
4. (SBU) SITRATERCO workers receive on average USD 8/day 
(which is almost double the USD 4.5 minimum wage in the 
export sector) plus at least that much in benefits.  The 
company has plans to reduce expenses related to its benefits 
package by switching from company-owned housing to subsidized 
bank loans for employees to buy their own homes built by the 
company on land provided by Chiquita and the GOH.  The 
employees will pay approximately 25-30 percent of the actual 
cost of the house and land and can continue to make payments 
toward the title even if they stop working for Chiquita.  The 
houses are not on the plantation, thus ending the company 
town and reducing health risks from pesticide application 
near housing.  Chiquita is also considering transferring the 
company hospital (built in 1951) to the GOH\'s social security 
system, and grandfathering current employees who have 
generous health plans.  Chiquita has not yet discussed the 
hospital issue with the union and asked EmbOffs to remain 
silent on the issue. 
 
Both Sides Agree Absenteeism a Problem but Disagree on Size 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Chiquita is currently suffering problems over 
alleged absenteeism by a relatively large percentage (15 
percent) of its workforce.  Ambassador and PolCouns discussed 
the issue November 20 with Minister of Labor German 
Leitzelar, LabAtt spoke to both management and labor November 
21, and EmbOffs discussed the issue again during the November 
26 visit to Chiquita.  Chiquita recently ran a full-page ad 
in Honduran newspapers that detailed management\'s point of 
view.  Chiquita management says it has faced the issue of 
absenteeism for quite some time and could not afford to 
postpone dealing with it any longer.  Productivity is low and 
the Honduras operation has been losing money since 1994, said 
Sanchez.  Management has two lists of employees with alleged 
absenteeism problems: one list of 350-400 workers with a high 
level of absenteeism that do not/not have legitimate health 
problems, and another list of 350 workers with a high level 
of absenteeism that do have legitimate health problems. 
 
6. (SBU) The union conceded to EmbOffs that absenteeism was a 
problem but disputed the extent it had negatively impacted 
production, and claimed management was downplaying problems 
with the fruit and infrastructure.  (Chiquita management 
recently funded a trip for labor representatives to travel to 
Florida to meet with Chiquita customers and to hear 
complaints about the quality of the bananas coming from 
Honduras.)  The union also believes that some of the workers 
on the list either were on vacation, maternity leave, or 
extended recuperation time during their alleged absenteeism, 
and that others on the list no longer work for Chiquita. 
Both sides agreed that press coverage of the issue had been 
erroneous. 
 
7. (SBU) Rivas said that the union had received the lists 
from management November 21 and that a tripartite committee 
comprised of management, labor, and the medical office of the 
company had begun to meet November 25 to deal with the 
problem on a case-by-case basis.  According to both sides, 
management and labor have fifteen days to determine a final 
disposition in each case of workers with a high level of 
absenteeism and that do not/not have legitimate health 
problems.  Management has pledged that any workers laid off 
will receive their full severance pay in accordance with 
Honduran law.  Cases involving workers with a high level of 
absenteeism that do have legitimate health problems will take 
several months to resolve.  Sanchez said that workers with 
legitimate health problems will either be reintegrated into 
the workforce or will receive some sort of disability 
benefits.  Sanchez emphasized that this was not a ploy to 
reduce the workforce and that adult dependents of those laid 
off will have first shot at filling the vacant positions. 
EmbOffs encouraged the sides to talk to each other to resolve 
this issue directly (and not via the press) in a fair manner. 
 
8. (SBU) Sanchez called LabAtt November 27 to follow-up on 
EmbOffs visit to Chiquita.  LabAtt urged Chiquita management 
to continue to work with SITRATERCO according to the 
collective bargaining agreement to resolve the cases of 
alleged absenteeism.  Sanchez said he would keep the Embassy 
up to date on how the process went. 
 
Ambassador Urges Continued Dialogue 
----------------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Comment:  Ambassador and LabAtt underlined the 
importance of U.S. investment in the banana sector to 
Honduras\' economic growth as well as the importance of trade 
unions in Honduras to both management and labor.  Ambassador 
reiterated that the Embassy\'s role was to promote the 
observation of core labor rights throughout Honduras and to 
help facilitate dialogue between labor and management. 
EmbOffs made clear that the Honduran Ministry of Labor had 
jurisdiction over labor-management problems in Honduras. 
Neither side has asked for the Embassy\'s intervention to help 
resolve the issue.  Post is guardedly optimistic that the two 
sides will be able to resolve the majority of the cases of 
alleged absenteeism through the established procedures. 
However, the fact that the potential number of employees to 
be dismissed is a significant percentage of the union\'s 
membership could make it more difficult.  This issue of 
medical care, however, could be an even more contentious 
issue in the future.  End Comment. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"4650","12/9/2002 22:47","02TEGUCIGALPA3318","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE242866","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 003318 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, L, IO, EB, AND NP 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2012 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, KTIA, AORC, PARM, EAIR, EWWT, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ACTION ON SEVEN COUNTERTERRORISM 
CONVENTIONS STALLED PENDING CERTIFIED COPIES IN SPANISH 
 
REF: STATE 242866 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request; please see para. 10. 
 
2. (SBU) Summary: PolOff met December 6 with Honduran MFA 
Director General for Treaties Ivonne Bonilla to demarche 
Bonilla on the 1988 maritime counterterrorism (CT) convention 
and protocol and to get a status report on the GOH\'s slow 
action on becoming a party to five international and two OAS 
CT conventions, including the maritime convention and 
protocol.  Bonilla claimed the crux of the problem was that 
the MFA has not been able to obtain certified 
Spanish-language copies of the conventions.  Post requests 
immediate assistance from the Department, USUN, and USOAS to 
obtain the necessary documents.  End Summary. 
 
3. (U) PolOff met December 6 with Honduran MFA Director 
General for Treaties Ivonne Bonilla to demarche Bonilla on 
the maritime counterterrorism (CT) convention and protocol 
(reftel) and to get a status report on the GOH\'s slow action 
on becoming a party to international and regional CT 
conventions. 
 
Honduras Currently Party to Only Five CT Conventions . . . 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
4. (U) PolOff confirmed with Bonilla that the GOH is 
currently only a party to the following five international 
counterterrorism conventions: 
-- 1963 Tokyo Convention on Offenses and Certain Other Acts 
Committed Onboard Aircraft 
-- 1970 Hague Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful 
Seizure of Aircraft 
-- 1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful 
Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation 
-- 1973 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes 
Against Internationally Protected Persons, and 
-- 1979 Convention Against the Taking of Hostages. 
 
 . . . But About to Become a Party to Two More 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5. (U) PolOff congratulated Bonilla on the GOH taking action 
to become a party to the: 
-- 1997 Convention for the Suppression on Terrorist Bombings, 
and 
-- 1999 Convention on the Suppression of Financing of 
Terrorism Crimes (signed by the GOH November 11, 2001). 
The MFA had forwarded both to Congress in October, Congress 
approved both in early November, and since then Congress and 
the Executive Branch have been completing all the required 
steps.  Two decrees are now awaiting publication in the \"La 
Gaceta,\" the Honduran version of the Federal Register, to 
become official.  Bonilla was not sure if the decrees would 
be published prior to the end of December. 
 
Two Down, Seven to Go 
--------------------- 
 
6. (U) PolOff confirmed with Bonilla that the GOH is still 
not/not a party to the following five international CT 
conventions, including the two maritime conventions: 
-- 1980 Convention on the Physical Protection on Nuclear 
Materials 
-- 1988 Convention for the Suppression on Unlawful Acts 
Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (SUA Convention) 
-- 1988 Protocol for the Suppression on Unlawful Acts Against 
the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental 
Shelf (SUA Protocol) 
-- 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of 
Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation 
-- 1991 Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for 
the Purpose of Detection (signed by the GOH March 26, 1991). 
 
The GOH is not a party to the following two Organization of 
American States (OAS) CT conventions either: 
-- 1971 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of 
Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and 
Related Extortion that are of International Significance 
(signed by the GOH February 2, 1971) 
-- 2002 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of 
Terrorism (signed by the GOH June 3, 2002). 
 
MFA Claims Lack of Spanish Versions Key to Delay 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
7. (SBU) Bonilla claimed that the GOH did want to be a member 
to all of these conventions but complained that the MFA first 
needed certified Spanish-language copies of the conventions 
that would be suitable for forwarding to Congress for 
consideration.  Bonilla said that she had asked Honduran 
diplomatic missions to obtain certified Spanish-language 
copies of the conventions but they had not done so to date. 
She then showed PolOff drafts of letters from the Vice 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Anibal Quinonez to the Honduran 
Ambassadors/Consul Generals/PermReps in Berlin, London, 
Montreal, Rome, the UN, and Vienna instructing them to obtain 
the needed documents.  Bonilla said that the letters would be 
sent shortly. 
 
8. (SBU) PolOff offered to assist if possible and Bonilla 
said that the MFA would greatly appreciate any USG assistance 
on this issue, as she was not optimistic that her diplomatic 
colleagues would obtain the necessary Spanish-language 
versions.  PolOff noted that obtaining the necessary OAS 
documents should not be difficult.  Bonilla agreed, but it 
was clear that she had focused more on the international CT 
conventions and was not very familiar with either OAS CT 
convention.  Political Section Chief plans to call Honduran 
OAS PermRep to urge him to take swift action to obtain the 
documents. 
 
9. (U) Following the meeting PolOff sent Bonilla hyperlinks 
to UN, OAS, IAEA, ICAO, and IMO websites on CT conventions 
that included the English text and status of the conventions. 
 
10. (SBU) Action request for the Department, USUN, and USOAS: 
Post requests assistance to obtain for the GOH certified 
Spanish-language copies of the five international and two OAS 
counterterrorism conventions mentioned previously.  Post 
suggests that the documents be given to one or more of the 
following: the Honduran Mission to the UN, the Honduran 
Mission to the OAS, the Honduran Embassy, or pouched to Post 
for delivery to the MFA. 
 
11. (U) Post point of contact is Deputy Political Chief 
Derrick Olsen, IVG phone: 539-4394, phone: (504) 236-9320 
x4394, fax: (504) 238-4446, unclassified and classified 
e-mail. 
 
Without USG Assistance, Delay Will Likely Continue 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
12. (C) Comment:  The GOH has been a good and reliable friend 
of the U.S. on counterterrorism, both under former President 
Flores and current President Maduro.  Maduro\'s government 
hosted a major U.S. military counterterrorism exercise in 
March and has quickly responded with freeze orders to all 
U.S. requests regarding suspect terrorist bank accounts.  No 
terrorist assets have been found in Honduran financial 
institutions, to date.  However, the GOH still has not 
designated a national coordinator for counterterrorism, filed 
its national report in accordance with United Nations 
Security Council Resolution 1373, and most of all, signed 
and/or ratified the five outstanding international 
conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions against 
terrorism.  There is no high-level coordinated GOH effort to 
ensure that the GOH rapidly becomes a party to these 
conventions, and thus, the process has bogged down in the 
bureaucracy over the issue of obtaining certified 
Spanish-language copies of the conventions.  Post would 
greatly appreciate Department, USUN, and USOAS assistance to 
jump-start this moribund process.  End Comment. 
PIERCE 
"
"4665","12/10/2002 14:59","02TEGUCIGALPA3320","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE238564","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003320 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS, PHUM, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VERIFICATION FOR JOINT OPERATION WITH 
HONDURAN UNIT AT PUERTO CASTILLO NAVY BASE TRUJILLO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 238564 
 
Embassy Tegucigalpa verifies that the Department of State 
possesses no credible information as of 11/21/02 of gross 
violations of human rights by any Honduran unit at Puerto 
Castillo Navy Base Trujillo. 
PIERCE 
"
"4667","12/10/2002 15:14","02TEGUCIGALPA3321","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02SECSTATE211927|02TEGUCIGALPA2201","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 003321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR: ANDREA GASH 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, EB/OIA, INR/B 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMAT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE PASS TO EXIM, OPIC, USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EFIN, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: TREASURY FINANCIAL SECTOR-LED GROWTH 
INITIATIVE 
 
REFS: A) SECSTATE 211927, B) TEGUCIGALPA 2201 
 
1. (U) Post submits the following information on Honduras\' 
financial services sector as requested in ref A.  Ref B provided 
an overview of the banking sector in Honduras.  Washington 
agencies should note that the World Bank and Interamerican 
Development Bank are currently conducting a comprehensive review 
of all aspects of the financial sector in Honduras. 
Simultaneously, the Honduran banking association (AHIBA) has 
contracted a financial services consultant to provide a similar 
assessment to the banks.  We expect results from these ongoing 
assessments to become available starting in early 2003. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
State of Development of Financial Sector 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) Honduras is a Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) with 
about USD 4.5 billion in outstanding foreign debt.  The HIPC debt 
relief completion point for Honduras has been delayed by the 
GOH\'s problems in meeting IMF program targets and funding of its 
poverty reduction program.  The result is a constriction of world 
capital flows to the GOH, except for concessionary loans by 
international financial institutions.  The Honduran financial 
system is comprised of a troubled banking system, no capital 
markets to speak of, limited recourse to long-term financing, 
high interest rates, limited credit-worthiness of potential 
customers and an over-crowded insurance sector.  Consumer and 
business financial services (credit cards, mortgages, leasing 
etc.) are available but expensive.  Full development of the 
financial sector will depend on the speed and success of 
structural economic reforms by the GOH.  The repayment record is 
also fairly low in some sectors of the economy. 
 
3. (U) At this point, the future for financial services is 
cloudy.  As the USG\'s financial services offer reflects, the most 
important opportunities for U.S. financial firms are probably in 
the insurance industry if limitations on the provision of cross- 
border services are lifted.  Improved macroeconomic stability (if 
and when it comes) could spur improved prospects in investment 
banking, development of a securities market and increased 
opportunities for housing and commercial mortgages. 
 
4. (U) The Honduran banking system, currently comprised of 20 
private and 2 state-owned banks, is considered weak and in need 
of extensive consolidation.  Insider abuses and heavy losses in 
the agriculture and real estate sectors combined to contribute to 
a large overhang of bad loans (estimated at 18 percent).  Banks 
also have a large inventory of repossessed assets (ranging from 
mines to hotels to a medical center) with limited success in 
reselling.  Slowed domestic and world economic activity following 
Hurricane Mitch and September 11, 2001 decreased demand for loans 
and other credit services, although some corporate business 
appears to be rebounding in the second half of 2002. 
 
5. (U) There are few, if any, restrictions on foreign banks 
establishing or operating representative offices in Honduras. 
The limited presence of foreign banks is owed mostly to the 
smallness of the market.  Current reserve requirements, 
particularly for dollar accounts, have contributed to high 
interest rates.  With their lower interest rates, regional banks 
in Miami, Panama, El Salvador and even Guatemala are often the 
lenders of choice for the most credit-worthy Honduran customers. 
 
6. (U) Banking supervision is improving steadily, with assistance 
from the International Monetary Fund and others, and the Maduro 
government in particular has shown dedication to its 
strengthening.  Protection of property rights (particularly land 
tenure) and enforcement of contracts in the judicial system are 
weak.  There are bankruptcy laws but they are rarely used. 
Recent legal changes allow some investment of pension funds, but 
the administrators of these funds are skittish about repayment 
prospects (in an interesting portrayal of fears on this subject, 
a teachers demonstration turned unexpectedly violent in the 
autumn of 2002 the day after the Congress adopted a law allowing 
teacher pension funds to buy bonds that are being issued to fund 
low-income housing). 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Comments by U.S. Financial Services Providers 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Econcouns met with Maximo Vidal, country director for 
Citibank in Honduras, on November 27 to exchange views.  Citibank 
is the only U.S. bank operating in Honduras, primarily because of 
the small size of the market.  Citibank confines itself to 
corporate lending and services, loan sindication and investment 
banking.  The office hopes to help structure future GOH 
privatization projects.  Vidal confirmed that foreign banks face 
few restrictions in Honduras.  Vidal shared a letter that 
Citibank recently sent to USTR expressing support for the 
upcoming U.S.-Central America free trade agreement (US-CAFTA) 
negotiations.  Citibank did not identify any particular trade 
obstacles in Honduras in this letter. 
 
8. (SBU) Vidal, who is currently serving on the banking 
association board, confirmed the widely held view that there are 
too many banks operating in Honduras and that the GOH should 
focus on encouraging mergers.  Commenting on the fragility of the 
system, he noted that about four to five banks have significant 
agricultural loan portfolios with high levels of bad debts.  In 
addition, Vidal highlighted the extensive holdings of repossessed 
property (activos eventuales); banks are supposed to sell these 
within a limited period of time but have encountered problems in 
disposing of the assets. 
 
9. (SBU) According to Vidal, regional banks (Panamanian, 
Salvadoran and now even Guatemalan) are making inroads because 
they are able to offer far lower interest rates than local banks. 
Individuals and companies with means are also able to travel to 
the U.S. and work with banks in Miami and other U.S. cities.  In 
Honduras, in contrast, the high reserve requirements (50 percent 
held in Grade AA banks in the U.S. and 15 percent deposited in 
the Central Bank) restrict dollar-denominated loans to 35 percent 
of dollar holdings (30 percent to exporters and 5 percent to 
other borrowers).  The Central Bank has expressed concerns about 
lowering the reserve requirements too much too quickly, because 
of the expansionary effect on the monetary base.  The high 
interest rates and small market constrains the credit card 
industry and other financial services.  Development of a reliable 
credit bureau would, however, be helpful to credit card issuers. 
 
10. (SBU) Finally, Vidal underlined the limiting effect of the 
lack of capital markets.  Honduras would need a medium-term 
issuer of three to five-year bonds in order to create a liquid 
secondary market.  The lack of a capital market means companies 
and applicants for mortgages generally face short loan terms. 
 
11. (U) The Honduran insurance sector is currently comprised of 
12 insurance companies, 2 of which are U.S. companies, American 
Home Insurance and Pan American Life.  The rest are Honduran- 
owned.  It is believed that there are too many insurance 
companies operating in the Honduran market.  The market is 
regulated by an August 2001 Insurance Law, which reduced the 
bureaucracy in obtaining the authorization to sell insurance in 
Honduras and which strengthened sanctions on individuals and 
companies purchasing insurance from non-registered firms.  There 
is one bill currently in the National Congress which would allow 
cross-border insurance services, but its prospects are not rosy. 
The Central Bank, in consultation with the National Banking and 
Insurance Commission, is responsible for authorizing operating 
permits for national and foreign insurance institutions. 
Insurance companies are required to invest at least ten percent 
of the company\'s projected minimum capital in government bonds 
and hold between USD 1.5 to 4.8 million in capital (depending on 
the type of service provided) prior to beginning operations.  An 
American Home Insurance representative commented that while 
foreign insurance companies seeking to operate in Honduras are 
subject to a slightly more exhaustive authorization process than 
national firms, there are no restrictions on foreign companies 
and that foreign and national companies compete equally in the 
Honduran market. 
 
------------------------------ 
USAID and Technical Assistance 
------------------------------ 
 
12. (U) USAID/Honduras, which is currently developing its 
strategy for 2004-2010, is waiting for completion of the World 
Bank and the IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) in 
Honduras in January 2003.  This assessment should provide a 
clearer idea of the current weaknesses in the Honduran financial 
sector and World Bank and IMF recommendations to strengthen it. 
The Interamerican Development Bank (IDB) has also been supporting 
bank supervision over the past four years through various 
Multilateral Investment Fund (MIF) operations.  The IDB 
activities have improved the legal framework for supervision of 
the financial system and the quality of the information produced 
by the National Banking and Insurance Commission.  Subsequently, 
the IDB has prepared a four-year USD 25 million Financial Sector 
Program proposal that is scheduled to go to their Board of 
Directors for approval in early January 2003.  USAID/Honduras, 
which has worked with microfinance institutions and financial 
policy programs over the past decade, is currently waiting to 
receive the results of the FSAP and the approval of the IDB 
Financial Sector Program before identifying the areas where the 
USAID bilateral mission should work to strengthen Honduras\' 
financial sector. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Consumer Access to Financial Services 
------------------------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) Honduran consumer access to financial services includes 
car loans, credit cards, mortgages and consumer lending.  Credit 
cards are issued directly from banks, with interest rates (for 
balances in lempiras) ranging from 3.9 to 4.7 percent per month. 
Rates for mortgages in lempiras are 16 to 20 percent per year, 
and 12 to 14 percent per year for those in dollars.  Terms for 
mortgages in dollars are shorter (5 to 10 years) than those in 
lempiras.  Banks are cautious to see if a borrower has dollar 
income or dollar assets before issuing a mortgage in dollars.  In 
addition to financing through a bank, several retail stores are 
offering low-interest consumer credit.  Other financial 
institutions charge extremely high interest rates and are of 
varying soundness.  The National Banking and Insurance Commission 
is seeking additional oversight responsibilities for these 
institutions. 
 
14. (SBU) Interest rates paid on savings accounts are slightly 
higher than those paid on checking accounts, and are higher for 
lempira deposits than dollar deposits.  Below are the interest 
rates paid by Banco Mercantil as of September 2002 (interest 
rates will vary slightly between banks): 
 
Amount of Deposit        Interest Rate 
(lempiras)               (percent) 
-----------------        ------------- 
300-199,999                  5 
200,000-499,999              7 
500,000+                     9 
 
15. (SBU) Hondurans\' access to savings accounts may be limited by 
minimum deposit requirements established by banks.  Several banks 
have considered raising their minimum deposit requirements from 
100 to 1,000 lempiras (USD 6 to 60).  Banks are beginning to 
charge between 20 and 500 lempiras (USD 1.2 and USD 30.0) monthly 
for accounts that fall below this minimum requirement.  Hondurans 
with substantial means tend to hold their savings in Honduras\' 
largest banks and Lloyds (the one foreign bank that takes 
deposits) or overseas because of fears of bank stability. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Business Access to Financial Services 
------------------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) Honduran businesses also have access to financial 
services that include commercial loans for start-up and 
expansion, trade finance, and leasing.  Working capital loans (in 
lempiras) are usually short-term (12 to 18 months), with an 
average interest rate of 18 to 22 percent.  Project financing 
loans are longer (five to seven years, depending on the project). 
One banker noted to Econoff that there is plenty of money to 
lend; the problem is finding credit-worthy borrowers who are 
willing to borrow at current interest rates.  Honduras\' economy 
remained fairly stagnant in 2001 and the first half of 2002, thus 
reducing the demand for loans. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Credit Provided by Foreign Institutions 
--------------------------------------- 
 
17. (U) Although there are few legal barriers to entry in the 
banking sector, the small size of the market and weak financial 
situation have discouraged greater foreign investment.  Only two 
banks had majority foreign ownership in 2001 (Citibank and 
Lloyds) accounting for only 5.7 percent of bank capital. 
Panamanian Banco del Istmo is currently in the process of 
purchasing Honduras\' largest financial group, Grupo Banco El 
Ahorro Hondureno (BGA).  In an effort to strengthen the banking 
system, the Central Bank in 2002 raised the minimal capital 
requirement to operate a bank from 100 million lempiras (usd 6.1 
million) to 150 million lempiras (usd 9.1 million). 
18. (U) The benchmark spread between cost of funds and the 
lending rate is normally two to four percent, depending on the 
industry.  This gap exists because of the reserve requirements of 
the Central Bank of Honduras (BCH) and currency risk. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Individual Access to Investment Vehicles 
---------------------------------------- 
 
19. (U) Long-term investment vehicles available in Honduras 
include savings accounts, certificates of deposit, and government 
bonds.  There are no corporate bonds or stocks available due to 
the lack of capital markets.  There are short-term and long-term 
(called bonos de caja) certificates of deposit available. 
 
Amount of Certificate 
Of Deposit (short-term)  Interest Rate 
    (dollars)             (percent) 
-----------------------  ------------- 
$5,000-24,999                2.0 
$25,000-49,999               2.5 
$50,000-99,999               3.0 
$100,000+                    3.5 
 
 
Amount of Certificate 
Of Deposit (long-term)   Interest Rate 
      (dollars)            (percent) 
----------------------   ------------- 
 
$25,000-99,999               4.0 
$100,000-199,999             4.5 
$200,000+                    5.0 
 
Pierce 
"
"4668","12/10/2002 15:21","02TEGUCIGALPA3322","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE242132","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003322 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR L/T, INL, EB, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PBTS, KTIA, KCRM, ETRD, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CONGRESS APPROVES STOLEN VEHICLE TREATY 
WITH U.S.; DECREE PUBLISHED IN HONDURAN FEDERAL REGISTER 
 
REF: STATE 242132 
 
1. Upon receipt of reftel that informed Post that the Senate 
on November 14 had given advice and consent to ratification 
of the Treaty With Honduras for Return of Stolen, Robbed, and 
Embezzled Vehicles and Aircraft, EmbOffs began checking into 
the status of Honduran congressional action on the treaty. 
The Economic Section discovered that on October 29 a decree 
(266-2002) was published in \"La Gaceta,\" the Honduran version 
of the Federal Register, announcing that Congress had given 
approval August 6 to the treaty. 
 
2. PolOff confirmed this information December 6 with MFA 
Director General for Treaties Ivonne Bonilla.  PolOff 
informed Bonilla of the Senate\'s action and Bonilla said that 
the MFA is ready to discuss an exchange of instruments of 
ratification as soon as the USG is ready. 
 
3. Comment:  Post notes that EmbOffs were never informed by 
the MFA nor Congress that Congress had approved the treaty or 
that the decree had been published in La Gaceta. 
Unfortunately, this is not atypical behavior for the MFA. 
End Comment. 
PIERCE 
"
"4696","12/12/2002 14:58","02TEGUCIGALPA3346","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE243208","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GENEVA FOR USTR/ADAMS 
USTR FOR ANDREA GASH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, HO, USTR, WTRO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN REACTION TO U.S. PROPOSAL ON NON- 
AGRICULTURAL TARIFFS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 243208 
 
Per reftel request, on December 3, Post delivered demarche 
talking points on the U.S. proposal on non-agricultural 
tariffs to Minister of Industry and Commerce Norman Garcia 
and Vice Minister of Foreign Trade Irving Guerrero.  In a 
meeting with Econcouns on December 9, Minister Garcia asked 
for more time to study the proposal before giving a 
reaction.  Guerrero noted that unlike some other developing 
countries, Honduras\' tariffs on non-agricultural products 
are rather low and Honduras does not export a high 
proportion of industrial goods.  The GOH will be 
concentrating most on the WTO agriculture negotiations. 
 
Pierce 
"
"4700","12/12/2002 19:43","02TEGUCIGALPA3349","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003349 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2012 
TAGS: KJUS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: BATTLE OVER CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION RAGES 
 
Classified By: PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On December 4, the Supreme Court took the 
first step in analyzing constitutional amendments proposed by 
Congress that would give Congress unfettered power to 
interpret the constitutionality of laws they pass.  The 
Constitutional Chamber of the Court asked Congress to explain 
why it was attempting to alter the Constitution in a manner 
that ostensibly usurps traditional judicial authority.  If 
the amendments become effective, the judiciary will lose its 
authority to construe the Constitution, and Congress will be 
free to interpret the constitutionality of laws with a 
two-thirds majority vote.  Three weeks ago, the National 
Human Rights Commission filed a lawsuit asking that the 
Supreme Court declare the proposals unconstitutional and in 
violation of the \"separation of powers\" provision in the 
Constitution.  The Attorney General will soon be issuing an 
opinion regarding the legality of the proposed amendments. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
JUDICIAL REVIEW OF CONGRESSIONAL PROPOSAL 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) On December 4, the Supreme Court took the first step 
in analyzing a constitutional amendment proposed by the 
National Congress that would give Congress unfettered power 
to interpret the Constitution.  The Constitutional Chamber of 
the Supreme Court asked Congress to explain its motives 
behind the unprecedented attempt to give itself unlimited 
authority to interpret the Honduran Constitution. 
 
3.  (U) On November 13, 2002, the National Human Rights 
Commission, with the support of civil society, filed a 
lawsuit alleging that the Congressional move violates the 
separation of powers provision of the Constitution and thus 
is unconstitutional.  The Court has not yet ruled on the 
issue, but is expected to do so between now and when Congress 
reconvenes on January 25, 2003.  (Note:  The Supreme Court is 
scheduled to recess between December 15 and January 6.  End 
Note.) 
 
------------------------------------------- 
ATTORNEY GENERAL AND CIVIL SOCIETY WEIGH IN 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) The Attorney General\'s Office will soon issue a legal 
opinion about the legality of the proposed amendments. 
Attorney General Roy Medina said that his office previously 
issued an opinion on this subject, and that the previous 
opinion will be released at the same time as the new one. 
While Attorney General opinions tend to carry great weight, 
they do not amount to law and, therefore, do not have to be 
followed. 
 
5.  (SBU)  On December 10, 2002, the Coalition for the 
Strengthening of Justice (made up of several civil society 
organizations) launched a campaign to increase public 
awareness and stimulate policy dialogue about the issue.  The 
Coalition staunchly opposes the attempts by the National 
Congress to usurp judicial review and undermine the 
separation of powers.  Its campaign will focus on defending 
the Constitution, and will include advertisements on radio, 
television and in the newspapers.  (Note:  Civil society 
helped the Human Rights Commission prepare its legal brief 
for the challenge before the Supreme Court.  End note.) 
 
---------------- 
ABOUT THE LAW... 
---------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) There are actually two (2) constitutional 
amendments at stake.  The first amends section 218(9) of the 
Constitution and eliminates the President\'s power to veto 
Congressional interpretation of the Constitution.  The 
section 218(9) amendment was passed last year, presumably in 
anticipation of more recent attempts to alter the 
Constitution.  The lawsuit filed by the Human Rights 
Commission is primarily based on the section 218(9) 
amendment.  Congress is in the process of trying to pass an 
amendment to section 205(10) of the Constitution--a change 
that would expressly bestow upon Congress exclusive 
interpretive authority.  (Note: The aforementioned lawsuit 
also refers to the section 205(10) issue, which is arguably 
not yet ripe for official judicial review.  End note.) 
 
7.  (SBU) If the amendments become final, Congress would have 
unlimited power to interpret the Honduran Constitution.  The 
proposed constitutional amendment (205(10)) would permit 
Congress to construe the Constitution with a two-thirds vote 
in just one (1) regular session of Congress.  Constitutional 
interpretation of laws is traditionally the role of the 
judiciary, and such judicial review is an integral part of 
the \"separation of powers\" concept in a democratic system. 
(Note:  The Honduran Constitution contains a separation of 
powers provision.  End Note.)  Moreover, the President would 
have no veto power over this type of Congressional action 
(under the amendment to section 218(9)), meaning that the 
Congress could make constitutional determinations without any 
\"check and balances.\" 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8.  (C) The proposed amendments would thwart judicial review 
of the constitutionality of Honduran laws and represent a 
clear threat to the concept of separation of powers--which is 
a cornerstone of a democratic system and judicial 
independence.  Pursuant to Honduran law, the Constitutional 
Chamber of the Supreme Court is responsible for protecting 
the integrity of the Constitution.  Should Congress succeed 
in usurping the Court\'s powers, the stability and 
independence of the Supreme Court will be seriously 
compromised as would a basic tenant of democracy. 
 
9.  (C) Conventional wisdom suggests that the Supreme Court 
will likely rule that the amendments should not take effect 
because they are unconstitutional and improper.  It is 
uncertain what position the Attorney General will take, but 
more likely than not he will cite the separation of powers 
requirement in the Constitution and find that the proposed 
changes are unlawful.  End Comment. 
PIERCE 
"
"4701","12/12/2002 20:28","02TEGUCIGALPA3350","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA1780","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 003350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR D, T, PM, WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2012 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MASS, MARR, HO 
SUBJECT: CERRO LA MOLE RADAR--STILL AN UNREQUITED PACT 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 01780 
 
Classified By: PolChief Francisco Palmieri, Reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  Post reiterates the U.S. national interests 
in fulfilling its obligations under the 1993 agreement with 
the GOH regarding the maintenance of the radar located at 
Cerro La Mole.  The U.S. agreed to pay 75% of all maintenance 
costs up to a limit of $400,000 per year, while the GOH 
agreed to pay 25% of the maintenance costs.  To date, the 
U.S. has paid nothing under the agreement, while the GOH has 
paid for all maintenance costs in excess of $800,000.  Post 
recommends that the U.S. honor the spirit of the agreement by 
either replacing it with a TPS-78 solid state version or with 
another TPS-70, or repair the existing one.  In the wake of 
the rapid Honduran accession to an Article 98 agreement, the 
ongoing failure of the U.S. to fulfill its legal obligations 
under the agreement is creating doubt about the U.S.\'s 
commitment to international agreements at the very time we 
are urging further Honduran cooperation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------- 
THE AGREEMENT 
------------- 
 
2.  (U) In 1993 the U.S. and the GOH signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding for the Expansion of the Radar Located in Cerro 
La Mole in the Caribbean Basin Radar Network (MOU).  The 
purpose of the MOU was to reaffirm the cooperation of the two 
governments in the international battle against narcotics 
trafficking by expanding the radar capability of the region 
as set forth in the Caribbean Basin Radar Network agreement 
(CBRN) signed by the U.S. and the GOH April 7, 1989.  The MOU 
was designed to integrate the Cerro La Mole radar (\"the 
radar\") into the operations of the CBRN. 
 
3.  (U) The core provisions that are relevant to this 
recommendation are as follows (NOTE: A more complete summary 
of the core provisions of the MOU are found in Ref A. END 
NOTE.): 
 
-The costs of operations and maintenance of the radar are to 
be borne by the GOH. 
 
-The U.S. will have unrestricted access to the data from the 
radar except in the case of a Honduran national emergency. 
 
-The U.S. will provide spare parts support and technical 
assistance valued at a maximum of $400,000 per year, with the 
GOH responsible for no less than 25 percent of the total 
spare parts/technical assistance costs each year. 
 
-The MOU is effective until April 7, 2009. 
 
------------------------------ 
THE PROBLEMS OF NON-COMPLIANCE 
------------------------------ 
 
4.  (C) There are a number of emerging diplomatic problems 
due to the U.S.\'s failure to comply with the MOU.  The U.S. 
has paid nothing under the terms of the MOU, while the GOH 
has paid more than $800,000 in an attempt to maintain the 
radar.  This is a source of tension between the Honduran 
Armed Forces (HOAF) and the U.S. military personnel stationed 
in Honduras.  Moreover, the situation has become a diplomatic 
problem.  We understand that President Maduro had considered 
raising it during the postponed visit of Secretary Powell in 
October.  Ref A outlines the effects of the strained 
relations that U.S. non-compliance has caused.  It is 
difficult to ignore the GOH\'s argument that the agreement was 
entered into between two sovereign nations, and that the U.S. 
has a legal and moral obligation to abide by its terms. 
 
5.  (C) The GOH is also raising the ante over the issue of 
non-compliance.  Political and military relations are 
becoming more and more bogged down with discussions about the 
future of the MOU.  In a recent meeting between Ambassador 
Palmer and Minister of Defense Fred Breve (MOD), when the 
Ambassador discussed U.S. security assistance concerns, the 
MOD responded by mentioning the U.S. failure to comply with 
the MOU.  During the Conference of the Chiefs of the American 
Air Forces, Colonel Ramos (Commander of the Honduran Air 
Force), pressed General Jumper (Chief of Staff, U.S. Air 
Force) for his support.  All political and military VIPs that 
visit Honduras must field questions about our non-compliance. 
 MOD Breve raised it with WHA A/S Reich in August when the 
A/S visited Honduras.  The situation has become increasingly 
embarrassing for post and actually hampers productivity due 
to the amount of time all mission military elements must 
spend responding to HOAF questions.  Compliance with the MOU 
would permit all country team elements to focus on more 
important U.S. interests and priorities in Honduras, such as 
working on counterterrorism and counterdrug training for the 
HOAF, obtaining MOD support for counterterrorism treaties 
languishing in Congress and designation of a GOH 
counterterrorism coordinator. 
 
--------------------------- 
APPRECIATION FOR ARTICLE 98 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) The GOH recently signed an Article 98 agreement, 
despite pressure from other Latin American countries to 
decline.  Honduras was the first Central American country to 
sign Article 98, and the Hondurans remain staunch supporters. 
 Post believes that the GOH should receive a tangible sign of 
U.S. appreciation for signing the Article 98 agreement.  At 
the recent USSOUTHCOM Security Assistance Conference (MILGP 
Commanders\' Conference), Brigadier General Vincent Brooks, 
Deputy Director, Pol Mil Affairs, WHEM, from Joint Staff J-5 
stated that our new approach would be the \"carrot and the 
stick\"--in other words, the U.S. will help those countries 
that sign Article 98 agreements and cut aid to those that do 
not.  The radar issue is the U.S.\'s chance to demonstrate 
that we will assist countries that support us on Article 98. 
At the same conference, representatives from State and 
Defense stated that U.S. interests are best served when each 
country can best protect its own sovereignty.  The radar at 
Cerro La Mole would enable Honduras to become a \"full 
partner\" in the counterdrug and counterterrorism fights, 
better protect its own sovereignty and allow for more 
complete control of its airspace. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
SUPPORT FOR COUNTERDRUG/COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
7.  (U) More and more frequently, Honduran waters and air 
space are used by narcotraffickers for transshipment of drugs 
from Colombia to the U.S. and of illegal arms back to 
Colombia.  Stopping this flow of arms to Colombian terrorist 
groups is a direct and measurable contribution to the global 
war on terrorism.  The U.S. regularly asks the GOH to assist 
in the war against drugs.  The GOH has made a number of 
strides in its counterdrug operations.  The Honduran Air 
Force has begun to fly intercept missions, and maintains two 
F-5s on fifteen-minute alert to scramble on counterdrug 
flights.  Additionally, the Honduran Navy has returned at 
least two patrol vessels to deep water service on the north 
coast.  Honduras continues to grow as a transshipment zone 
for illicit drugs, and the National Police are now having 
some success in interdicting overland shipments.  An 
operational TPS-70 at Cerro La Mole would allow the GOH to 
become more fully engaged in regional counterdrug efforts, 
since it would give Honduras the ability to track and pass 
information to other governments in the region.  Drug 
traffickers are increasingly exploiting the known hole in the 
Cental American radar network to fly through the Cerro La 
Mole radar coverage of the Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador 
border areas. 
 
8.  (U) Currently, the TPS-70 is non-operational and, 
therefore, provides no intelligence directly to the U.S.  It 
is part of SOUTHCOM\'s radar architecture, meaning it is tied 
directly into our radar network.  A functional radar system 
at Cerro La Mole would directly provide the U.S. a much 
better view of Central America\'s illicit flights 
(specifically, it would provide the U.S. with a means to 
differentiate between friendly and unfriendly tracks provided 
by the Relocatable Over the Horizon Radar (ROTHR) 
system)--thus, buttresses the U.S. in its war against drugs. 
 
------------------ 
REGIONAL STABILITY 
------------------ 
 
9.  (U) U.S. compliance with the MOU would ultimately 
translate into increased regional stability by providing 
Honduras with an increased capability for maintaining its 
sovereignty.  Due to the geographical coverage of the radar, 
it would provide advance warning of aggression against 
Honduras, and thus provide a strong (yet peaceful) deterrent 
to hostile military actions.  This would serve to reduce 
misunderstandings between the Central American countries.  It 
would also enhance identification of illicit flights skirting 
the Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador border areas.  This has 
become a serious problem because none of the three countries 
can encroach on a 10-mile buffer zone along the borders under 
terms of multi-national agreements.  A functioning TPS-70 may 
lead to agreements among the three countries for better 
cooperation in the buffer zones. 
 
----------------- 
HOAF EXPENDITURES 
----------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) During the last nine years, the GOH has spent more 
than $800,000 to maintain the radar, but has lost the battle 
in keeping it operational. 
 
----------------------------- 
ANSWERS TO OPPOSING ARGUMENTS 
----------------------------- 
 
11.  (C) There is stated DOD/SOLIC opposition to support for 
this radar.  This mission contends the following--the 
Hondurans are paying their fair share (paragraphs 4 and 10); 
and, Cerro La Mole is now needed to improve radar collection 
on a growing number of illicit drug flights that exploit the 
Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador window (paragraphs 7 and 9). 
 
12.  (C) We ask DOD/SOLIC to reconsider its previous position 
and find a way to identify funds for this radar.  It is not 
just the right thing to do, it is the smart thing to do to 
advance multiple U.S. interests in Central America. 
 
--------------------- 
POST\'S RECOMMENDATION 
--------------------- 
 
13.  (C) Post recommends that the U.S. should immediately 
begin honoring the MOU by either replacing the radar with a 
solid state version (TPS-78) or with another TPS-70 
transferred from counterdrug programs.  This should be done 
because we agreed to do so, to support counternarcotics 
efforts in the region, and as a tangible sign of U.S. 
appreciation to Honduras for its prompt signing of Article 98 
(the first in Central America). 
 
14.  (C) In the alternative, the U.S. could repair the radar 
to operational status.  However, the radar is an older 
300-series radar, and this approach may not be cost 
effective.  Cost of replacement or repairs should be 
evaluated to determine the most economical solution. 
Moreover, post recommends that, pursuant to the MOU, the 
radar be left in the control of the GOH, with all outputs 
made available to the U.S. 
PIERCE 
"
"4717","12/13/2002 21:45","02TEGUCIGALPA3362","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02SECSTATE251996","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR S/ES-O, WHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: NAMES, TITLES, AND CONTACT NUMBERS FOR 
LEADING GOVERNMENT AND POLITICAL FIGURES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 251996 
 
1. (SBU) Per reftel, Post is submitting an update of the 
contact information for senior GOH officials: 
 
A.  Post: Tegucigalpa, Honduras 
 
Date of submission: December 13, 2002 
 
B.  Head of Government:  Ricardo Maduro Joest 
 
Title: President of the Republic of Honduras 
 
Office telephone numbers:  (504) 221-4545.  Often faster 
direct service to his immediate location is through the GOH 
special switchboard number: (504) 193.  (Note: This is only a 
three digit number.  End Note.) 
 
Residence telephone number: (504) 221-4932 
 
Cellular phone number: (504) 978-0391 
 
Comments:  President Maduro speaks English fluently.  His 
secretary is Sonia Zepeda who is also fluent in English.  The 
 
SIPDIS 
President\'s Personal Assistant is Private Secretary Ricardo 
Alvarez, office telephone (504) 239-7328, residence telephone 
(504) 221-8519, cellular phone number: (504) 221-4932. 
Private Secretary Alvarez\'s secretary, who is fluent in 
English, is Aida de Buck, telephone (504) 234-6264. 
 
C.  Head of State information is the same as that contained 
in part B under Head of Government. 
 
D.  Name:  Guillermo Augusto Perez-Cadalso Arias 
 
Title: Foreign Minister 
 
Office telephone number: (504) 234-3297 
 
Residence telephone number: (504) 232-3902 
 
Cellular phone number: (504) 978-2478 
 
Comments:  Minister Perez-Cadalso speaks English fluently. 
His secretaries, who are not fluent in English, are Juanita 
Lopez De Cano and Amada Mendoza. 
PIERCE 
"
"4718","12/13/2002 22:05","02TEGUCIGALPA3365","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 003365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PM, INL, EB, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2012 
TAGS: OVIP, MARR, MASS, MOPS, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR GENERAL HILL\'S VISIT TO HONDURAS 
DECEMBER 18-19 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, in 
office since January, faces numerous challenges in one of the 
poorest and most corrupt countries in the Western Hemisphere. 
 His Administration has been stalled on its domestic agenda 
since June as it tries to reconcile its ambitious goals to 
its straitjacketed financial situation.  Bilateral relations 
between the U.S. and Honduras are excellent; Honduras was the 
first country in Central America (and the second in Latin 
America) to sign an ICC Article 98 Agreement with the U.S. 
and its support for the international counterterrorism effort 
is steadfast.  The United States and Honduras have maintained 
a long-standing close relationship framed by such events as 
the establishment of the banana plantations in the late 
1800s, the Contra wars of the 1980s, and reconstruction 
efforts in the wake of the October 1998 fury of Hurricane 
Mitch.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Key Issues in Bilateral Relationship 
------------------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) The central themes in our bilateral diplomatic 
efforts in Honduras are combating international crime by 
strengthening governance and attacking corruption, assisting 
American citizens, fostering economic development, promoting 
regional stability, promoting trade and investment, and 
combating terrorism.  However, the underlying difficulty to 
realizing USG objectives is improving the administration of 
justice and rule of law.  President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
government is fully engaged on all of these issues, supports 
judicial and political reform, and is seeking to transform 
Honduras so that law and order can be restored and economic 
growth ignited.  He faces formidable challenges from 
entrenched economic and political interests in moving his 
agenda forward. 
 
------------------------------- 
Status of the Maduro Government 
------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) President Maduro is facing increasing criticism 
from the political opposition over his government\'s policies 
and continued dissatisfaction from his own party\'s Members of 
Congress because of his Administration\'s technocratic style. 
The Honduran Congress is a focal point of political 
opposition to his policies.  It is a corrupt institution 
riddled with avaricious politicians, and Maduro\'s National 
Party does not control a majority of the unicameral body. 
The ongoing problems within his own party are serious and 
threaten his broader political agenda, which will require 
legislation to advance.  Continuing political negotiations 
will be needed to manage this situation.  Maduro\'s personal 
life also intruded into the political sphere.  His October 
wedding to a Spaniard was criticized by many Hondurans who 
viewed the President as distracted by his personal life. 
 
4.  (SBU) The President\'s standing has remained stalled at a 
low point since June.  Faced with slow progress in his 
efforts to promote regional economic integration, Maduro\'s 
team is pinning its hopes that a U.S.-Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA) can serve as a catalyst to regional 
economic cooperation.  Maduro is also beginning to hear wider 
disillusionment among the Honduran public as violent crime 
levels are increasing once again despite his successful 
initial \"zero tolerance\" law and order campaign. 
Notwithstanding his crackdown on street crime, actual ongoing 
criminal investigations, in particular homicides, remain 
stalled. 
 
---------------------------- 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Maduro is a good and reliable friend of the U.S. on 
counterterrorism.  His government hosted a major U.S. 
military counterterrorism exercise in March and has quickly 
responded with freeze orders to all U.S. requests regarding 
suspect terrorist bank accounts.  No terrorist assets have 
been found in Honduran financial institutions, to date.  The 
GOH still needs to take the following concrete steps: 
designate a national coordinator for counterterrorism, file 
its national report in accordance with United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 1373, and most of all, 
sign and/or ratify the five outstanding international 
conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions (1971 and 2002) 
against terrorism.  It is also of vital importance for 
Honduras to improve security at its maritime ports, 
particularly Puerto Cortes. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
6.  (C) While the GOH is in general supportive of key USG 
foreign policy goals, the Ministry of Foreign Relations 
appears hesitant to be out front supporting the USG position 
on Iraq.  Securing a UNSC Resolution on Iraq has helped 
mollify MFA officials concerns about the need for 
multilateral support via the United Nations.  Lacking Rio 
Group consensus the GOH is not yet willing to make a public 
statement backing U.S. policy on Iraq.  However the U.S. 
should be able to count on Honduras\' support when a final 
decision is taken. 
 
-------------- 
Anticorruption 
-------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The new U.S. policy against corruption struck a 
nerve in Honduras, especially any mention of our new visa 
revocation authorities.  Politicians in Congress and certain 
business elements feel the U.S. is attacking them.  Maduro is 
committed to addressing corruption, even if it will cost him 
political support within his party.  The Supreme Court 
President is also on board.  Given the scope of the problem, 
any public discussion about the country\'s pervasive 
corruption is a positive development. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The Supreme Court is developing into an independent 
branch of power, unlike all of its predecessor courts since 
democracy was restored in 1982.  It is pro-reform in 
orientation and fighting for its prerogatives.  In some 
respects, the development of the court in Honduras\' restored 
democracy is approaching its \"Marbury v. Madison\" moment. 
The emerging issue is whether it can become a fully 
independent and co-equal branch of political power, 
consistent with the separation of powers provision in the 
Honduran Constitution.  The established political order is 
fighting that prospect with all its might.  In fact, the 
Congress recently seized the political opportunity to 
introduce legislation that would give itself the power to 
interpret the constitutionality of the laws its passes. 
 
---------------------------- 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27 President Maduro\'s 
first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise -- a zero 
tolerance campaign against the country\'s out-of-control crime 
situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 soldiers to the 
streets to support the police.  The public responded 
enthusiastically.  However, despite the initial success of 
establishing a visible police presence, violent crime, 
particularly homicides and kidnappings, has only fallen 
marginally.  Public support is fading and the campaign needs 
some visible victories to restore confidence in the 
government\'s program.  We are helping the Maduro government 
establish an anti-kidnapping unit, increase intake/training 
of police recruits, create a model tourist police force, 
boost its counternarcotics efforts, and expand the frontier 
police.  The country\'s geographic position makes it an 
obvious strategic transit point for narcotics trafficking, 
alien smuggling operations and other organized crime 
activities. 
 
10.  (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults between 1998-2001, have been a source 
of serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to 
take steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases. 
There has been some discussion of the establishment of a 
Truth Commission to look into unresolved alleged human rights 
abuses from the 1980s.  There are serious problems with child 
labor in several industries, particularly melon, coffee, and 
shrimp (but not the maquila) sectors, and trafficking in 
persons of women/children for prostitution in the U.S. and 
children for commercial sexual exploitation in Central 
America.  USAID and Peace Corps have both been involved in 
HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) Some 500,000 Hondurans, both legal and illegal, 
live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration issues high 
on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of Honduras is 6.5 
million.)  There is deep appreciation for the 
Administration\'s extension of Temporary Protected Status 
(TPS) in the U.S. and interest in possible congressional 
action on the pending Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central 
American Relief Act (NACARA), which would give immigration 
parity for Hondurans.  With fourteen thousand American 
citizens residing in Honduras and many thousands visiting 
Honduras annually for tourism and business American Citizen 
Services are a key part of the Embassy\'s work.  Until 
recently, there was little progress in most of the now more 
than 30 American citizen murder cases; however, there have 
been three convictions in these cases in recent weeks.  In 
the last year the GOH has increased cooperation with the 
Embassy on these cases, including establishing two 
prosecutors.  However, little progress has been made on 
extradition cases involving American Citizens wanted for 
felonies in the U.S. 
 
-------------- 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three 
Central American land neighbors and its seven maritime 
neighbors.  Maduro is personally engaged with his 
Presidential counterparts to address these issues.  Its land 
and maritime disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the 
most heated.  The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast is a 
particularly difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) ruling laid out shared areas of control in the 
Gulf of Fonseca and established the land border between 
Honduras and El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow 
to implement the ruling.  In September of this year El 
Salvador requested a revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling. 
 
13.  (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua 
have a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.   Honduras provoked Nicaraguan retaliation when it 
signed a maritime treaty with Colombia recognizing the 15th 
parallel as its maritime border in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an 
ICJ case over the maritime border and more importantly in 
1999 slapped a punitive 35 per cent tariff on Honduran goods 
that remains in place despite a Central American Court of 
Justice ruling that it is illegal.  With former Nicaraguan 
President Arnoldo Aleman deposed as President of the National 
Assembly, GOH officials have expressed renewed optimism that 
Nicaraguan President Enrique Bolanos will make good on 
private assurances to lift the tariff and thereby take an 
important step forward toward regional economic integration, 
especially given the fact that the ICJ recently ruled in 
favor of the GOH\'s petition against the tariff.  You may wish 
to compliment Maduro on the GOH,s restraint and note that 
the regional integration benefits of a CAFTA with the U.S. 
(as well as other integration efforts) will be undermined by 
a trade war. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Troubled Economy Endangers IMF Program and HIPC Debt Relief 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
14.  (SBU) President Maduro inherited a stagnating economy 
and seriously deteriorated government finances from the 
previous government.  The GOH missed all key International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) targets in 2001.  Even after the Maduro 
economic team won passage of austerity and tax measures in 
May of this year, the government\'s budget deficit is still 
expected to be a high 5.9 percent of GDP.  It is important 
for the GOH to undertake the meaningful and long overdue 
reforms needed to work out a new IMF program. 
 
15.  (C) During its November visit the IMF team did not reach 
agreement with the GOH on draft terms of a three-year Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility Program (PRGF).  In 
consultations with the IMF mission, the GOH developed a plan 
to improve the fiscal situation in the next few months.  If 
all goes well, the team will return to Honduras in March or 
April to begin negotiations on a program.  The delay of a 
program jeopardizes $240 million in debt relief, concessional 
loans and grants from some donors.  The IMF maintains that 
the situation is unsustainable, unless donors want to 
continue to fund public sector salaries, and watch investment 
in poverty reduction programs continue to dwindle.  The 
Maduro administration has asked the U.S. to push the IMF for 
flexibility, but the Embassy favors supporting the IMF on its 
push for real fiscal and economic reform in Honduras. 
 
16.  (SBU) International Financial Institution (IFI) and 
bilateral donor disbursements will be held up until the new 
IMF program is in place.  There could also be pressure on GOH 
Paris Club debt service payments (USD 100 million per year). 
In the meantime, the completion point for Highly Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) debt reduction (worth USD 900 million) 
continues to slip back further.  Ultimately, this fiscal 
situation could impact Honduras\' eligibility for Millennium 
Challenge Account grants. 
 
17.  (SBU) The Honduran economy is growing slowly (estimated 
real GDP growth of 1.8 percent this year).  Low world coffee 
prices continue to hurt the economy in rural areas. 
Inflation continues to decrease slowly, estimated at 8-9 
percent in 2002.  The currency is depreciating at a rate of 
about five percent per year.  The economy is dominated by 
agriculture - particularly the production of coffee, bananas 
and cultivated shrimp - although the in-bond apparel assembly 
industry has grown dramatically over the past decade and 
remittances, from Hondurans living overseas, continues to 
grow rapidly (up 38 percent in the first six months of this 
year) and have become the most important source of foreign 
exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras\' largest trading partner; 
roughly 150 U.S. companies do business here.  While many 
social indicators are improving, two-thirds of all Hondurans 
live in poverty and average educational levels are very low. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
18.  (SBU) Maduro has personally identified himself with a 
CAFTA as his government\'s principal trade objective.  The 
Minister of Industry and Trade is reorganizing the Ministry 
(historically fairly weak) and adding staff in a belated 
effort to get ready for the negotiations.  The Maduro 
administration has also been more cooperative with the U.S. 
in the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Geneva.  Honduras 
(along with other Central American countries) has been 
supportive in the FTAA ministerials but to date has not taken 
an active role in the negotiating groups. 
 
19.  (SBU) Latent protectionism exists in the private sector, 
especially agriculture, but the general attitude toward a 
free trade agreement in Honduras is guardedly positive.  The 
textile and apparel industry in particular believes an FTA is 
the only way that the Honduran apparel sector can survive the 
elimination of quotas in 2005 and compete with Asian 
manufacturers.  As such, it is the strongest supporter of 
CAFTA. 
 
------------------------------ 
U.S. Investment Faces Problems 
------------------------------ 
 
20.  (SBU) The Maduro government understands that Honduras 
needs foreign (and domestic) investment to spur economic 
growth but has placed emphasis on the more immediate problems 
of political and judicial reforms, the fiscal deficit, and 
needed improvements in security, education and health. 
Maduro will tout a new law on simplification of 
administrative procedures and formation of a national 
competitiveness council, headed by Vice President Vicente 
Williams, to enhance the investment climate at all levels of 
society.  The government has identified tourism, 
agribusiness, and forestry as important sectors that could 
create much-needed jobs. 
 
21.  (SBU) Much more needs to be done to declare Honduras 
\"open for business.\"  Maduro needs to find a way to get his 
cabinet (and the prickly legislative and judicial branches) 
to make meaningful changes that will resolve the key 
problems: poor and expensive infrastructure; weak legal 
system; personal security, education and health conditions; 
land tenure problems; and opposition to large foreign 
investments by well-connected vested interests. 
 
22.  (SBU) The Honduran government has stalled in its past 
efforts to liberalize and privatize the electricity and 
telecommunications markets.  On November 15, the National 
Electric Energy Company (ENEE) announced that Honduran 
company Lufussa was winner of the 210 mega-watts electricity 
tender, ignoring Lufussa\'s failure to comply with bid 
requirements and serious allegations of impropriety.  This 
was a heavy blow for U.S. company AES, which seeks to build a 
$600 million combined cycle plant in Puerto Cortes.  On 
November 26, AES challenged the award to ENEE\'s decision, 
citing a failure to disqualify Lufussa for the omissions in 
its bid (e.g., insufficient transmission facilities and 
failure to specify the type of fuel to be used) and other 
irregularities.  The Honduran Attorney General and the Office 
of the Inspector General have announced that they are 
investigating the matter.  The GOH telecom regulatory agency 
is also bidding out a second cellular phone license this 
year; one U.S. company has been pre-qualified.  The GOH has 
requested USG policy support for liberalization of the 
telecom (through the Trade and Development Agency) and power 
(through USAID) sectors.  However, in order to make these 
long overdue structural reforms a reality, the Maduro 
government must follow through on its commitments. 
 
23.  (SBU) Land tenure problems (combined with a weak 
judicial system) are endemic in Honduras, and undermine 
efforts to develop the tourism, agriculture and forestry 
sectors.  They also deter new investments in a variety of 
other sectors.  The Embassy has files on 112 property dispute 
cases (generally squatter/land reform cases and title 
disputes), of which 32 are active.  There are an additional 
68 commercial disputes, of which 14 are currently active. 
The GOH is adopting a law allowing some of the land cases to 
be submitted to arbitration and is working on an improved 
property registry system.  In recent weeks, we have seen 
notable progress in handling by the judicial system of 
commercial and investment disputes involving U.S. citizens. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Money Laundering and Bank Failures 
---------------------------------- 
 
24.  (SBU) Strengthened money laundering legislation, with an 
antiterrorist financing clause, was the first law to be 
adopted by the new Congress in late February of this year. 
The GOH has followed up rapidly with creation of a Financial 
Information Unit.  Currently, 70 potential cases are under 
investigation.  Weakness of the financial system remains a 
key concern.  The GOH took over the two most troubled banks 
in May 2002, arranged for the absorption of a third 
undercapitalized bank and is actively promoting mergers among 
the remaining 20 private banks. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Bilateral Political/Military Issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
25.  (C) In January of 1999, the constitution was amended to 
abolish the position of military commander in chief of the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF), thus codifying civilian 
authority over the military.  Honduras now has a civilian 
Minister of Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint Staff who 
heads the HOAF.  Civilian control is well accepted by the 
HOAF, and the transition to civilian control has resulted in 
greater transparency and fiscal accountability.  The current 
MOD, Fred Breve, enjoys a good relationship with the HOAF 
military leadership, but the Office of the Minister of 
Defense still lacks a staff that could provide institutional 
memory and continuity between the change in political 
administrations. 
26.  (U) There are a number of bilateral political/military 
issues with which Post routinely deals - brief summaries of 
recent issues follow. 
 
Cerro La Mole Radar 
------------------- 
 
27.  (C) In 1993, the U.S. entered into an agreement with the 
GOH regarding the maintenance of the radar located at Cerro 
La Mole, under which it agreed to pay 75 percent of 
maintenance costs up to $400,000 per year.  The U.S. has paid 
nothing under the agreement, and the issue affects relations 
between the U.S. and Honduran militaries.  Post has sought 
guidance from DOD and State on how to resolve our 
obligations, and recommended that the U.S. either replace the 
radar with a solid state version (TPS-78) or with another 
TPS-70 transferred from counterdrug programs.  Alternatively, 
the U.S. could repair the radar to operational status.  When 
operational, the radar provides a view of the 
Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador border areas and the Gulf of 
Fonseca on the Pacific Ocean.  If operational, the radar 
could be helpful in the fight against narcotrafficking. 
 
Naco 
---- 
 
28.  (C) The small town of Naco hosts the 4th Logistical Base 
(CALE) and a large cache of weapons and artillery.  In 1985, 
Longlac Enterprises, a Panamanian-registered arms importer, 
sent weapons to Honduras on deposit for use by the HOAF. 
After years of poor storage and neglect, the cache became a 
serious hazard, and in 1993 an explosion killed two people. 
In 2001 the GOH destroyed the unstable weapons, and moved the 
remaining weapons to a more secure storage facility -- 
supposedly eliminating the threat to the nearby population. 
 
29.  (C) Meanwhile, Longlac sold the cache of arms to 
Miami-based Samco Global Arms.  For several years, there has 
been a complicated legal battle over the ownership of the 
weapons and who is responsible for removing them.  Currently, 
the Honduran courts control the storage facility and the 
inventories.  The legal battles become even more complicated 
when Samco sued the GOH in Miami and the GOH counter-claimed. 
 Post is concerned that the weapons might fall into the hands 
of arms traffickers or terrorists, and we have advised the 
GOH of the USG willingness to assist in the destruction or 
disposal of the remaining cache once ownership is established. 
 
30.  (C) On July 31, the prosecutor from the Task Force 
against Organized Crime conducted a spot check, accompanied 
by a Court Clerk from the Fourth Circuit of the Honduran 
Criminal Court, a DAO military attache, and a team of arms 
experts from the Defense Intelligence Agency.  The prosecutor 
conducted the spot check using an inventory attested to by 
affidavit of the Chief Judge of the Fourth Criminal Court of 
San Pedro Sula and the Commander of the CALE dated July 31, 
2001.  Among other arms and ammunition, the inventory 
included 790 AKMS assault rifles that are Chinese-made AKMS 
type 56-1 -- copies of the Soviet folding stock AKMS.  The 
recent spot check revealed that 230 of the AKMS are missing, 
presumably stolen.  On August 28, the high command of the 
HOAF designated an Army Auditor to investigate the alleged 
theft of the arms. 
 
Joint Task Force Bravo (JTF-B) Account Freeze 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
31.  (C) This spring, an automobile accident occurred 
involving a USG vehicle from JTF-Bravo, causing injuries to 
four Hondurans, as well as vehicle damage.  A civil lawsuit 
was filed against two JTF-B personnel, and ultimately, a 
court issued an order freezing the local JTF-B bank account. 
 
32.  (C) The 1954 Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement 
(BMAA) expressly provides that the USG funds are not subject 
to this sort of legal process.  Eventually, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (MFA) persuaded the Supreme Court to order 
that the account be freed from the inappropriate legal 
actions of the lower court. 
 
Bay Islands Vetting 
------------------- 
33.  (C) In 2002, U.S. Navy and Coast Guard ships began port 
calls/liberty visits in the Bay Islands after a period of 
many years without any ship visits.  We suspect that a number 
of businesses in the Bay Islands are owned, in whole or in 
part, by individuals who are suspected of being involved in 
narcotrafficking and other illegal activities, or who are 
convicted felons.  Post formed a committee to gather 
information about Roatan hotels and their owners in order to 
formulate a policy regarding the patronization of such 
businesses -- particularly in instances where U.S. government 
monies are used. 
 
Recent Military Promotions 
-------------------------- 
 
34.  (C) On December 6, 18 HOAF officers (two generals, 15 
colonels and one lieutenant colonel) who are members of the 
twelfth promotion group unexpectedly retired.  These 
honorable retirements came in the wake of a scandal involving 
General Mario Raul Hung Pacheco (also of the twelfth 
promotion group), who allegedly stole money from the Honduran 
Military Retirement Fund.  Some of the retiring officers 
emphasized that they served their country honorably, and that 
the HOAF should not be judged solely by those officers who 
were involved in corruption.  Another promotion ceremony took 
place on December 11 -- amongst the ranks of those officers 
were General Jose Isaias Barahona (the current Chief of the 
Joint Staff), Jorge Andino, Luis Maldonado and Rodolfo 
Interiano.  Interiano\'s promotion was unexpected because of 
his previous problems with the Maduro Administration.  He is 
expected to stay in Washington, DC as the Honduran Defense 
Attache. 
 
--------------- 
A Great Tragedy 
--------------- 
 
35.  (U) At approximately 8:55 p.m. on December 11, a U.S. 
Army Black Hawk helicopter from Joint Task Force Bravo 
crashed while engaged in a night training exercise -- killing 
five (5) U.S. soldiers who belonged to the 1st Battalion, 
228th Aviation Regiment.  The helicopter flew from Soto Cano 
Air Base to La Mesa international airport in San Pedro Sula 
to participate in a night landing exercise.  After refueling 
the helicopter headed back to Soto Cano, and 40 minutes later 
crashed into the mountains near Santa Cruz de Yojoa, which is 
85 miles north of Tegucigalpa. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
36.  (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  Our Peace Corps program, with more than 220 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY02 budget of USD 34.5 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula.  Five-hundred and fifty 
U.S. service men and women are stationed at Honduras\' Soto 
Cano Air Base under the auspices of SOUTHCOM as Joint Task 
Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a Bilateral 
Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their intention 
to work closely together to foster peace and security in the 
Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 Agreement with 
Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment, and will enable our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster recovery, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
PIERCE 
"
"4799","12/19/2002 21:42","02TEGUCIGALPA3402","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003402 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, CA, AND DRL/PHD 
DOL FOR ILAB AND BLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, CVIS, PHUM, ECON, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ESTIMATES 700,000 PEOPLE HAVE IMMIGRATED 
TO U.S. FROM 1970-2000; OTHERS ESTIMATE UP TO 900,000 
 
 
1. According to the Honduran National Institute of 
Statistics (INE), more than 700,000 Hondurans have 
immigrated to the United States from 1970-2000.  Others have 
estimated that between 600,000 - 800,000 Hondurans are in 
the U.S. illegally with another 100,000 in the U.S. legally. 
INE estimates that approximately 35,000 people per year 
leave Honduras.  Experts have theorized that escaping 
poverty has been the driving force behind those traveling to 
the United States in search of employment. 
 
2. According to the Social Forum of External Debt and 
Development, every 15 minutes a Honduran begins a journey to 
the United States.  The lack of employment and a per capita 
income of approximately USD 920 in Honduras are powerful 
push factors. 
 
PALMER 
"
"4800","12/19/2002 23:38","02TEGUCIGALPA3407","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, EB, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/19/2012 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: POSSIBLE CABINET SHAKEUP IN HONDURAS AS MADURO 
LOOKS TO RECAPTURE MOMENTUM 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  As President Ricardo Maduro staggers to his 
first anniversary in office, there are emerging signs that he 
will make some changes in his Cabinet in an effort to 
recapture the political initiative in the country.  One 
rumored change is a new Foreign Minister.  Other more 
probable targets for turnover are the National Security, 
Education, Health, Social Investment, Environment, and 
International Foreign Assistance Coordination Ministers.  On 
the other hand, former Honduran Ambassador to the U.S. and 
current Government and Justice Minister Jorge Ramon Hernandez 
Alcerro, is poised to win broader powers and influence as he 
will be given a new office in the Casa Presidencial.  The 
conventional political wisdom is that the President must act 
now to remove ineffectual ministers and reinvigorate his 
mandate.  According to political commentators, early 
presidential campaigning will likely begin in January 2004, 
at which time the Maduro government will begin its inevitable 
slide toward lame-duck status.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) Over the last two weeks there is a growing strength to 
the rumor that current Foreign Minister Guillermo 
Perez-Cadalso Arias will leave the Foreign Ministry to become 
Rector of the National University (UNAH).  The Rector\'s 
position at the autonomous UNAH is a high profile and very 
political position that has been controlled by the Liberal 
Party during the last eight years.  The Nationalists are now 
poised to claim the spot.  However, there has been fierce 
politicking over who should be the favored Nationalist 
candidate.  Sources indicate that Perez-Cadalso is emerging 
as a compromise candidate who appeals to the competing 
Nationalist Party sectors.  The election for the new Rector 
could take place this week or in early January at which time 
Perez-Cadalso could leave the Foreign Ministry. 
 
3. (C) Perez-Cadalso has performed capably but without great 
fanfare at the Foreign Ministry.  He has not taken any bold 
initiatives but, while not a member of the tight Maduro inner 
circle, conscientiously carried out Maduro Administration 
foreign policies.  In particular, he has managed to lower the 
previous screeching tenor of diplomatic exchanges related to 
Honduras\' border conflicts with its neighbors.  His only 
other lasting impact at the Foreign Ministry has been to 
implement a crushing 18 per cent budget reduction that has 
reduced the size of domestic and overseas diplomatic 
operations.  Perez-Cadalso has done little to help Honduras 
become a party to the seven outstanding international and OAS 
counterterrorism conventions/protocols, but he did sign an 
ICC Article 98 Agreement with the USG.  MFA DG for Foreign 
Policy, AMB Mario Fortin, acknowledged the rumors of 
Perez-Cadalso\'s possible departure but told PolOff December 
19 that no decision had been made yet by President Maduro to 
change the Minister of Foreign Affairs.  Among rumored 
replacements are current National Security Advisor Ramon 
Medina Luna and Government and Justice Minister Jorge Ramon 
Hernandez Alcerro. 
 
4. (C) Casa Presidencial and press reporting inform that 
Hernandez Alcerro is poised to win broader powers and 
influence as he will be given a new office in the Casa 
Presidencial.  Political Section sources say that Hernandez 
Alcerro is being brought into the Casa Presidencial to help 
manage the President\'s political and communications 
strategies.  He will continue to maintain his Ministerial 
portfolio but will be given new (unspecified) authority to 
manage the Administration\'s policy initiatives.  (COMMENT: 
If true, Hernandez Alcerro will re-assume his campaign role 
as the communications and policy czar.  In our view, 
Hernandez Alcerro is the only member of the Maduro inner 
circle who can approach the same level of confidence with the 
President that Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza 
maintains.  His entry into the Casa Presidencial could create 
a significant counter-weight or complement to Cosenza\'s role. 
 Post notes that Cosenza has seemed to struggle at times as 
Maduro\'s chief of staff.  We will watch closely to see how 
the presidential ambitions of these two advisors influence 
internal presidential decisionmaking.) 
 
5. (C) Ramon Medina Luna\'s departure from the Casa 
Presidencial and/or his National Security portfolio has been 
rumored since last July.  However, he is a charter member of 
the Maduro inner circle and, by inside accounts, continues to 
retain significant access to the President and direct 
involvement in the presidential decision-making process.  He 
is the Minister that Members of Congress most detest. 
(COMMENT:  In our view, a move to the Foreign Ministry would 
further complicate the Maduro Administration\'s relations with 
Congress. END COMMENT.) 
 
6. (C) The ministers most likely to be removed in the short 
time are the Education, Health, and Social Investment Fund 
(FHIS).  Education Minister Carlos Avila was recently voted 
the worst minister by the media and is a lightening rod for 
complaints by secondary schoolteachers about the Maduro 
Administration\'s hard-line salary negotiating tactics. 
(Maduro, however, has publicly supported Avila and extolled 
his virtues.)  The Health Minister, Elias Lizardo, while 
getting high marks for his professional approach to the 
Ministry, is being criticized for not placing more 
Nationalist party activists in Ministry positions.  Finally, 
FHIS Minister, Leony Yu-way, is viewed as not directing FHIS 
projects to Nationalist party interests in the departments. 
(According to political sources, this reticence is not a 
resistance to corruption as much as it is his unwillingness 
to treat FHIS projects as a political and legislative pork 
barrel.)  Other Ministers whose names have been the subject 
of press speculation are Environment and Natural Resources 
Minister Patricia Panting (who is the chair of the ENEE Board 
of Directors and could be chosen as a scapegoat if the GOH 
decides to overturn the results of the recent controversial 
electricity licitation) and International Foreign Assistance 
Coordination (SETCO) Brenie Matute. 
 
7. (C) COMMENT: As President Maduro staggers to his first 
anniversary in office, he is clearly grasping for a way to 
recapture the political initiative.  The conventional 
political wisdom is the President must act now to remove 
ineffectual ministers and reinvigorate his mandate.  Maduro 
recently reiterated publicly that he would regularly review 
Ministerial performance.  Two ministers (Security Ministry 
Arias and Trade Minister Handal) were forced out earlier this 
year after they were no longer producing desired results.  A 
change in some Ministers would also allow Maduro to win some 
points with Nationalists (especially in Congress) for 
responding to their criticism about the overly technocratic 
makeup of his government.  According to political 
commentators, early presidential campaigning will likely 
begin in January 2004 at which time the Maduro government 
will begin its inevitable slide toward lame-duck status. 
Given this time-frame, some advisors are suggesting that 
President Maduro cannot delay making changes to Ministers who 
are not performing well.  Maduro, himself, has fared poorly 
in popularity polls.  He states, however, that he is not 
concerned about his popularity as long as he is acting in the 
best interest of the Honduran people.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"4824","12/20/2002 19:19","02TEGUCIGALPA3416","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","01TEGUCIGALPA2872","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND EB/CBA 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, BEXP, EINV, ECON, EAID, PREL, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT:  ENEE BOARD ANNULS BID FOR 210 MW CONTRACT; 
DECISION IN THE HANDS OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 
 
REF: a) 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2872 
 
     b) TEGUCIGALPA 02207 
     c) TEGUCIGALPA 02857 
     d) TEGUCIGALPA 03184 
     e) TEGUCIGALPA 3273 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  On December 19, the Board of Directors 
for the State-owned electricity company ENEE announced the 
annulment of the bid for a 210 MW electricity contract.  In 
announcing the annulment, the Board said that the various 
legal challenges presented by bidders to the decision to 
award the contract to Honduran energy company Lufussa could 
tie up the bid process in the courts for years and lead to a 
potential national energy crisis.  The annulment moves the 
decision on what to do with the contract to the Council of 
Ministers which met early on December 20 to discuss options. 
AES\' local representative (protect) reported to the Embassy 
rumors that the ministers are leaning to signing a direct 
contract with AES for the 210 MW.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) On December 19, the Board of Directors for the State- 
owned electricity company ENEE unanimously agreed to annul 
the public tender for a 210 MW electricity contract.  In a 
press conference, the President of the ENEE Board of 
Directors, Minister of Natural Resources Patricia Panting, 
remarked that the decision to annul the bid was taken to 
avoid a prolonged case in the court over the challenges to 
the decision to award the 210 MW contract to Honduran energy 
company Lufussa.  The Board feared that the legal challenges 
to the bid decision would tie up the bid contract in the 
courts for years and impede the creation of new energy 
capacity to meet Honduras\' energy needs beginning in 2004. 
 
3. (U) On November 26, AES, Comercial Laeisz and the 
National Engineers group all challenged the results of the 
bid, arguing that Lufussa should have been disqualified for 
failing to include sufficient transmission facilities in its 
original bid offer (ref e). 
 
4. (SBU) In annulling the bid process, the ENEE Board of 
Directors has put the responsibility of taking a decision on 
the 210 MW contract in the hands of the Council of Ministers 
which met early on December 20 to discuss options.  AES\' 
local representative reported to the Embassy that he has 
heard rumors from various sources that the Council of 
Ministers is leaning toward arranging a direct contract with 
AES for the 210 MW.  Another option is to redo the entire 
bid process.  Given the urgency in meeting Honduras\' energy 
needs beginning in 2004, it seems unlikely that the GOH 
would embark on another public tender for the 210 MW. 
 
5. (U) Minister Panting reiterated that the bid process was 
clean and transparent and that the annulment was not related 
to any irregularities in awarding the contract to Lufussa. 
ENEE Director Angelo Botazzi echoed Minister Panting\'s 
remarks on the transparency of the process and stated that 
it is in the best interest of the country to avoid a 
prolonged legal battle in the courts which could leave 
Honduras without new energy capacity in 2004.  Botazzi 
warned of a potential energy crisis and alluded to the 
energy crisis of 1994, when the government\'s program to 
ration electricity led to prolonged blackouts across 
Honduras. 
 
6. (SBU) Embassy has continuously advocated for AES to 
receive fair treatment during the bid process.  Post is 
pleased that the GOH annulled the contract with Lufussa and 
would welcome a GOH decision to award the contract to AES, 
but notes that if this were to happen there would likely be 
negative public reaction by some interested parties. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4825","12/20/2002 20:10","02TEGUCIGALPA3418","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE225281","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 003418 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EB/TPP/MTA/MST 
USTR FOR GBLUE 
GENEVA FOR USTR 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EFIN, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE REPORT 2003 
 
REF: SECSTATE 225281 
 
1.  The text of the 2003 National Trade Estimate report for 
Honduras follows. 
 
TRADE SUMMARY 
 
2.  (Note that the following paragraph to be updated by 
Washington with USDOC statistics).  In 2001, the U.S. trade 
deficit with Honduras was $690 million, an increase of $183 
million from the U.S. trade deficit of $506 million in 2000. 
U.S. goods exports to Honduras were $2.4 billion, a decrease of 
$147 million (5.7 percent) from the level of U.S. exports to 
Honduras in 2000.  Honduras was the United States\' 40th largest 
export market in 2001.  U.S. imports from Honduras were $3.1 
billion in 2001, an increase of $36 million (1.2 percent) from 
the level of imports in 2000. 
 
3.  (We also understand that this paragraph will also be updated 
with USDOC statistics).  The stock of U.S. foreign direct 
investment (FDI) in Honduras in 2000 amounted to $115 million, a 
decrease of 8.7 percent from the level of U.S. FDI in 1999.  U.S. 
FDI is concentrated largely in the manufacturing sector. 
 
IMPORT POLICIES 
 
Tariffs 
 
4.  In 1995, Honduras and other members of the Central American 
Common Market (CACM) agreed to reduce and harmonize the common 
external tariff (CET) at zero to 15 percent, but allowed each 
member to determine the timing of the reductions.  Honduras has 
reduced its tariffs to one percent on capital goods, medicines, 
agricultural inputs, and raw materials for those imports produced 
outside of the CACM.  Tariffs on non-CACM final goods were 
reduced to 16 percent on December 31, 2000.  Honduras intends to 
reduce its non-CACM external tariffs for other goods 
(intermediate and finished) over the next several years to 
between 10 percent and 15 percent.  Per the tax reform law of 
June 2002, import tariffs on cars were reduced from 40 percent to 
15 percent ad valorem.  Vehicles older than seven years are no 
longer allowed entry to Honduras. 
 
Non-tariff Measures 
 
5.  Honduras was obligated to implement the WTO Customs Valuation 
Agreement on January 1, 2000.  WTO records show that Honduras has 
not yet notified its legislation nor the Customs Valuation 
Checklist to the WTO Committee on Customs Valuation.  In November 
1999, the WTO Committee on Customs Valuation granted Honduras\' 
request to use minimum values for certain used clothing products 
until January 1, 2002, and for certain tires, appliances, and 
used vehicles until January 2, 2003. 
 
6.  Honduras implements a price band mechanism for imports of 
yellow corn, sorghum, and corn meal.  This price band is 
calculated from a time series of international prices on a given 
product for the prior 60 months.  The 15 highest and lowest 
monthly prices are eliminated, with the remaining highs and lows 
establishing the price band.  Imports entering with values within 
the defined band are assessed a 20 percent tariff.  Imports 
entering with prices above the band are assessed duties at a rate 
lower than 20 percent, according to a predetermined schedule; 
those imports priced below the band are assessed a tariff higher 
than 20 percent.  However, the government also maintains a 
seasonal restriction on the price band.  From September to 
January the minimum allowable duty is 20 percent for corn and 15 
percent for cornmeal and sorghum.  From February to August, 
duties are allowed to fluctuate according to the predetermined 
duty tables for each commodity.  This seasonal restriction has 
been added to provide additional protection to local grain 
farmers during the main harvest season.  In addition to the 
above, the Government of Honduras, farm groups, and importers 
have agreed to a quasi-tariff-rate quota in which the price band 
remains in effect until local grain supplies are exhausted, after 
which a one percent duty is applied to imports.  The United 
States has strongly opposed the Honduran policies on corn and 
sorghum as limiting access for U.S. agricultural products. 
 
STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING AND CERTIFICATION 
 
7.  Honduras has had a ban on U.S. raw poultry imports for some 
time.  USDA FAS estimates that if Honduran restrictions on U.S. 
raw poultry and poultry parts were lifted, U.S. producers could 
export an additional USD 10 million of poultry products to 
Honduras, annually.  The Embassy has received a series of 
complaints in 2002 from local importers regarding import 
restrictions, difficult certification requirements and other 
obstacles to the importation of U.S. pork, poultry and dairy 
products.  Honduran food safety officials have restricted the 
imports of U.S. chicken and pork products citing sanitary 
concerns.  Local importers charge that Honduran officials are 
using sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures to block U.S. imports 
to protect local producers and in some cases to promote diversion 
of trade to other Central American countries.  Changes in 
sanitary and phyto-sanitary requirements are seldom reported to 
the WTO as required, and create uncertainty among U.S. suppliers 
and Honduran importers.  The Honduran government requires that 
sanitary permits be obtained for all imported foodstuffs. 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
 
8.  Under the new State Contracting Law, which entered into force 
in October 2001, all public works contracts over $63,000 must be 
offered through public competitive bidding.  Public contracts 
between $31,000 and $63,000 can be offered through a private bid 
and contracts less than $31,000 are exempt from the bidding 
process.  To participate in public tenders, foreign firms are 
required to act through a local agent.  Local agency firms must 
be at least 51 percent Honduran-owned, unless the procurement is 
linked to a national emergency.  While foreign firms are granted 
national treatment for public bids, some still complain of 
mismanagement and lack of transparency in the bid processes. 
Government purchases and project acquisitions are generally 
exempted from import duties. 
 
9.  Honduras is not a signatory of the WTO Government Procurement 
Agreement.  In the past, the United States has raised concerns 
regarding Honduras\' lack of cooperation in the WTO Working Party 
on Transparency in Government Procurement.  In recognition of 
increased cooperation in the WTO Working Party on Transparency in 
Government Procurement, the United States reinstated a waiver of 
\"Buy America Act\" provisions in 2002 which had previously been 
suspended for Honduras. 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR) PROTECTION 
 
10.  Honduras largely has complied with the WTO Agreement on 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), 
through legal revisions enacted in December 1999.  The Honduran 
Congress still must, for instance, adopt reforms related to 
integrated circuit designs and plant variety protection to be in 
full compliance with TRIPS. 
 
11.  Honduras and the U.S. initialed a Bilateral Intellectual 
Property Rights (IPR) Agreement in March 1999.  Final signature 
of this agreement is still pending.   Honduras became a member of 
the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in 1983. 
 
Copyrights 
 
12.  Honduras\' copyright law, updated in 1999, added more than 20 
different criminal offenses related to copyright infringement and 
established fines and suspension of services that can be levied 
against offenders.  The piracy of books, sound and video 
recordings, compact discs, and computer software is still 
widespread in Honduras, however, due in part to limited 
enforcement capacity.  U.S. companies are concerned that recent 
attempts to prosecute computer software infringement cases have 
been met with resistance by officials in the Ministry of Industry 
and Trade\'s IPR Division and the Attorney General\'s office. 
 
Patents and Trademarks 
 
13.  Honduras ratified the Paris Convention for the Protection of 
Industrial Property in 1994.  The Honduran Congress enacted a 
1999 Law of Industrial Property to provide improved protection 
for both trademarks and patents.  To be protected under Honduran 
law, patents and trademarks must be registered with the Ministry 
of Industry and Trade. 
 
14.  Recent modifications to the Patent Law of 1993 include 
patent protection for pharmaceuticals, and extend the term of 
protection for a patent from seventeen to twenty years from the 
date of filing to meet WTO standards.  The term for cancellation 
of a trademark for lack of use has been extended from one year to 
three years.  Trademarks are valid for up to 10 years from the 
registration date.  The illegitimate registration of well-known 
trademarks has, however, been a persistent problem in Honduras. 
 
15.  A U.S. pharmaceutical company has complained that the 
Ministry of Health, in approving a competing company\'s 
pharmaceutical product, did not respect their data exclusivity 
rights as guaranteed in article 77 of Honduras\' Industrial 
Property Law and article 39 of the WTO TRIP\'s agreement.  The 
Ministry of Health approved the competing pharmaceutical product, 
despite communication from Honduras\' IPR Division that the U.S. 
company\'s research and data were protected under Honduran law. 
The U.S. company argues that in order for the competing product 
to be legally registered with the Ministry of Health, the company 
needs to provide the research and data to support their 
application.  Honduran law provides five-year exclusive use of 
data provided in support of registering pharmaceutical products. 
 
SERVICES BARRIERS 
 
16.  Special government authorization must be obtained to invest 
in the tourism, hotel and banking services sectors.  Foreigners 
may not hold a seat in Honduras\' two stock exchanges or provide 
direct brokerage services in these exchanges.  Honduran 
professional bodies heavily regulate the licensing of foreigners 
to practice law, medicine, engineering, accounting, and other 
professions. 
 
INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
 
17.  The Constitution of Honduras requires that all foreign 
investment complement, but not substitute for, national 
investment.  Companies that wish to take advantage of the 
Agrarian Reform Law; engage in commercial fishing, forestry, or 
local transportation activities; serve as representatives, 
agents, or distributors for foreign companies; or operate radio 
and television stations must be majority-owned by Hondurans. 
Government authorization is required for both foreign and 
domestic investors in basic health services; telecommunications; 
generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity; air 
transport; and mining. 
 
18.  In addition, special government authorization is required 
for foreign investment in the following sectors: forestry, 
telecommunications, basic health, air transport, fishing and 
aquaculture, mining, insurance and financial services, private 
education, and those agricultural and agro-industrial activities 
exceeding land tenancy limits established by law. 
 
19.  Small-scale commercial and industrial activities with an 
investment less than 150,000 lempiras (about $9,000), excluding 
land, buildings, and vehicles, are reserved exclusively for 
Honduran nationals.  For all investments, at least 90 percent of 
a company\'s labor force must be Honduran, and at least 80 percent 
of the payroll must be paid to Hondurans. 
 
20.  Foreign ownership of land within 40 km of the coastlines and 
national boundaries is constitutionally prohibited, though 
tourism investment laws allow for certain exceptions. Inadequate 
land title procedures have led to numerous investment disputes 
involving U.S.-citizen landowners. 
 
21.  Historically, U.S. firms and private citizens have found 
corruption to be a problem and a constraint on foreign direct 
investment.  Corruption appears to be most pervasive in the 
following areas: government procurement, performance 
requirements, the regulatory system, and the buying and selling 
of real estate, particularly land title transfers.  Honduras\' 
judicial system is easily influenced; investment and business 
disputes involving foreigners have rarely been resolved in a 
transparent manner.  In 2002, however, the Honduran Supreme 
Court, the appeals court and the executive branch have looked 
into some of these specific problems and been helpful in pushing 
delayed cases toward resolution.  The Honduran government also 
has plans to submit a small number of land expropriation cases to 
arbitration. 
 
22.  On July 12, 2001, a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) 
between the U.S. and Honduras entered into force.  The treaty 
provides for equal protection under the law for U.S. investors in 
Honduras and permits expropriation only in accordance with 
international legal standards and accompanied by adequate 
compensation.  U.S. investors in Honduras also have the right to 
submit an investment dispute to binding international 
arbitration.  Honduras has taken the following limited exceptions 
to its BIT national treatment obligation: properties on cays, 
reefs, rocks, shoals or sandbanks or on islands or on any 
property located within 40 km of the coastline or land borders of 
Honduras; small scale industry and commerce with total invested 
capital of no more than $40,000 or its equivalent in national 
currency; ownership, operation and editorial control of broadcast 
radio and television; ownership, operation and editorial control 
of general interest periodicals and newspapers published in 
Honduras. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4845","12/23/2002 22:06","02TEGUCIGALPA3428","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02SECSTATE113261|02TEGUCIGALPA988","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC, ETTC, KCRM, US, HO 
SUBJECT: PROPOSED MUNITIONS EXPORT APPLICATIONS #865798 AND 
#865799 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 988 
     B. SECSTATE 113261 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  Omni Engineering Company, Inc. has applied for 
two (2) licenses to import arms and ammunition to Honduras. 
Application #865798 is a proposed sale of revolvers, pistols 
and rifles to La Armeria (the Honduran distributor/end user) 
valued at $312,500.  Application #865799 is a proposed sale 
of 3,050,000 rounds of ammunition to La Armeria valued at 
$346,500.  After careful consideration, Post recommends that 
neither sale be allowed to go forward.  This recommendation 
is supported by a variety of factors, including the 
inordinately high rate of violent crime, the lack of any 
meaningful arms control or regulation by the government, and 
because La Armeria continues to do business without firm 
purchase orders or sales contracts (in violation of guidance 
provided in Ref B).  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
APPLICATION #865798--800 GUNS 
----------------------------- 
 
2.  In its application #865798, Omni Engineering Company, 
Inc. (Omni) has applied to import 800 revolvers, pistols and 
rifles.  Omni states that it intends to sell the arms to La 
Armeria--the Honduran distributor/end user for retail sale to 
the general public.  Specifically, Omni seeks to import 400 
.38/.357 caliber revolvers, 150 .32 caliber pistols, 50 .25 
caliber pistols and 200 .22 caliber rifles.  The value of the 
proposed sale is $312,500. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
APPLICATION #865799--3,050,000 ROUNDS OF AMMUNITION 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3.  Omni has applied to import 3,050,000 rounds of 
ammunition, including 2,000,000 rounds .22 caliber, 100,000 
rounds .30 caliber, 100,000 rounds .40 caliber, 300,000 
rounds 9mm, 50,000 rounds .223 (5.56) caliber, 400,000 rounds 
.357 caliber and 100,000 rounds .380 caliber.  In its 
application, Omni proposes to sell the ammunition, valued at 
$346,500, to La Armeria. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
RATIONALE FOR DENIAL OF APPLICATIONS #865798 AND #856799 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
THE PROBLEM OF NO CONTRACT OR PURCHASE ORDER 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  The primary problem that exists for Omni (as well as for 
other U.S. arms exporters) is that La Armeria has not yet 
rectified its problematic procedures for doing business. 
There is no actual contract for sale or firm purchase order 
for these items.  It is the standard operating procedure of 
La Armeria (the purported initial purchaser) not/repeat not 
to enter into firm contract of sale, but rather routinely 
makes projections of arms and munitions that it might or 
might not need and might or might not purchase. 
 
5.  Post\'s investigations have indicated that La Armeria 
routinely obtains \"quotes\" or \"bids\" from more than one arms 
manufacturer for exactly the same arms.  Thereafter, they 
might or might not purchase the arms from one or more of the 
companies that gave them quotes.  These two applications 
appear to be two more of those cases where La Armeria has 
provided the potential seller (here, Omni) with mere 
projections, and that no contracts for sale exist. 
 
6.  Post understands that relevant regulations provide that, 
in order to obtain a license from the Department of State, 
the U.S. firm or individual seeking an export license must 
have a firm purchase order or sales contract from the buyer. 
Moreover, letters of intent, invoices unconfirmed statements 
of purchase projections of likely purchases are not 
sufficient to meet the requirements for issuance of such a 
license.  Via Ref B, The Department of State clarified this 
issue for Post, after Post sought guidance with respect to 
this La Armeria dilemma in Ref A. 
 
A SOLUTION IN THE OFFING? 
------------------------- 
 
7.  La Armeria is aware of the problem.  In addition to 
having been advised by Post, officials from Remington Arms 
traveled to Honduras in October to visit with officials at La 
Armeria in an attempt to rectify the problem.  Additionally, 
on October 2, PolOffs met with the Remington officials in 
order to provide them with any information that might help 
solve the dilemma.  At this meeting, PolOffs were advised by 
the Remington representatives that the La Armeria officials 
had promised them that they would immediately begin issuing 
specific, firm contracts for sale and/or purchase orders.  To 
date, La Armeria has not instituted the necessary changes. 
 
8.  Post remains hopeful that La Armeria will soon correct 
the problem.  On December 19, PolOffs were approached by 
Colonel Carlos Humberto Ramos, Commander of the Honduran Air 
Force (who is the President of the Board of La Armeria), who 
expressed concern and dismay regarding the problems faced by 
U.S. arms exporters.  PolOffs explained the issue to Colonel 
Ramos, and he indicated that there should be not problem 
correcting the problem within La Armeria.  PolOffs and 
Colonel Ramos agreed to schedule a meeting in early January 
to reach a definitive solution once and for all. 
 
------------------ 
IN THE MEANTIME... 
------------------ 
 
9.  Until La Armeria succeeds in changing its internal 
methods in a manner that complies with Department of State 
requirements, the importation of arms and ammunition from 
U.S. manufacturers will continue to be problematic and in 
violation of current guidance.  In the meantime, Post once 
again recommends that the pending Omni applications be denied 
for the reasons stated herein. 
Palmer 
"
"4846","12/23/2002 22:07","02TEGUCIGALPA3429","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE259957","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR INL/LP, WHA/PD AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: HERO OF THE WEEK -- INL PROGRAM SIGNLED OUT BY 
LOCAL NEWSPAPER 
 
REF: STATE 259957 
 
1.  Tegucigalpa\'s local El Heraldo newspaper singled out the 
December 18 signing of the INL face sheet amendment as a 
\"hero\" of the week.  The paper praised the U.S. as 
Wednesday\'s hero because the INL program donated 12.7 million 
lempiras (750K USD) to support the fight against drug 
trafficking in a signing ceremony with Vice President Armida 
de Lopez Contreras, who is also the head of the Honduran 
Government\'s National Commission to Fight Drug Trafficking. 
The newspaper chose the INL program donation for its regular 
daily feature in its December 19 edition and then re-ran the 
piece in its weekly summary in its Sunday, December 22 
edition as well. 
 
2.  The Mission\'s INL program officer and PAS office worked 
closely on the press release and PAS did an excellent job in 
spreading the good news.  PAS also posted the press release, 
photos from the ceremony, and the Ambassador\'s remarks on the 
Embassy web page.  Publicity from the event also caught the 
attention of other government ministers who were quick to 
approach the INL program officer for additional details on 
the distribution of the funds. 
 
3.  Post signed its face sheet amendment on December 18 in a 
signing ceremony with Vice President Armida de Lopez 
Contreras.  Funds will be sub-obligated expeditiously to 
various projects, as approved by INL in reftel. 
Palmer 
"
"4858","12/24/2002 15:33","02TEGUCIGALPA3434","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, AND DRL/PHD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, PHUM, KJUS, KCRM, SNAR, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: CRIME IN HONDURAS VICTIMIZES POLICE AS WELL AS 
CIVILIANS; POSSIBLE INVOLVEMENT OF CORRUPT POLICE 
 
1. Napoleon Nazar Herrera, head of the Honduran General 
Administration for Criminal Investigation (DGIC - 
investigative police under the Public Ministry), recently 
told reporters that gang members have killed at least 10 
police officers this year.  An increasingly typical killing 
occurred November 17 when a police investigator was killed 
near his home in Comayaguela.  According to police 
informants, members of the gang \"mara Salvatrucha\" had 
staked out the investigator.  A search led to the capture of 
five gang members in possession of a list containing the 
names of approximately 20 police officers that they had 
allegedly planned on killing in the next few days. 
 
2. In addition to the list, the gang members also had 
bulletproof vests, grenades, and information to which only 
personnel of the DGIC would have had access.  Nazar alleged 
that organized crime and corrupt members of the DGIC have 
been responsible for these murders.  Some DGIC personnel 
allegedly involved may have already been identified by the 
police.  Nazar\'s main concern was the fact that confidential 
information fell into the hands of gang members. 
 
3.  On December 16, yet another DGIC officer was killed by 
gang members who allegedly were lying in wait for him as he 
was returning home from the city of Danli.  They assaulted 
him on a public bus and killed him when he reached for his 
weapon.  While there is no apparent connection between any 
of these killings, the involvement of gang members in police 
murders underscores the real battle underway on Honduran 
streets as the police continue to implement President 
Maduro\'s \"Safe Honduras\" program. 
 
4. In another interesting police development, one newly 
assigned DGIC officer was discovered to have been 
participating in \"home invasions\" (break-ins) while in 
training and was caught by accident when an invasion victim 
was at the DGIC HQ and saw the criminal - thinking he was 
under arrest - and to his surprise he was told the man was a 
DGIC police officer.  This incident also highlights the 
involvement of Honduran police officials in criminal 
activity that undermines their fellow officer\'s efforts and 
the stated public security goals of the Maduro government. 
 
PALMER 
"
"4859","12/24/2002 15:33","02TEGUCIGALPA3435","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE224985","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 003435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL, WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN, PRM, AND DRL 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PASS AID FOR EGAT/WID 
JUSTICE FOR OPDAT 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, SMIG, PREL, ELAB, EAID, KPAO, KWMN, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) PROJECT 
PROPOSALS FOR HONDURAS 
 
REF: STATE 224985 
 
1. Post welcomes the opportunity to submit anti-Trafficking 
in Persons (TIP) project proposals.  After discussing reftel 
among the Political, Public Affairs, and Consular Sections, 
as well as INS and USAID, Post proposes two Honduras-specific 
program recommendations.  Embassy is also collaborating with 
other regional embassies on a regional project to 
survey/measure the extent of TIP in Central America, to be 
submitted separately.  Post also strongly supports a proposal 
previously submitted by the Department of Justice\'s Criminal 
Division\'s Office of Prosecutorial Development, Assistance, 
and Training (OPDAT) for anti-TIP training to Central 
American prosecutors and police.  Post believes that it is 
essential that any regional anti-TIP programs be coordinated 
with the DOL-funded International Labor Organization\'s 
International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor 
(ILO-IPEC) project \"Contribution to the Prevention and 
Elimination of Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in 
Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic,\" a 
three-year, approximately USD 3.8 million, project that began 
June 30, 2002. 
 
2. 
 
Project I 
--------- 
 
A.PROJECT:  Public Awareness Campaign Regarding Severe Forms 
of Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
B.ORGANIZATION: A variety of GOH agencies, NGOs, and 
international organizations, such as the Office of the First 
Lady, National Women\'s Institute, Institute of the Child and 
the Family (IHNFA), Ministry of Labor, Public Ministry, 
Immigration, Casa Alianza, Human Rights Commission, IOM, 
UNDP, and UNICEF. 
C.DURATION: 2 years 
D.OBJECTIVE: (1) To focus Honduran audiences on the existence 
of TIP, especially those affecting women and children; (2) to 
organize a forum of GOH agencies, NGOs, and international 
organizations (listed above) to address the problem of TIP 
and seek public policies to combat it.  This forum would 
build on the already exisiting commission to combat 
commercial child sexual exploitation that includes many of 
the same organizations. 
E.JUSTIFICATION: Honduran authorities and the general public 
need to focus attention on the problem of TIP, especially 
those involving women and children.  Many human rights 
organizations have not included TIP as a top priority in 
their organization\'s agenda.  The media has reported 
incidences of TIP, but there has been no public service 
campaign against TIP.  With a per capita GDP of USD 920 and 
approximately half the population of Honduras under age 16, 
poverty and unemployment exacerbate the number of potential 
TIP victims. 
F.PERFORMANCE MEASURES: Radio and TV campaigns; audience 
levels can be determined.  Number of hot line calls to 
prevention center can be tallied.  Statistics on number of 
victims assisted and/or criminals prosecuted. 
G.BUDGET BREAKOUT: 100,000 USD/year to develop and place 
radio and TV public service announcements (PSAs) involving 
sports and cultural figures and for sponsoring a forum in 
Honduras of interested parties.  Recent studies in Honduras 
have found that the frequency of PSAs is the key to having an 
impact on society.  Unfortunately, Honduran radio and TV 
stations do not run PSAs free of charge.  Seed money 
(approximately USD 10,000 of the USD 100,000 total budget) to 
launch a national forum on TIP. 
H.GOH CONTRIBUTION? In-kind support. 
I.OTHER DONOR COUNTRIES CONTRIBUTING? none 
J.PROPOSED FUNDING MECHANISM: Public Affairs Section grants 
to the co-sponsoring institutions. 
K.EMBASSY POINT OF CONTACT: Derrick Olsen, Deputy Political 
Chief/Labor Attache, (504) 236-9320, ext. 4394, and Melissa 
Cooper, Public Affairs Officer, (504) 236-9320 ext. 4139. 
 
Project II 
---------- 
 
A.PROJECT: Assistance to Victims of Trafficking 
B.ORGANIZATION: Governmental agencies Honduran Institute of 
the Child and the Family (IHNFA) or National Women\'s 
Institute, NGO Women\'s Studies Center (CEM-H), or UNICEF. 
C.DURATION: 2 years 
D.OBJECTIVE: Assist victims of trafficking, primarily women 
and children, to reinsert themselves into productive society, 
by providing counseling, education, and social support. 
E.JUSTIFICATION: Victims of trafficking may be reticent to 
become active members of society because of the stigma of 
their exploitation.  Victims often lack life skills and have 
substance abuse problems, thus making reinsertion difficult. 
F.PERFORMANCE MEASURES: Number of victims served. 
G.BUDGET BREAKOUT: 50,000 USD/year to establish a counseling 
center, have NGO train IHNFA staff, provide training to 
clients. 
H.GOH CONTRIBUTION: In-kind contributions from IHNFA or 
National Women\'s Institute. 
I.OTHER DONOR COUNTRIES CONTRIBUTING? none 
J.PROPOSED FUNDING MECHANISM: Public Affairs Section grants 
to IHNFA or National Women\'s Institute. 
K.EMBASSY POINT OF CONTACT: Derrick Olsen, Deputy Political 
Chief/Labor Attache, (504) 236-9320, ext. 4394. 
Palmer 
"
"4860","12/24/2002 16:24","02TEGUCIGALPA3440","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003440 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA,(MBUCKLEY; MPROCTOR); IIP/G/WHA (DDIPASQUALE) 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, Ios, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION:\"AMBASSADOR PALMER AND THE JUSTICE 
SYSTEM\" 
 
  1.   Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based daily \"La 
     Prensa\"(liberal party periodical) (12/23),\"Palmer and the 
     Justice System\": The statements of Ambassador Larry Palmer 
     have bothered some thin-skinned members of the political 
     establishment.  Essentially, what Ambassador Palmer said was 
     that that he hopes that legal cases involving U.S. Citizens 
     will be solved quickly based on principles of justice and 
     fairness. Ambassador Palmer also stated that if his country 
     feels that the legal system is not transparent and does not 
     provide a level playing field that this could affect trade 
     negotiations between the United States and Honduras.\" 
 
 
  2.   \"For some time now, the justice system in Honduras has 
     been questioned. The lack of judicial safeguards is not just 
     a rhetorical issue: the media is a wash with cases of 
     corruption and the lack of an ethical code.  International 
     and local investigations into the legal system strongly 
     recommend reforms within the justice system. 
 
  3.   \"So why now do we hear such hostile reactions against 
     Ambassador Palmer?  He is only asking for fair legal 
     procedures for his fellow-citizens and for Hondurans as 
     well. 
 
 
  4.   \".What bothers some people who do business with the 
     government in a non transparent and honest way is that their 
     interests can be harmed because of the Ambassador\'s honest 
     statement about the need for a transparent way of doing 
     business.\" 
 
  5.   Nevertheless, only the truth will set us free: free 
     from oppression, deception, and propaganda and above all 
     else free from corruption. 
 
 
 
 
 
     Palmer. 
"
"4878","12/27/2002 21:03","02TEGUCIGALPA3463","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02SECSTATE263389","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 003463 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, ALSO FOR D/HS, HOMELAND SECURITY GROUP 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y  (PARA 2 LAST WORD) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/24/2012 
TAGS: PTER, CVIS, PREL, PGOV, APER, KCRM, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: ESTABLISHMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WORKING GROUP 
 
REF: SECSTATE 263389 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  Per reftel, Post has established a Homeland 
Security Working Group (HSWG) in order to focus on and 
support \"homeland security abroad\" in Honduras.  Post will 
incorporate its HSWG responsibilities into the existing work 
of its Counternarcotics/Law Enforcement Committee (CNLE). 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) Per reftel, Post determined it appropriate to 
establish its HSWG by way of assigning the new homeland 
security duties and responsibilities into the existing work 
of its Counternarcotics/Law Enforcement Committee.  Post\'s 
CNLE meets biweekly and is comprised of representatives from 
the Political, Consular, Economic and Public Affairs 
Sections, as well as RSO, DEA, TAT, INS, DAO, MILGP, 
JTF-Bravo, ICITAP and ORCA. 
 
3.  (U) The CNLE Committee deals with a variety of 
counternarcotics, law enforcement and security issues in 
addition to counterterrorism matters.  Additionally, the CNLE 
addresses customs, container, and port security, maritime 
operations and immigration and visa Viper issues.  A chief 
focus of the CNLE has been the growing nexus of 
drugs-for-arms deals between drug traffickers and Colombian 
terrorist groups that are taking place in Honduras.  The 
functions of the existing CNLE fit hand-in-glove with HSWG 
responsibilities.  The representatives who participate on the 
CNLE are the same individuals who would coordinate HSWG 
functions.  Therefore, Post has determined that the CNLE 
Committee will become the CNLE/HSWG Committee. 
Palmer 
"
"4898","12/30/2002 21:28","02TEGUCIGALPA3479","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","01TEGUCIGALPA2872","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND EB/CBA 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, EINV, ECON, EAID, BEXP, PREL, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: ADVOCACY CASE: GOVERNMENT TURNAROUND LEADS TO AES 
CONTRACT FOR 200 MW STARTING IN THREE YEARS 
 
REF: a) 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2872 
 
     b) TEGUCIGALPA 02207 
     c) TEGUCIGALPA 02857 
     d) TEGUCIGALPA 03184 
     e) TEGUCIGALPA 3273 
     f) TEGUCIGALPA 3416 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  AES Honduras signed a contract on 
December 27 with the state-owned electricity company ENEE to 
provide 200 MW of electricity starting within three years. 
The deal came after the ENEE Board of Directors annulled the 
tender award to Lufussa on December 19.  In an emergency 
meeting on December 20, the Council of Ministers authorized 
the ENEE to sign direct purchase agreements for a total of 
410 MW with the companies who made the best offers based on 
price and quality.  Lufussa also reportedly signed a 210 MW 
contract earlier in the week.  Embassy wished to thank 
Washington agencies for their strong support during this 
hard-fought advocacy effort.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) AES\' local representative reported that on December 
27 AES Honduras signed a deal with the state-owned 
electricity company ENEE for 200 MW.  AES chose to begin 
providing electricity within 36 months, allowing it to 
operate the plant with natural gas from the beginning.  The 
ENEE refused to consider standard clauses used in 
international financing with multilaterals like the 
International Finance Corporation or the Interamerican 
Development Bank.  The local AES representative reported 
that despite the omission of the standard clauses, the 
contract provides enough flexibility to complete the USD 600 
million investment.  Honduran energy company Lufussa also 
signed a contract for 210 MW with 24 months COD earlier in 
the week.  We understand that the contracts would go to the 
National Congress for approval on January 27. 
 
3. (SBU) The deals came after the Council of Ministers held 
an emergency meeting on December 20, a day after the ENEE 
Board of Directors unanimously agreed to annul the public 
tender for the 210 MW electricity contract, to discuss what 
to do about the bid.  The ENEE Board annulled the bid over 
concerns that the legal challenges to the decision to award 
the 210 MW contract to Lufussa would tie up the bid contract 
in the courts for years, impede the creation of new capacity 
and ultimately lead to a potential national energy crisis in 
2004 (ref\'s e & f).  The government has not acknowledged any 
flaws in the tender process. 
 
4. (U) Following the meeting, the Council of Ministers sent 
instructions to the ENEE to arrange direct contracts for the 
original 210 MW contemplated in the bid and an additional 
200 MW for demand growth.  Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza announced to the press that the contracts would be 
signed with the bidders who made the best offers, based on 
quality and price, in the original public tender. 
 
5. (SBU) Embassy would like to thank Washington agencies for 
their support throughout.  Advocacy by then Assistant 
Secretary of WHA Otto Reich, Commerce Secretary Donald Evans 
 
SIPDIS 
and Under Secretary for Economic Affairs Alan Larson, all 
expressing their interest in a fair and transparent bid 
process, were especially helpful. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4915","12/31/2002 17:50","02TEGUCIGALPA3491","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA1540","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INR/B, WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD/OMA 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
STATE PASS TO USAID, USTR, EXIM, OPIC, USED IDB, USED WB, 
USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: BANCO CAPITAL LIQUIDATED; SOGERIN TO BE SOLD 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1540 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  The National Banking and Insurance 
Commission announced on December 20 the forced liquidation 
of Banco Capital, which had been under government 
supervision since May 17.  Banco Ficohsa acquired the 
deposits worth approximately USD 43 million.  The GOH 
authorized the transfer of approximately USD 30.7 million 
from accounts of the state-owned telephone company Hondutel 
to Banco Ficohsa to guarantee the deposits.  Banco Sogerin, 
the other bank under government supervision, will be sold in 
February, after completion of an appraisal of its assets. 
End summary. 
 
2. (U) On December 20, Ana Cristina Mejia de Pereira, 
President of the National Banking and Insurance Commission, 
announced the liquidation of Banco Capital which, along with 
Banco Sogerin, had been under the supervision of the 
Honduran Deposit Insurance Fund (Fosede) since May 17 after 
the bank was found to be undercapitalized and have high 
levels of related lending and a deteriorating loan portfolio 
(see reftel). 
 
3. (SBU) In a December 30 meeting, Pereira told Econcouns 
that the government-appointed supervisors discovered 
previously unknown non-performing loans and new cases of 
insider lending that had increased the bank\'s insolvency, 
pushed the bank\'s legal reserve requirement beneath the 
minimum six percent as required by law and ultimately forced 
the liquidation of Banco Capital.  The Commission is 
preparing an exhaustive report on evidence of violations by 
Capital\'s principal shareholder, Ivis Lopez, to assist the 
Public Ministry in pressing charges.  Pereira confided that 
the original plan was to liquidate Banco Capital last May 
when the bank was intervened.  However, due to concerns that 
closing two banks at that time could cause significant 
amount of capital flight from several other banks, the 
Banking Commission decided to hold off liquidating Capital 
to avoid a banking crisis. 
 
4. (SBU) Banco Ficohsa acquired Capital\'s deposits worth 730 
million lempiras (approx. USD 43 million).  Due to low 
offers, the loan portfolio was not sold.  The government 
hopes to recover approximately USD 100,000 through the sale 
of the remaining assets.  Fosede, which is required by law 
to guarantee deposits up to 150,000 lempiras, originally had 
set aside only 213 million lempiras (approx. USD 12.6 
million) to guarantee the deposits.  After the sale of the 
assets, the Council of Ministers agreed to transfer 517.7 
million lempiras (approx. USD 30.7 million) from the 
accounts of the state-owned telephone company Hondutel to 
cover the remaining Capital deposits.  Honduran law requires 
the government to guarantee 100 percent of the deposits 
until September 2003.  Pereira believes the final cost will 
be lower (currently, Ficohsa is reporting that most Capital 
depositors are leaving their accounts open). 
 
5. (SBU) Pereira commented that Banco Sogerin\'s 
recapitalization effort was more successful.  As opposed to 
Capital, which had many outstanding loans in the agriculture 
sector and few assets, Sogerin possessed properties and 
other assets which helped the government-appointed 
supervisors make the bank solvent.  The Banking Commission 
has commissioned an appraisal of plans Sogerin\'s worth, due 
to be completed in February.  It will be sold shortly 
thereafter.  So far Honduran bank Occidente, regional bank 
LAFISE and Salvadoran bank Cuscatlan have all expressed 
interest in acquiring Sogerin. 
 
6. (SBU) Pereira also remarked that implementation of Basel 
rules on capitalization requirements will lead to eventual 
bank mergers.  Banco Futuro and the Armed Forces Bank 
(BANFFAA) are both reportedly up for sale.  Shareholders in 
Banco del Pais, in contrast, have chosen to add funds as 
part of a recapitalization effort. 
 
7. (SBU) Comment:  Although not mentioned during briefings 
for the press or donors, the November IMF mission apparently 
urged immediate closure of Capital and quick sale of 
Sogerin.  Pereira appeared confident that the current 
financial sector measures will satisfy the Fund.  End 
comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4916","12/31/2002 18:06","02TEGUCIGALPA3492","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 003492 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET, ENRG, HO, VE 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS\' PETROLEUM MARKET STABLE FOR NOW, DESPITE 
EVENTS IN VENEZUELA 
 
1. (SBU) Econoff approached Texaco Caribbean General Manager 
Richard Ritter (please protect) on December 30 to discuss 
the effect of the oil strike in Venezuela on Honduras\' 
petroleum and energy needs.  Honduras, which is party to an 
agreement signed between Venezuela and other countries in 
the region to purchase oil at a preferential basis, imports 
approximately 50 percent of its fuel needs from Venezuela. 
Texaco, which through a fuel port facility at Puerto Cortes, 
is responsible for bringing in 65 to 70 percent of all the 
petroleum products imported into Honduras. 
 
2. (SBU) Ritter confided that December has been a terrible 
month for Texaco\'s operation in Honduras and that the oil 
strike in Venezuela has caused Texaco since November to 
reroute at least five vessels destined for Venezuela to the 
Gulf of Mexico to buy crude oil on the spot market.  So far, 
Texaco has not passed the increased costs to Honduran 
consumers.  There have been recent price increases at the 
gasoline pumps related to the rising cost of oil on world 
markets, but Texaco\'s actions are absorbing some of the 
costs.  Electricity prices, which are based on a formula 
using oil prices from two months earlier, are actually 
expected to fall in January. 
 
3. (SBU) Ritter affirmed Texaco\'s commitment to meeting all 
of Honduras\' fuel and energy needs and will continue to 
absorb the extra costs through the month of January.  Ritter 
warned though, that he does not know if Texaco will be able 
to continue the practice after January if the situation in 
Venezuela worsens and/or events in Iraq lead to further 
spikes in world oil prices. 
 
Palmer 
"
"4931","1/2/2003 20:03","03TEGUCIGALPA4","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE240015|03STATE240035","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 000004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND DRL/PHD 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC AND G 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, EAID, PREL, ETTC, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY REPORT 
(INCSR) - HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. STATE 240035 
     B. STATE 240015 
 
1.  Embassy Tegucigalpa hereby submits 2002 International 
Narcotics Control Status Report (INCSR) for Honduras.  Begin 
text: 
 
I.  Summary 
 
The trans-shipment of cocaine through Honduras using air, 
land and maritime routes continued without significant 
disruption in 2002.  Overall seizures in Honduras dropped to 
their lowest level in more than three years and were the 
fewest in Central America.  There is solid evidence of drug 
trafficking-related corruption within Honduran law 
enforcement, judicial, and military organizations.  On a 
positive note, the Honduran Congress finally approved a new 
money laundering law in March that will facilitate U.S. and 
Honduran law enforcement and counterterrorism efforts.  The 
National Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking 
renewed its commitment to lead the country\'s counternarcotics 
efforts.  A new, more politically-independent Supreme Court 
was installed in January with the change of government.  It 
has already demonstrated its willingness to tackle the 
problems of judicial corruption.  It is working assiduously 
to improve the administration of justice in the country. 
Available funds to implement a government-approved 
counternarcotics master plan remain limited.  The Ministry of 
Public Security and Honduran military took a more active role 
in counterdrug operations; however, their actions did not 
effectively reduce the amount of drugs transiting Honduras. 
The U.S. continues to provide funding, training and technical 
support to improve Honduran law enforcement capabilities. 
Ensuring the detention, prosecution and incarceration of 
major offenders, however, remains a challenge.  Honduras is a 
party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
 
II. Status of Country 
 
Honduras does not produce drugs in any meaningful quantities. 
 Its primary drug problem stems from the trafficking of hard 
drugs, in particular, cocaine, via air, land and maritime 
routes.  There are direct air and maritime links to U.S. 
cities and the Panamerican Highway crosses southern Honduras. 
 The Honduran police and Honduran Navy do not have sufficient 
maritime assets to attack drugtrafficking along its north 
coast.  There was a significant drop in drug interdiction 
this year, with the total amount of cocaine seized dropping 
from 182 kg to 76 kg.  Despite the recent passage of a new 
broader money laundering law, money laundering in Honduras 
remains a serious threat, although the country is not yet a 
major money laundering center. 
 
III. Country Actions against Drugs in 2002 
 
Policy Initiatives:  In February, the new President, Ricardo 
Maduro, launched a \"zero tolerance\" campaign to combat crime 
in Honduras.  His policy launched a combined police-military 
effort to patrol throughout the country, but primarily in 
urban areas, where widespread violent gang activity had 
reached alarming levels.  The President directed more than 
3,000 soldiers to work directly in support of law enforcement 
activities. 
 
In response to violations of its airspace, the new Government 
approved the creation of a joint inter-agency incident 
response group; however, implementation of this new 
capability stalled.  In late 2002, Presidential-designate 
Armida Villeda de Lopez Contreras, the chair of the National 
Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking, launched an 
effort to improve coordination between the police, armed 
forces, prosecutors, and judiciary. 
 
The Criminal Procedures Code took effect on February 20, 
2002.  The new code changes Honduras, criminal legal system 
from an inquisitorial system to an accusatorial one.  The 
code\'s chief goal is to decrease opportunities for criminals 
to manipulate the justice system; and it should assist 
efforts to prosecute drug-trafficking cases.  However, it 
requires substantial political will and monetary resources to 
implement effectively.  All elements of the judicial system 
(law enforcement, prosecutors, judges, public defenders) 
required, but did not fully receive, additional budgetary 
resources for the successful implementation.  Nonetheless, 
Honduras carried out far more trials (84) under the new code 
than other Central American countries during similar 
transition periods. 
 
Accomplishments:  As of December 1, 2002, 76 kilograms and 
708 rocks of crack and 914.75 pounds of marijuana had been 
seized and there had been 722 narcotics-related arrests. 
Some progress was made in establishing a small maritime law 
enforcement facility in Gracias a Dios Department. The 
Honduran Frontier police had success detecting cocaine 
transshipments through frontier posts, drawing on increased 
U.S. government-provided counternarcotics training.  Law 
enforcement agencies seized USD 460,000 in a mid-December 
seizure and search of the M/V Capt. Ryan. 
 
Law Enforcement Efforts:  Counternarcotics efforts are a 
priority for government agencies, but evidence continues to 
mount of penetration of law enforcement agencies by 
narcotraffickers and other criminals, as well as bribery. 
The DEA equivalent investigative force (the DLCN) continued 
to operate ineffectively despite new leadership.  The new 
DLCN Director subsequently resigned his post in late October. 
 A successor had not yet been named as of December 30.  The 
Minister of Public Security supported creation of new 
anti-narcotics police units, authorized an expanded role for 
the Frontier Police in the counter-drug effort, and joined an 
inter-agency effort to create a new joint police-military 
counternarcotics command. 
 
Corruption:  Corruption remains a major problem in all 
aspects of national life.  It is the single most serious 
impediment to more effective counternarcotics efforts.  While 
the government does not encourage or facilitate drug 
trafficking nor does any senior official participate in the 
illicit production or distribution of drugs, corruption 
within the government and judiciary is a significant 
impediment to effective law enforcement actions.  The 
Minister of Public Security named a new Police Chief and 
Internal Affairs Director in February and continued efforts 
to purge the police of corrupt elements.  However, the 
Government has still not conducted any effective 
investigations into criminal penetration of law enforcement 
and judicial units.  The Internal Affairs Director and 
Minister of Public Security became embroiled in a highly 
publicized dispute over the involvement of police officers in 
extrajudicial killings, which inhibited efforts to 
investigate corruption within the police.  Nationally elected 
officials enjoy legal immunity for all acts while in office, 
creating a perverse incentive for people involved in illicit 
activity to run for office and complicating enforcement 
efforts against suspected illegal narcotics activity.  The 
widespread issuance of Honduran diplomatic and official 
passports also aids drug-trafficking.  A member of the 
1997-2001 Honduran Congress was arrested with 6 kilos of 
heroin while attempting to cross the Panama-Costa Rica border 
using a valid Honduran diplomatic passport. 
 
Agreements and treaties:  During the course of year, the U.S. 
and Honduras both ratified a stolen car treaty, which had 
been signed in November 2001.  The treaty has not yet entered 
into effect.  A U.S.-Honduras maritime counternarcotics 
agreement entered into force in 2001, under its auspices a 
trilateral counterdrug maritime operation, which included 
Nicaragua, was conducted during April 2002.  The agreement 
allows U.S. vessels to operate in Honduran waters in support 
of Honduran law enforcement efforts; in addition, the 
agreement provides for information exchange and the 
coordination of joint counternarcotics activities.  The 
Honduran government is an active member of the Inter-American 
Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD).  Honduras also hosts 
the Regional Center for (Counternarcotics) Development and 
Judicial Cooperation in Central America, headed by a 
Nicaraguan.  Honduras has counternarcotics agreements with 
the U.S., Belize, Colombia, Jamaica, Mexico, Venezuela and 
Spain. 
 
Cultivation/Production:  Marijuana remains the only illegal 
drug known to be cultivated in Honduras.  There were no 
additional seizures of synthetic drugs during 2002, despite 
the seizure of ecstasy for the first time in Honduras in 
December 2001.  Aerial herbicides are not used. 
 
Drug Flow/Transit:  The volume of drugs transiting Honduras 
continues to increase.  There has been a noticeable increase 
in the number of suspect air flights transiting Honduran 
airspace en route to Guatemala and southern Mexico. Overland 
routes using commercial and private vehicles continue to be 
used to smuggle cocaine.  Illegal go-fast boat landings in 
Department of Gracias a Dios also are used to deliver cocaine 
for trans-shipment via small boat to La Ceiba, where it is 
transported onward for embarkation on commercial vessels, or 
trucked toward Guatemala.  The vast majority of drugs 
entering/transiting Honduras - probably over 90 percent - are 
destined for the U.S., although it is now an apparent common 
practice for traffickers to pay local \"contractors\" in drugs. 
 Gang members are increasingly used to \"push\" these in-kind 
payments to Hondurans in urban areas and along the north 
coast.  Drug smuggling using ships departing Honduran ports 
on the Caribbean is common.  Despite efforts to establish a 
port security program, the government\'s autonomous Port 
Authority has not made any significant progress to address 
this problem. 
 
Domestic Programs/Demand Reduction:  The Maduro 
Administration, under the direction of Presidential-designate 
Armida Villeda de Lopez Contreras, the chair of the National 
Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking, has launched 
a pilot program directed at Honduran youth to fight drug 
abuse.  The National Council is making demand reduction a 
major part of Honduran counternarcotics efforts.  It reflects 
the government\'s appreciation that drug trafficking through 
Honduras is a national security threat and major public 
policy problem inside the country. 
 
Drug use is a growing phenomenon among youth culture in 
Honduras; 49 percent of Hondurans are under 18.  Drug abuse 
by gang members is a growing issue of public concern.  It is 
viewed by some as only one of many public health and social 
problems linked to unemployment, poverty and economic 
under-development.  Alcohol is by far the most abused drug in 
Honduras, followed by marijuana, inhalants, and - to a much 
lesser degree - cocaine.  Crack cocaine and designer drug use 
is increasing. 
 
The National Council\'s pilot program links the efforts of the 
government\'s demand reduction entity \"IHADFA\" - the Institute 
for the Prevention of Alcoholism and Drug Addiction - with an 
umbrella group (\"CIHSA\") of NGOs working in demand reduction 
and drug rehabilitation. The new program combines programs 
operated by the Ministries of Public Health and Education, 
IHADFA and CIHSA, to launch a community-wide effort to inform 
youth about the dangers of drugs and to address root causes 
of drug experimentation.  The U.S. Embassy is working with 
the National Council to support this new approach. 
 
IV. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
 
U.S. Policy Initiatives:  U.S. counternarcotics initiatives 
are aimed at improving the institutional abilities of 
Honduran law enforcement entities, with a special focus on 
enhancing GOH maritime interdiction capabilities along the 
north coast.  The new government has worked hard to support 
implementation of bilateral counternarcotics projects and 
expressed interest in expanding program cooperation, even 
though its resources are extremely limited.  In addition, the 
June amendment to the 2000 Letter of Agreement directed 
monies for the establishment of a machine readable passport, 
completion of the construction of a container freight 
tracking system, and a repatriation shelter for illegal 
aliens from third countries. We are continuing our support to 
help launch the Honduran government\'s pilot programs. 
 
Bilateral Cooperation:  The U.S. added almost USD 1.5 million 
to its bilateral counternarcotics program during 2002.  We 
funded construction of additional office space for a new 
transnational crime analytical unit and provided necessary 
computer equipment to CEINCO, the joint intelligence 
coordination center.  U.S. Customs provided refresher 
training and an assessment of the DLCN canine program. 
Construction of a counternarcotics and customs checkpoint on 
the Panamerican Highway was completed in November 2002.  The 
new facility will be manned by the Frontier Police, which 
received intensive training for the U.S. INS Border Tactical 
Police.  The refurbishment of two 36-foot and two 24-foot 
USG-donated boats for counternarcotics purposes was completed 
and the boats were deployed along the Caribbean (north) 
coast.  The U.S. doubled its support for Honduran demand 
reduction programs.  The Embassy found no irregularities when 
it conducted a thorough review, including site visits, of the 
status of previous USG donations to Honduran law enforcement 
units. 
 
The Road Ahead:  The Honduran government of President Maduro 
has demonstrated a strong interest in attacking drug 
trafficking through its national territory and is organizing 
itself to more effectively respond to this challenge.  We 
expect to see an increased level of maritime interdiction 
operations by the government during the next year.  The 
National Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking, 
under the direction of Presidential-designate Armida Villeda 
de Lopez Contreras, has taken a revitalized leadership role 
within the government.  We expect to work closely with the 
council to address better implementation of the national 
counternarcotics master plan.  The council is more 
effectively coordinating the various efforts of the police, 
Attorney General\'s Office, judiciary, and armed forces. 
Corruption, threats and violence continue to pose a major 
challenge to effective law enforcement, but our relationships 
with the National Council and key ministries should result in 
significant progress during the next year. 
 
V.  Statistical tables 
 
Summary Tables for Three Years 
 
For Calendar Years:       2002 -- 2001 -- 2000 
 
1.  Coca: 
 
-- A. Cultivation         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- B. Eradication         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- C. Harvestable after Eradication 
                          N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
2.  Potential Coca Leaf:  N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
3.  Opium: 
 
-- A. Cultivation         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- B. Eradication         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- C. Harvestable after Eradication: 
                          N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
4. Cannibis (in plants) 
 
-- A. Cultivation:        Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
-- B. Eradication:         41,402  269,000  590,000 
-- C. Harvestable after Eradication: 
                          N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
5. Potential Cannabis Yield: 
                          Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
6. Drug Seizures (in kilos) 
 
A. Coca leaf              N/A      N/A     N/A 
B. Cocaine paste          N/A      N/A     N/A 
C. Cocaine base           N/A      N/A     N/A 
D. Cocaine HCL             76       182      1,139 
E. Opium poppy straw      N/A      N/A     N/A 
F. Opium gum              N/A      N/A     N/A 
G. Heroin (grams)         N/A      N/A     N/A 
H. Cannabis (tons)        .46      2.85    2.74 
I. Crack Cocaine (rocks)  708      714    1,289 
 
8. Illicit Labs Destroyed: 0       0       0 
 
9. Domestic Consumption of illicit drugs: 
                          Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
 
10. Arrests:              722       896      1,009 
 
11. Users:                Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
 
VI.  Chemical Control:  The GOH continues to try to limit the 
illicit introduction of precursor chemicals into the country. 
 However, comprehensive regulations to control the sale of 
chemicals necessary for the processing of illegal narcotics 
have never been developed.  During the year, the government 
in conjunction with UNDP installed a national data system to 
more effectively track precursor chemical transactions. 
 
 
VII.  Money Laundering: 
 
Honduras has a growing money laundering problem, but with 
passage of a tough new anti-money laundering law in February 
2002 (Decree 45-2002), is taking steps to control money 
laundering activities.  Honduras is not an important regional 
financial center and is not considered to have a significant 
black market for smuggled goods.  Per a January 2002 National 
Banking and Insurance Commission Resolution (No. 
012/08-01-2002), the operation of offshore financial 
institutions is prohibited.  The arrest of the Jimenez drug 
trafficking cartel in May 2001, on the north coast of 
Honduras revealed an extensive money laundering operation of 
both domestic and foreign illicit proceeds.  Their operation 
revealed a variety of criminal activities including narcotics 
trafficking, auto theft, kidnappings, bank fraud, smuggling, 
prostitution and corruption.  Money laundering activities are 
not limited to the banking sector, but likely include 
currency exchange firms, casinos and front companies. 
 
The new anti-money laundering law expands the definition of 
the crime of money laundering to encompass (1) any 
non-economically justified sale or movement of assets and (2) 
asset transfers connected with trafficking of drugs, arms and 
people, auto theft, kidnapping, bank and other forms of 
financial fraud, or terrorism.  The law includes banker 
negligence provisions that make individual bankers subject to 
two to five-year prison terms for allowing money laundering 
activities. 
 
The law creates a financial information unit in the National 
Banking and Insurance Commission to which banks and other 
non-bank financial institutions must send information on all 
transfers exceeding USD 10,000 or 500,000 lempiras (about USD 
30,000) or other atypical transactions.  The law requires the 
Financial Information Unit and the reporting banks to keep a 
registry of reported transactions for five years.  The 
Financial Information Unit receives between 2,600 to 2,700 
reports per month of transactions over the designated 
threshold.  A public prosecutor is assigned full-time to the 
Financial Information Unit and public prosecutors, under 
urgent conditions and with special authorization, may 
subpoena data and information directly from financial 
institutions.  Since passage of the law, the Financial 
Information Unit has begun investigating approximately 70 
cases of possible money laundering activity. 
 
In October 2002, Honduras became a member of the Caribbean 
Financial Action Task Force.  Honduras cooperates with U.S. 
investigations and requests for information pursuant to the 
1988 UN Drug Convention.  Honduras has signed Memoranda of 
Understanding to exchange information on money laundering 
investigations with Panama, El Salvador, Guatemala and 
Colombia.  The Honduran government adheres to the core 
principles for effective banking supervision that the Basel 
Committee adopted in 1997.  At the regional level, Honduras 
is a member of the Central American Council of Bank 
Superintendents, which meets periodically to exchange 
information. 
 
Asset Seizure and Forfeiture:  The National Congress enacted 
an asset seizure law in 1993 that subsequent Honduran Supreme 
Court rulings substantially weakened.  The new money 
laundering legislation strengthens the asset seizure 
provisions of Honduran law.  According to the law, officials 
in the Public Ministry will operate a warehouse for seized 
assets.  The implementing regulation governing the operations 
of the warehouse is still under discussion.  Since passage of 
the law and during the course of investigating cases of 
suspected money laundering, Honduran officials have frozen 
two bank accounts worth approximately USD 250,000. 
 
Terrorist Financing:  The National Banking and Insurance 
Commission has issued freeze orders promptly for the names on 
the UN 1267 Sanctions Committee\'s consolidated list and the 
subsequent lists of individuals and entities the U.S. has 
designated under relevant authorities.  The Commission 
reported that, to date, no accounts linked to the entities on 
the lists have been found in the Honduran financial system. 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for 
instructing the Commission to issue freeze orders.  The 
Commission directs Honduran financial institutions to search 
for, hold and report on terrorist-linked accounts and 
transactions, which, if found, are frozen.  Honduras signed 
the 1999 International Convention for the Suppression on the 
Financing of Terrorism on November 11, 2001. 
Palmer 
"
"4932","1/2/2003 23:22","03TEGUCIGALPA10","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03RefA:Tegucigalpa3149|03RefB:Tegucigalpa3479|03RefC:Tegucigalpa3491","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000010 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR, EXIM, OPIC 
STATE PASS USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH Starting to Get Serious About Getting An IMF 
Program 
 
Ref A: Tegucigalpa 3149 
Ref B: Tegucigalpa 3479 
Ref C: Tegucigalpa 3491 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (SBU) Honduran government officials are working hard to 
close the gap with the International Monetary Fund over a 
new three year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) 
program.  With plans for new revenue measures of usd 175 
million and planned reduction in costs (primarily personnel 
cuts) of usd 35 million, the government believes it can 
reduce the central government deficit to three percent of 
GDP for 2003, down from 5.6 percent in 2002.   The GOH is 
already implementing recommendations by the Fund in the 
financial sector and working closely with the World Bank-IMF 
evaluation of the financial sector.   A delegation of 4-6 
IMF directors will visit Honduras January 17-21.  The GOH\'s 
macroeconomic team will return to Washington after that 
visit to review tax reform legislation before sending it to 
Congress in early February.   The GOH hopes that the IMF 
mission would return to Honduras in March, after approval of 
the legislation to sign off on a letter of intent, and that 
the program could go to the IMF Board in April.  The IMF\'s 
insistence on major reductions in public sector salaries as 
percent of GDP continues to be the main sticking point, 
along with the associated timing of the folding-in of 
teachers into a planned civil service reform program.   End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Significant Revenue Measures Planned 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) The Ministry of Finance has identified new revenue 
measures that will raise central government income by 2.8 
percent of GDP (about usd 175 million).  These measures 
include: elimination of exemptions from the sales tax, an 
implementation of withholding taxes designed to reduce 
evasion of sales and income taxes, broadening of the base 
for income tax to include a higher percentage of bonuses and 
benefits packages, and the taxing of the retirement income 
above a specified level.  The government plans to introduce 
a decree to eliminate the tax exemption for diesel used in 
the production of electricity (this exemption is believed to 
be the source of enormous tax evasion); the state-owned 
power company ENEE would be charged with negotiating an 
adjustment to the price paid to private electricity 
generation companies to cover this tax change.  The Finance 
Ministry plans to direct credit card companies to send sales 
tax payments directly to the tax authorities (the DEI) in 
order to avoid evasion of sales tax and help collect the 
planned withholding taxes.  Vice Minister William Chong Wong 
noted that this type of measure has been extremely 
successful in El Salvador and other countries.  The Finance 
Ministry also wants to require audits for companies with 
more than ten million lempiras (approx. usd 593,000) in 
sales annually, and to make financial officers of companies 
and accounting firms more accountable for intentional tax 
evasion.  Chong Wong is heading up the effort to draft 
reforms to the income tax law and tax code.  The GOH plans 
to review these draft legal changes with the IMF in mid to 
late January. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Wage Bill Reductions - Sticking Point with IMF 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
3. (SBU) On the expenditure side, the GOH has identified 
some one-time measures that will reduce government spending 
and the wage bill by 0.6 percent of GDP in 2003.  Six 
thousand teachers who are over 65 years old will be retired 
in early January (an overdue legal requirement) and will be 
replaced by younger teachers with lower salaries.  Similar 
measures will be taken among state-employed medical staff. 
The government is also cleaning up its payroll records (to 
be completed by February) and expects to be able to achieve 
savings of 200 million lempiras (approx. usd 11.9 million) 
per year by reducing ghost workers and individuals receiving 
multiple full-time salaries. 
 
4. (SBU) According to Finance Minister Alvarado, however, 
the IMF is pushing for additional reductions in the wage 
bill as a percent of GDP: 
 
     2002     10.7 percent 
     2003     10.1 percent 
     2004      9.1 percent 
     2005      8.1 percent 
 
The GOH does not see how they can meet these targets. 
Alvarado (strictly protect) has now proposed to the Cabinet 
a public sector wage freeze for 2003.  There is some 
interest but the government remains stymied over the idea of 
freezing teacher salaries only months after reaching a 
settlement on teacher wage increases for 2002-2005. 
 
5. (SBU) During the December 16-17 consultations between the 
GOH macroeconomic team and the IMF in Washington, the 
government finally shared its draft Civil Service Framework 
bill.  Discussion focused on Article 110, which currently 
says that the teachers will be folded into overall state 
wage policy by 2006, indicating that the salary provisions 
of the estatutos (laws governing particular professions) 
will be eliminated that year.  Alvarado said that IMF staff 
are insisting that the teachers be covered by the civil 
service reform immediately upon adoption of the law.  The 
GOH has commented that the World Bank is more understanding 
of their stance on this issue. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
The Results: Sizable Projected Reduction in Government 
Deficit Based on Reforms That Could Get Through Congress 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
6. (SBU) The central government deficit for 2002 is 
estimated to be 5.6 percent of GDP.  This deficit is 
projected to decline to 5.1 percent in 2003 if no further 
measures are implemented.  The IMF mission in November 
estimated that the reforms envisioned by the GOH would bring 
down the central government deficit to 4.0 percent of GDP. 
Finance Minister Alvarado is now saying that he can get it 
down to 3.0 percent of GDP. 
 
7. (SBU) The government is determined, however, to go to the 
Congress only once more on major fiscal reforms.  For this 
reason, they want to be absolutely sure the IMF is on board 
with all legislative proposals before they are sent to the 
legislature.  At the same time, the GOH is certain that any 
further changes to the agreement with the teachers would 
undermine congressional approval.  On the expenditure side, 
they believe they\'ve gone as far as they can go.  Minister 
Alvarado noted, in a meeting with Econ Counselor and AID 
economist on December 31, that the GOH wants to be sure it 
can deliver what it promises.  He alluded to problems that 
Nicaragua is already having in getting its program approved 
by the legislature. 
 
8. (SBU) The GOH was heartened by the Honduran Congress\' 
easy acceptance of the austerity budget for 2003 on December 
4.  The budget was virtually unchanged from the 2002 budget 
in nominal terms, with the exception of usd 262 million in 
needed infrastructure projects, meaning that most ministries 
will face cuts in real terms of about eight percent after 
accounting for inflation.  The Congress identified new 
funding for all of these infrastructure projects. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Public Enterprises Still A Concern 
---------------------------------- 
 
9. The declining surpluses in the key public enterprises 
(electricity utility ENEE, phone company Hondutel, and the 
Port Authority) remain a concern.  Finance Minister Alvarado 
acknowledged that while ENEE\'s financial picture should 
improve by 2004-2006 when high cost power contracts are 
replaced by new low-cost Lufussa and AES projects (see ref 
b), 2003 is going to be a very tough year for the state- 
owned electricity utility.  The government plans a series of 
privatization and liberalization initiatives in 2003 and 
2004, including privatization of some port facilities, the 
postal system and some roads.  This may help increase 
government revenues in the short run and efficiency in the 
long run.  Privatization of Hondutel, a twice failed 
undertaking, remains a politically charged issue, with the 
government in denial about the true low value of the utility 
to an outside investor and the fairly strong union trying to 
fight any changes.  A GOH requested study of liberalization 
of the telecom sector in Honduras has been approved by the 
U.S. Trade Development Agency and should begin in the first 
half of 2003.  In the power sector, the GOH has the results 
of a USAID sponsored white paper on modernization.  To 
depoliticize the issue, the GOH is no longer talking about 
privatization of ENEE, but rather the unbundling of its 
generation, transmission and distribution activities. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Financial Sector: Actions Underway 
---------------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) As reported in Ref C, Banking and Insurance 
Commission President Ana Cristina Mejia de Pereira 
apparently is making strides in meeting prior action 
requirements of the Fund in the financial sector.  Banco 
Capital was liquidated on December 19.  The GOH needed to 
tap into about usd 30 million of Hondutel cash to cover the 
deposit insurance for this failed bank; the Minister of 
Finance indicated to emboffs on December 31 that this is the 
last time he will authorize use of those funds to cover a 
bank failure.  The Commission has ordered an appraisal of 
the value of Banco Sogerin, the other bank which the 
government took over in May, and hopes to be able to sell it 
in February (three potential purchasers have shown 
interest).  The Commission is working closely with five 
additional banks to ensure they meet the higher 
capitalization requirements.  Two or three of these banks 
will probably be sold to larger banks; in the remaining 
cases, the shareholders are providing the needed additional 
capital. 
 
--------------------- 
The Road to a Program 
--------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) The GOH has invited interested IMF executive 
directors to visit Honduras January 17-21.  Alvarado, 
Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza and Central Bank 
President Maria Elena Mondragon plan to return to Washington 
right after that visit to provide IMF staff with detailed 
proposals and projections and to review their drafts for new 
legislation.  The new laws would be submitted to Congress 
upon their return for adoption in February and to enter into 
force on March 1.  The GOH hopes that the IMF mission would 
then return to Honduras to complete a letter of intent on a 
new three-year PRGF, and Honduras\' program would go to the 
IMF board in April.  Speed is vital at this point.  Quite a 
few World Bank, Interamerican Development Bank, and 
bilateral aid programs are on hold until Honduras gets back 
on track with an IMF program.  Honduras is off track for 
HIPC debt relief and is now accumulating new arrears in its 
service of its Paris Club debt (arrears estimated at over 
usd 70 million at this point).  USG agencies should track 
this carefully, as the Brooke Amendment could come into 
force as early as March 31, forcing agencies such as USAID 
to begin drawdown plans. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
12. (SBU) If the government adopts the identified measures 
and is successful in reducing the central government deficit 
to three percent of GDP (i.e. a 2.5 percentage point 
reduction over the passive expected level), that will be a 
substantial achievement.  Similarly, adoption of the long- 
awaited civil service reform that would provide the GOH with 
control over wage policy and create a career civil service 
would be important moves.  If real progress is made in these 
areas in the next month, the GOH will have a much stronger 
hand with which to convince the IMF to accept a slower 
timetable on inclusion of the teachers in the civil service 
reform. 
 
13. (SBU) The other possible development that could help the 
fiscal imbalance is a resumption of economic growth.   It 
will be important for the GOH to start focusing on measures, 
other than tax incentives, which can be taken to attract 
investment and improve the business climate. 
 
Palmer 
"
"5054","1/10/2003 19:03","03TEGUCIGALPA65","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000065 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA,(MBUCKLEY, MPROCTOR, WWANLUND); IIP/G/WHA 
DIPASQUALE; PA/OBS/P (DSCHACKNER); EB/EPPD DCLUNE, 
MDEUTSCHER; USTR AGASH 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC, KPAO, OIIP, HO, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: EVALUATION OF AETN DIALOGUE ON \"WTO AGRICULTURAL 
INITITATIVE\" - JANUARY 08, 2003, 1800-1900 UTC 
 
 
1.  Description of the activity: A one-hour interactive AETN 
Dialogue on the \"WTO Agricultural Initiative.\" 
 
2.  Date: January 8, 2003; Fiscal year: FY-03, QTR 1 
 
3.  Objective:  To provide the local media an opportunity to 
discuss the issues of the new U.S. Agricultural Initiative 
with Alan Larson, Under Secretary for Economic, Business and 
Agricultural Affairs, and Ambassador Allen F. Johnson, Chief 
Agriculture Negotiator for the Office of the U.S Trade 
Representative (USTR). 
 
4.  MPP Goal: Regional Economic Development 
 
5.  Audience reached: 30 guests, including Honduran media, 
the trade advisor for the Central American Economic 
Integration Agency (SIECA), and USAID and Economic officers. 
 
6.  Result/Impact: Excellent. The program met post\'s 
objective of providing an opportunity for the media to focus 
attention on the U.S. agricultural initiative and making a 
pitch for Honduras to become active in WTO initiatives to 
remove subsidies. The local media responded with enthusiasm 
and the program received excellent press coverage. We expect 
to see more reports this week. 
 
7. The panelists were Sammy Castro, economic journalist from 
the daily \"El Heraldo;\" Leonila Madrid, economic journalist 
from a leading TV news program, \"Abriendo Brecha;\" and 
Sandra Moreno from the nightly news program, \"Telenoticias\". 
 
Tegucigalpa\'s participation in the January 8th AETN dialogue 
on subsidy reductions with U/S Larson and Johnson served to 
explain the importance to WTO negotiations of achieving 
subsidy reductions and alerted the media to the historic 
importance of the launch of CAFTA negotiations in 
Washington. 
 
Ambassador Johnson and U/S Larson\'s strong pitch for 
Honduras to become active in the WTO initiatives to remove 
subsidies grabbed the attention of the reporters covering 
the AETN dialogue. \"La Tribuna\" carried banner headline: 
\"United States seeks to eliminate subsidies\"; daily \"Tiempo\" 
headlined:\" CAFTA negotiations will bump agricultural 
products\". The AETN program appeared on major Honduran 
national television news programs. Abriendo Brecha and 
Telenoticias\' nightly news gave full coverage to the AETN 
dialog with Larson and Johnson. Other national news programs 
including TV-11, TV-63 and Radio HRN (nation-wide) provided 
excellent coverage of the program. 
 
After the AETN dialogue was over, journalists took the 
opportunity to interview USAID Agricultural Officer Raymond 
Waldron and Director of Economic Development Programs Duty 
Green and Alvaro Sarmiento, trade advisor for the Central 
American Economic Integration Agency (SIECA). 
Both USAID Officers pointed out the success Honduras has had 
in developing new products for export to the US. Sarmiento 
stressed the importance of the integration and harmonization 
of standards and laws governing export products. This 
discussion focused on the issues raised by the AETN dialogue 
and the relationship of these issues to the CAFTA launch. 
The three panelists here in Honduras energetically supported 
the AETN panelists by emphasizing the importance of 
Honduras\' supporting the US position at the WTO on subsidy 
reductions. 
 
PAS provided a copy of the AETN dialogue to the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Minister of Commerce, the Honduran 
Counselor for Private Enterprise (COHEP), the Animal and 
Plant Health Inspection Service (SENASA), and the Inter- 
American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). 
 
8.  Non-USG sources of funding:  None 
 
9.  Quality of USG support:  Excellent.  Post would like to 
thank EB/EPPD Daniel Clune and Martha Deutscher, WHA/PDA 
Martha Buckley and William Wanlund, and PA/OBS/P Debra 
Schackner for this initiative and for facilitating a 
flawless program. 
 
Palmer. 
"
"5055","1/10/2003 19:49","03TEGUCIGALPA69","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CAFTA LAUNCH 
 
 
1. January 9: \"La Tribuna,\" a Liberal Party Tegucigalpa- 
based daily, carried a full-page article on the CAFTA launch 
using IIP press release with headline \"U.S. and Central 
American countries initiated free trade negotiations.\" 
 
2. \"Tiempo,\" San Pedro Sula-based liberal paper owned by 
businessman and congressional deputy Jaime Rosenthal, also 
carried the banner headline: \"CAFTA negotiations will bump 
agricultural products\" and \"U.S. and Central America will 
strengthen trade.\" 
 
3. \"El Heraldo,\" moderate Tegucigalpa-based daily, and \"La 
Prensa,\" Liberal daily based in San Pedro Sula carried full 
page articles, entitled respectively \"Central America and 
the U.S. on the way to Free Trade\" and \"The first agreements 
of the Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. -have been 
reached\" 
 
4. January 10: \"El Heraldo\" and \"Tiempo\" carried half-page 
articles on CAFTA from a Washington-based reporter: \"North 
American Manufacturers support CAFTA.\" 
 
5. National TV and radio news program gave full coverage to 
the CAFTA launch using the IIP press release and 
international video.  Nation-wide radio station HRN and 
Radio America read the press release. 
 
6. An editorial in \"Tiempo\" entitled: U.S. and Central 
American Free Trade Agreement\"- \"the first free trade 
negotiations between Central American countries and the U.S. 
promoted by President Bush will take place at the end of the 
month. The completion of CAFTA has among its political goals 
that Central America should be prepared to join the FTAA - 
projected to be completed in 2005, although at the moment 
several MERCOSUR countries have expressed a strong 
opposition to an FTAA agreement and the creation of 
sufficient employment to avoid the loss of the Central 
American labor force to migration to the U.S. 
 
7. \"There is no doubt that these negotiations will be 
complex and difficult, because in between there are two 
asymmetric bases: \"the unequal development among Central 
American countries, and that of Central America with the 
U.S.\" In general terms what it pictures is the shark and the 
sardines. 
 
8. \"The fact is that Central American negotiators should be 
of great experience in order to present the value of the 
regional development situation and translate these into an 
adequate safe-guard without losing sight of the importance 
of the global feeling of these negotiations.\"  They must 
also pay special attention to production problems and 
farming commercialization, which is the backbone of the 
Central American economies; for this, they need to pay 
attention to the Mexican experience with NAFTA\" 
 
9. \"The completion and implementation of CAFTA is a 
overarching goal of regional development, but only if we 
know how to negotiate and discover in the North American 
positions a true understanding and political support for 
building a growing economy in Central America the importance 
of the inclusion of the labor rights so vital to Central 
American integration.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"5116","1/14/2003 19:45","03TEGUCIGALPA99","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR: L/LEI-DSULLIVAN, DOJ/OIA-JFAULKNER 
FBI PLEASE PASS TO MIAMI LIAISON JUNIOR ORTIZ 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, CASC, HO (MORRIS ARNOLD FREDERICK) 
SUBJECT: EXTRADITION OF ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS 
 
REF: (A) STATE 156430 AUG 02, (B) E-MAIL COMUNICATION 
 
BETWEEN POST AND DOJ/OIA OCT 2001, (C) TEGUCIGALPA 
02487 JUL 00, (D) TEGUCIGALPA 01784 MAY 00, (E) STATE 
94048 MAY 00, (F) TEGUCIGALPA 1638 MAY 00, (G) STATE 
276514 OCT 94, (H) STATE 150133 JUN 94, 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: ON OCTOBER 24, 2002, THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA RULED IN FAVOR 
OF MORRIS, ANNULLING THE CANCELLATION OF HIS HONDURAN 
CITIZENSHIP.  THIS RULING MAKES MORRIS A HONDURAN 
CITIZEN AND, THEREFORE, NOT EXTRADITABLE UNDER THE 
HONDURAN CONSTITUTION. THE SOLICITOR GENERAL HAS FILED 
AN APPEAL WITH THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) ON JANUARY 9, 2003 POST LEARNED FROM STAFF 
MEMBERS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA 
THAT ON OCTOBER 24, 2002 THE JUDGE HAD RULED IN FAVOR 
OF MORRIS ANNULLING THE CANCELLATION OF HIS HONDURAN 
CITIZENSHIP.  THE RULING WAS BASED ON ADMINISTRATIVE 
ERRORS, SUCH AS: A) THE REQUEST FOR CANCELLATION OF 
MORRIS\' CITIZENSHIP WAS FILED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
AND NOT BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL; B) THE 1994 CRIMINAL 
CASE AGAINST HIM WAS FILED AFTER HE HAD OBTAINED HIS 
HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP; C) THE 1992 CRIME WAS CLOSED 
BEFORE MORRIS OBTAINED HIS HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP (HE 
SERVED 6 MONTHS PROBATION AND PAID A $250 DOLLAR 
FINE). THE SOLICITOR GENERAL FILED AN APPEAL ON 
NOVEMBER 19, 2002 WITH THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT. 
 
3. (U) WHILE TRYING TO OBTAIN INFORMATION ON THE ABOVE- 
MENTIONED APPEAL, WE ALSO LEARNED THAT ON MARCH 25, 
2002 MORRIS HAD FILED ANOTHER APPEAL TO THE SUPREME 
COURT ARGUING THAT THE REQUEST FOR CANCELLATION OF HIS 
HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP SHOULD HAVE BEEN FILED BY THE 
SOLICITOR GENERAL INSTEAD OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. A 
RULING ON THIS ISSUE HAS NOT YET BEEN RENDERED. 
 
4. (SBU) DEPARTMENT SHOULD BE ADVISED THAT POST HAS 
BEEN MEETING WITH THE MINISTER OF GOVERNMENT, MINISTRY 
OF GOVERNMENT\'S SECRETARY GENERAL, THE SUPREME COURT, 
AND HAS MADE ENDLESS PHONE CALLS TO THE DIFFERENT 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURTS ON A WEEKLY AND MONTHLY BASIS IN 
ORDER TO OBTAIN AND KEEP TRACK OF INFORMATION ON THIS 
CASE.  UNFORTUNATELY, THE GOH DOES NOT PROVIDE TIMELY 
INFORMATION ON COURT CASES, AND THE HONDURAN JUDICIAL 
SYSTEM DOES NOT HAVE A CENTRALIZED TRACKING SYSTEM. 
POST IS FORCED TO RELY ON INFORMATION PROVIDED BY 
COURT STAFF THROUGH PERIODIC PHONE CALLS, SOMETIMES 
THE CLERKS CLAIM THAT THERE ARE NO NEW DEVELOPMENTS ON 
THE CASE WHEN IN FACT THERE IS OR THEY PROVIDED 
INFORMATION WHICH IS NOT ACCURATE.  THE BACKDROP TO 
THIS CASE IS PERSISTENT RUMORS THAT MORRIS, WHO HAS 
MARRIED INTO A POLITICALLY WELL-CONNECTED HONDURAN 
FAMILY, HAS CONTINUED TO PAY LARGE BRIBES TO JUDGES 
AND COURT CLERKS TO DELAY AND POSTPONE RULINGS ON HIS 
CASE. 
 
5. (U) FYI:  THE FOLLOWING IS A CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY 
OF DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS CASE, THUS FAR: 
 
ON MARCH 18, 1992, MORRIS ALLEGEDLY OBTAINED HONDURAN 
CITIZENSHIP. 
 
ON MARCH 7, 1995, THE EMBASSY REQUESTED MORRIS\' 
EXTRADITION THROUGH THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS. 
 
ON AUGUST 16, 1996, HONDURAN SOLICITOR GENERAL 
REQUESTED REVOCATION OF MORRIS\' HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP 
TO THE MINISTRY OF GOVERNMENT, CONTENDING IT HAD BEEN 
OBTAINED FRAUDULENTLY, SINCE HE HAD NOT ADMITTED TO 
HIS PRIOR CRIMINAL HISTORY IN THE U.S. 
 
ON MARCH 7, 1997, MORRIS TRIED TO SUBMIT ADDITIONAL 
SUPPORTING EVIDENCE AFTER THE APPROPRIATE DEADLINE TO 
THE MINISTRY OF GOVERNMENT.  THIS IS KNOWN AS RECOURSE 
OF REINSTATEMENT. 
 
ON APRIL 1, 1997, THE MINISTRY OF GOVERNMENT REFUSED 
THE RECOURSE OF REINSTATEMENT. 
 
ON MAY 21, 1997, MORRIS FILED AN APPEAL TO THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT OBJECTING TO THE FACT THAT HE HAD 
NOT BEEN ALLOWED TO SUBMIT EVIDENCE THAT WOULD PROVE 
THAT HE HAD NOT MISREPRESENTED HIS CRIMINAL HISTORY. 
 
ON FEBRUARY 4,1998, THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT REJECTED 
MORRIS\' APPEAL. 
 
ON FEBRUARY 17, 1998, MORRIS APPEALED TO THE COURT OF 
APPEALS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT. 
 
ON MAY 18,1998, THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT RULED THE APPEAL INADMISSIBLE. 
ON JUNE 30, 1998, MORRIS APPEALED TO THE SUPREME 
COURT. 
 
ON JUNE 22, 1999, THE SUPREME COURT RULED THE APPEAL 
INADMISSIBLE. 
 
ON OCTOBER 21, 1999, THE MINISTRY OF GOVERNMENT 
REVOKED MORRIS\' HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP. 
ON FEBRUARY 27, 2000, MORRIS FILED A NEW MOTION BEFORE 
THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN WHICH HE REQUESTS THE 
ANNULMENT OF THE FINAL RESOLUTION CANCELING HIS 
HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP. 
 
ON MARCH 7, 2000, THE CASE WAS TRANSFERRED TO THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN THE CITY OF SAN PEDRO SULA. 
 
ON MAY 31, 2000, THE MINISTER OF GOVERNMENT INFORMED 
THE EMBASSY THAT MORRIS WAS NO LONGER A HONDURAN 
CITIZEN. 
 
ON JUNE 7, 2000, THE EMBASSY SENT THE MINISTRY OF 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS A DIPLOMATIC NOTE REITERATING OUR 
REQUEST FOR MORRIS\' EXTRADITION, DEPORTATION OR 
EXPULSION. 
 
ON JUNE 19, 2000, THE HONDURAN IMMIGRATION SERVICE 
INFORMED THE EMBASSY THAT IT WOULD TRY TO DETAIN AND 
DEPORT MORRIS. 
 
ON JUNE 21, 2000, HONDURAN IMMIGRATION AND POLICE 
OFFICIALS WERE PHYSICALLY THWARTED BY MORRIS\' ARMED 
GUARDS, WHEN THEY TRIED TO DETAIN AND DEPORT HIM FROM 
ROATAN, ONE OF THE BAY ISLANDS OF HONDURAS. 
 
ON JUNE 22, 2000, MORRIS APPEALED TO THE COURT OF 
APPEALS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT, IN TEGUCIGALPA, 
FOR RELIEF UNDER THE CONSTITUTION ALLEGING THAT HIS 
HONDURAN CIVIL RIGHTS HAD BEEN VIOLATED. 
 
ON AUGUST 2000, THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO 
SULA RULED THE APPEAL OF FEBRUARY 27, 2002 
INADMISSIBLE. 
 
On September 8, 2000, Morris appealed to the Court of 
Appeals of the Administrative Court, in Tegucigalpa, 
requesting the following actions: 
 
    A REPOSITION OF THE RULING RENDERED BY THE 
  ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA, CONCERNING THE 
  SUBMISSION OF EVIDENCE. 
 
    A SUSPENSION OF THE INTERMEDIATE SENTENCE OF THE 
  CHALLENGED ACT. MEANING, SUSPENSION OF THE 
  CANCELLATION OF NATIONALITY, WHILE THE ACQUISITION OF 
  THE NATIONALITY WAS BEING CHALLENGED. THE RULING ON 
  THIS REQUEST REMAINS PENDING. 
 
ON SEPTEMBER 11, 2001, THE REPOSITION OF THE RULING 
CONCERNING THE SUBMISSION OF EVIDENCE WAS DENIED. 
 
On January 5, 2001, U.S. Department of Justice 
informed the Department of State that the case against 
Morris was still pending.  Officials reiterated that 
they wanted Morris returned to the U.S. so that he 
could stand trial. 
 
ON JULY 15, 2001, THE SUPREME COURT RULED IN FAVOR OF 
MORRIS\' JUNE 22, 2000 APPEAL BASED ON THE TECHNICALITY 
THAT THE MINISTRY OF GOVERNMENT HAD NOT SUBMITTED THE 
EVIDENCE IN A TIMELY MANNER. 
 
ON FEBRUARY 28, 2002, THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT RULED IN FAVOR OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA, CONFIRMING 
THAT HIS CIVIL RIGHTS HAD BEEN VIOLATED. 
 
ON MARCH 25, 2002, MORRIS APPEALED TO THE SUPREME 
COURT ARGUING THAT THE REQUEST FOR CANCELLATION OF HIS 
HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP SHOULD HAVE BEEN FILED BY THE 
SOLICITOR GENERAL AND NOT BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
 
ON OCTOBER 24, 2002, THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN 
PEDRO SULA RULED IN FAVOR OF MORRIS, ANNULLING THE 
CANCELLATION OF HIS HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP. 
 
ON NOVEMBER 29, 2002, THE SOLICITOR GENERAL FILED AN 
APPEAL WITH THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE 
COURT, IN TEGUCIGALPA, OBJECTING TO THE RULING OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA. 
 
6. (U) THE EFFECT OF THE RULING BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE 
COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA IS TO CONFIRM THAT MORRIS DID 
OBTAIN HONDURAN NATIONALITY, AND IS NOT SUBJECT TO BE 
EXTRADITED OR DEPORTED.  POST WILL CONTINUE TO MONITOR 
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE SOLICITOR GENERALS\' APPEAL. 
 
PALMER 
"
"5159","1/16/2003 14:34","03TEGUCIGALPA116","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SECSTATE6760","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS, SENV, ETRD, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH RESPONSE TO TEDS VERIFICATION REPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 06760 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. Per reftel request, on January 13, Econoff 
delivered demarche talking points to Vice Minister of 
Agriculture German Perez on the outcome of the December 
visit to the island of Roatan by USG fisheries officials to 
inspect Honduras\' TEDs program and the plans to de-certify 
Honduras to export commercially harvested shrimp to the U.S. 
The Ambassador had previously contacted President Maduro on 
January 9 to alert him of the possible de-certification. 
Perez blamed the lack of TEDs compliance on a change in 
government last February that resulted in a turnover in 
fisheries inspectors.  Perez reiterated the importance of 
shrimp exports to the Honduran economy and is eager to get 
their TEDs program back on track.  The GOH will formulate a 
proposal detailing their plans to strengthen the TEDs 
program and requesting additional TEDs training before USG 
fisheries officials return for another TEDs inspection. 
Perez remarked that they are interested in getting re- 
certified before the 2003 commercial shrimp season begins in 
July of 2003.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Ambassador Palmer spoke with President Maduro the 
evening of January 9, alerting him that during a December 
inspection of Honduras\' TEDs program, USG fisheries 
officials found major problems with the implementation of 
TEDS and that Honduras would most likely have its TEDs 
certification withdrawn, resulting in a ban on the 
exportation of commercially harvested shrimp to the U.S. 
Maduro appreciated the call, reiterated the importance of 
shrimp exports to the U.S. and promised to look into the 
matter. 
 
3. (U) Econoff met with Vice Minister of Agriculture German 
Perez on January 13 to deliver reftel demarche talking 
points and brief him on the TEDs team\'s findings.  Econoff 
encouraged Perez to consider formulating a proposal for a 
training program on the proper implementation and 
supervision of TEDs.  Perez had spoken with Roatan fisheries 
officials before the meeting to get a readout on the 
December inspection.  Perez suggested that the change in 
government last February resulted in a high turnover of 
personnel, including fisheries officials and inspectors in 
the Ministry of Agriculture, and that new employees have not 
been properly trained on TED\'s implementation and inspection 
procedures.  Perez also offered the weak argument that a 
culture of lawlessness exists on Roatan and that inspection 
officials are often intimidated into not performing their 
duties. 
 
4. (U) Perez responded enthusiastically about the prospects 
of receiving further TEDs training for fisheries officials, 
noting the importance of shrimp exports to the Honduran 
economy.  Post will continue to encourage the GOH to develop 
a plan to implement and regulate the use of TEDs on 
commercial fishing boats and will forward the Ministry\'s 
proposal for training as soon as it is received. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5. (U) The GOH feels they have a small window of opportunity 
to get their TEDs program back on line and get re-certified. 
The 2002 commercial shrimping season officially closes 
January 31, 2003, and the 2003 season is projected to open 
in early July, giving the GOH a five to six-month period to 
turn its TEDs program around.  Post notes that the GOH 
received TEDs training in 2001 and was subsequently re- 
certified to export commercially harvested shrimp.  While 
Post believes that GOH officials are sincere in their desire 
to be TEDs compliant, we recommend that USG fisheries 
officials make sure that the GOH takes the necessary 
measures to ensure that their TEDs program will remain 
compliant in the coming years.  End comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"5166","1/16/2003 20:55","03TEGUCIGALPA122","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000122 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA(MBUCKLEY, MPROCTOR); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; 
PA/OBS/P (DSCHACKNER); EB/EPPD DCLUNE, MDEUTSCHER; USTR 
AGASH 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC, KPAO, OIIP, HO, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: EVALUATION OF AETN DIALOGUE ON \"CAFTA\" - JANUARY 
15, 2003, 1800-1900 UTC 
 
 
1. Description of the activity: A one-hour interactive AETN 
Dialogue on \"CAFTA\". 
 
 
2. Date: January 15, 2003; Fiscal year: FY-03, QTR 2 
 
3. Objective:  To provide Dr. Barbara Bowie-Whitman an 
opportunity to make clear to a wide Honduran audience the 
historic importance of the CAFTA negotiations that began 
January 8th. To provide a venue for a frank and open 
discussion of the concerns of the Honduran government and 
private sector in regard to Honduras\' participation in 
CAFTA. To generate media coverage of the CAFTA negotiations 
and the importance of USAID programs and the World Trade 
Organization to that process. 
 
4.  MPP Goal: Promote the CAFTA process for regional 
integration, Honduran economic development and agricultural 
diversification, and U.S. exports. 
 
5.  Audience reached: 60 guests, Minister of Commerce and 
Industry; Minister of Labor; Representative of the Honduran 
Counsel for Private Enterprise (COHEP), trade advisors, 
officials from the public and private sectors, labor 
leaders, media and USAID and Economic officers. 
 
6. Result/Impact: Excellent/Excellent. Dr. Barbara Bowie- 
Whitman was an excellent interlocutor with this panel of 
high-ranking Government officials and private sector 
panelists. She handled the questions in depth and was able 
to discuss the CAFTA process from the perspective of a small 
country. Her discussion of the important role of USAID was 
on-target since we had invited the Director of USAID 
Honduras to participate in the panel and in our post-AETN 
press conference. The post-AETN press conference with USAID 
officials and the panelists, all of whom stayed around for 
about another half-hour, generated wide media coverage of 
the AETN. 
 
7. The panelists were Norman Garcia, Minister of Commerce 
and Industry, German Leitzelar, Minister of Labor, and Jesus 
Canahuati from the Counsel for Private Enterprise. 
 
Tegucigalpa\'s participation in the January 15th AETN 
dialogue on CAFTA with U.S FTAA Coordinator Dr. Barbara 
Bowie-Whitman served to explain the importance of such 
essential elements of free trade as security measures since 
9/11 and how they affect the growing trade between Honduras 
and the USA, the need for agricultural diversification and 
the important role USAID programs play, not only in legal 
reform projects, but in increasing competitiveness through 
diversification. Dr. Barbara Bowie-Whitman made convincing 
arguments for the benefits of CAFTA for all Hondurans. 
 
Following the AETN dialogue, the panelists and USAID 
officers participated in a 15-minuts press conference. The 
USAID Director highlighted Dr. Bowie-Whitman\'s statements 
about the key role that USAID competiveness and agricultural 
diversification projects play. Today\'s dailies headliners 
included: \"Tiempo\": To lower subsides in 15 years is the 
U.S. government goal\" and \"La Tribuna\" - With CAFTA, U.S. 
proposes to reinforce security in Central American ports.\" 
The \"El Heraldo\"- U.S. won\'t eliminate all agricultural 
subsidies - story focused on the need to reduce subsidies 
world wide. The journalists quoted Dr. Bowie-Whitman 
statements on this issue. The AETN program appeared on major 
Honduran national television and radio news programs 
Abriendo Brecha, TVC, TVN-Hondured, TV-66, TV-11, and Radio 
America. 
 
PAS provided a copy of the AETN dialogue to the President of 
the Honduran Supreme Court, the Minister of Agriculture, the 
Minister of Commerce and the USDA Officer who covers 
Honduras and Guatemala. Also we distributed packages to 
journalists and participants with CAFTA and USTR articles. 
 
8.  Non-USG sources of funding:  None 
 
9.  Quality of USG support:  Excellent.  Post would like to 
thank WHA/PDA Martha Buckley and PA/OBS/P Debra Schackner 
for this initiative and for the quality of the panelist. 
 
Palmer. 
"
"5191","1/17/2003 15:18","03TEGUCIGALPA131","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: MINISTRY OF TOURISM BUILDS ON HONDURAS\' STRENGTHS 
 
1. (U) Summary.  President Maduro came into office intent on 
nurturing the fledgling tourism industry in Honduras.   By 
tapping successful businessman (and Maduro cousin) Thierry 
de Pierrefeu to serve as Tourism Ministry, he assured that 
there would be a no-nonsense business approach to this 
priority sector.  Pierrefeu has, in fact, focused on the key 
problems highlighted in Embassy\'s previous reporting on the 
tourism sector, at the end of the Flores administration (see 
reftels).  He is focusing on marketing by advertising 
integrated tourism products (Caribbean vacations, Mayan 
ruins, and eco-tourism), opening tourism promotion offices 
in the U.S and a website, and seeking strategic partners. 
Juridical and personal security are being addressed with 
land titling projects and tourism police units. 
Infrastructure projects include plans for an airport in 
Copan, enhancements to attract the cruise ship trade in 
Roatan, and tourist information centers in inland tourist 
destinations.  A new Honduran airline, Sol Air, has helped 
bring down airfares from the U.S. and Central America, and 
Pierrefeu is urging new routes by U.S. airlines as well. 
Honduras still faces stiff competition for the tourism 
trade, but the GOH does appear to be on the right track. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The Ministry of Tourism has an annual budget of 156.6 
million dollars.  It has designated 194 million lempira 
(11.5 million dollars) for projects already approved.  By 
moving more towards environmentally friendly tourism 
projects, exploiting Honduras\' natural resources, flora and 
fauna, and concentrating on \"High End Luxury Tours,\" the 
Ministry hopes to increase visitors by 20 percent yearly, 
and introduce an anticipated increase to Honduras\' economy 
of 350 million dollars. 
 
3. (U) President Maduro and his cabinet have designated 
tourism as one of a small number of priority sectors likely 
to create a substantial number of jobs and economic growth. 
The Ministry of Tourism\'s strategies to increase tourism 
include 
 -- Developing tourism products for high end visitors 
(quality vacations versus quantity of visitors) 
 -- Creating a national cadaster with an actual folio real 
to improve the investment climate for foreign investment, 
building on the only experience gained in surveying the Bay 
Islands 
 -- Drafting a convention between Honduras and Guatemala 
(and other central American countries) to allow for a more 
free flow of visitors to the various Maya ruins sites to 
meet the demands of tourists 
 -- Increasing the number of cruise ship docks on the 
Atlantic coast; the inauguration of an expected dock on the 
island of Roatan is already resulting in a large increase in 
the number of tourists 
 -- Constructing a new airstrip near the Copan ruins to 
allow for day-trips for cruise line passengers from Roatan 
 -- Implementing a new tourist police force, this has 
already been accomplished in the cities of Tela and La Ceiba 
 -- Opening Honduran markets internationally via the 
internet (www.letsgohonduras.com) 
 -- Reforming the Tourism Incentives Law which allows for 
the approval of 43 hotel projects, various restaurants, 
recreation centers and car rental centers 
 -- Building municipal tourist centers in the western, 
southern and central parts of Honduras, to complement the 
existing tourist attractions on the north coast 
 -- Developing alternate sources of income for rural areas 
with high ecotourism potential 
 
4. (U) Pierrefeu, (a businessman, cousin of the President 
and organizer of the inauguration) has directed his staff to 
focus on three clear project goals.  Each of these projects, 
referred to as \"tourism products\" contains several smaller 
clusters of projects.  These products are titled \"A 
Caribbean Creation\", \"Maya Renaissance\", and \"Tropical 
Nature Adventure.\" None of the projects will be marketed for 
high-density tourism. The GOH is trying to promote what 
Pierrefeu calls high quality, sustainable tourism. 
 
-------------------- 
A Carribean Creation 
-------------------- 
 
5. (U) The Caribbean Creation project involves encouraging 
tourism development in the Bay Islands and the northern 
coast of Honduras, focusing on beaches and reefs.  There are 
plans to build two thousand hotel rooms in Tela Bay and to 
promote La Ceiba as an ecotourism center with the already 
strong infrastructure of airports, hotels and national 
parks. For the Tela and La Ceiba areas, the goal is a mid to 
low-density crowd based on eco-tourism as well as the north 
coast beaches. 
 
6. (U) The goal for the Bay Islands is to develop very high- 
end (costly) low-density tourism with new resorts that have 
a more intimate ambiance such as the proposed Caribe Point 
Rosewood and Ritz Carlton projects set for Roatan.  The 
Caribe Point Rosewood will require an estimated investment 
of over USD 47 million.  The Ritz Carlton is looking to 
develop a private resort with personalized bungalows set 
along a winding river so that each cabin has a private deck 
and swimming area.  A German chain is planning a similar 
exclusive resort called Iguana Bay on Guanaja Island. 
 
---------------- 
Maya Renaissance 
---------------- 
 
7. (U) This project is about Honduras\' wealth of archaeology 
and consists of a complete Mayan Route from Copan to other 
lesser known ruins and archaeological sites.  It will be 
geared towards a mid-density eco-tourism crowd. A primary 
improvement in the infrastructure of the area is a new, 
(unpaved) runway near the Copan ruins that will allow local 
commuter airlines to transport tourists from Guatemala and 
Roatan (targeted at the cruise ship tourists) for visits to 
the ruins at Copan.  The Ministry has plans to eventually 
construct an airport nearby to replace the airport that was 
closed due to its damaging proximity to the ancient ruins. 
 
8. (U) As for the south coast of Honduras, the Ministry has 
plans for improvements in Ampala, Cedeo, Punta Raton and 
Choluteca.  Choluteca will be part of a \"Colonial Route\" 
consisting of Gracias, Santa Rosa de Copan, Comayaqua, 
Tegucigalpa and Choluteca. 
 
------------------------- 
Tropical Nature Adventure 
------------------------- 
 
9. (U) Tropical Nature Adventure includes the marketing and 
developing of eco-tourism on the north shore, in the 
national parks and in the Copan ruins area.  The Ministry is 
also exploring an extension of eco-tourism towards high-end 
clients who wish to participate in scientific exploration. 
On a recent trip to New York, Ministry representatives met 
with people from the World Wildlife Federation, the 
Smithsonian, the Audubon, and Conservancy International and 
Counterpart International (the last two work together in 
unified projects) and National Geographic.  All responded 
favorably to the idea of participating in field studies in 
Honduras which will certify the quality of Honduras\' natural 
attractions. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Honduras\' Crown of Five Ecotourism Jewels 
----------------------------------------- 
 
10. (U) The five ecotourism attractions in Honduras include 
the dolphin zone, the coral zone, the Quetzal zone, the 
Liquid mbar zone (Liquid mbar refers to a tree resin), and 
the Pipante (a small native canoe) zone.  Each of these five 
fits into one of the Ministry\'s aforementioned three main 
projects. 
 
11. (U) The dolphin zone includes the north coast from the 
city of Trujillo westward to Puerto Cortes.  The principal 
tourist attractions include the national park \"Janet Kawas\" 
and the botanical gardens in Tela; the wilderness reserves 
around the Cuero and Salado rivers and the national park 
\"Pico Bonito\" in La Ceiba. 
 
12. (U) The coral zone is also associated with the Carribean 
Creation, consisting of the three main islands of Utila, 
Roatan and Guanaja in Honduras\' Bay Islands.  The islands 
contain the second largest coral reef in the world, second 
only to the Great Barrier Reef off the coast of Australia. 
Main attractions include the Marine Reserve at Sandy Bay, 
the Institute of Marine Science and the Roatan Museum, along 
with the marine reserves in West End and Turtle Harbor. 
 
13. (U) The Quetzal zone relates to archaeology - Maya Route 
project and covers the western part of Honduras.  It 
encompasses the Copan ruins, and sites from Lake Yojoa to 
Omoa.  The zone includes the key economic city of San Pedro 
Sula and Honduras\' principal port city, Puerto Cortes.  Main 
attractions include the nightlife of San Pedro Sula, the 
national park \"El Cusco\", Pulhapanzak waterfalls, the ruins 
of Copan and Lake Yojoa, Honduras\' largest freshwater lake. 
 
14. (U) Within the context of the Tropical Nature Adventure 
project, the Liquidambar zone encompasses the central region 
of Honduras, including the principal areas of Tegucigalpa, 
San Lorenzo and the Gulf of Fonseca.  The Gulf area includes 
several small volcanic islands stretching up into well known 
mountain peaks such as the cloud forest called \"La Tigra\" 
near Tegucigalpa and the well known mountainous coastal area 
of \"Zacate Grande\" near Choluteca in the south. 
 
15. (U) The last \"jewel\", definitely for the dedicated 
nature adventure lover, is the Pipante zone.  Named after 
the small canoe typically used by the locals, the areas of 
Olancho and Gracias a Dios are known as the most bio-diverse 
regions in the country.  Here, the largest and most 
developed protected areas such as the biosphere of the Rio 
Platano are the main attraction.  This is where the most 
adventurous tourists will seek to vacation. 
 
------------------------------ 
Encouraging Foreign Investment 
------------------------------ 
 
16. (U) In order to better attract foreign investment, the 
Tourism Ministry has pushed for a new land titling 
initiative.  As part of an IDB (Inter-American Development 
Bank) project on sustainable development, three 
international companies worked with the GOH to complete 
surveys of the Bay Islands via satellite, airplanes, and 
global positioning system (GPS) technologies.  They made 
topographical maps and a computerized registry of every 
piece of property in the islands.  The GOH believes this 
will simplify future land purchases, ensure future 
undisputed ownership rights to land (an important 
consideration for foreign investors such as hotel and resort 
entrepreneurs), and fortify the municipalities\' ability to 
collect local taxes. 
 
----------------------------- 
Protecting Honduras\' Visitors 
----------------------------- 
 
17. (U) In an attempt to better ensure the safety of 
Honduras\' visitors, the development of a tourism police 
force is underway.  The first unit was created in the city 
of Tela.  Within the next six months, the Ministry intends 
to activate units in the Bay Islands, La Ceiba and La Tigra 
National Park in Tegucigalpa.  Units in Copan and the Copan- 
San Pedro Sula route will follow shortly thereafter. 
 
18.  (U) Comment: Pierrefeu brings a fresh business 
perspective into the arena of tourism planning which gives 
him a different perspective on investments than former 
tourism heads.  Pierrefeu reports that the number of 
tourists is at its highest level ever with thirty six 
percent of the tourists coming from the U.S.  In order to 
increase that number to fifty percent, Pierrefeu\'s staff is 
working to build alliances with US travel agencies such as 
Conde Nast and American Express.  They are also opening new 
tourism promotion offices in Washington, Houston, San 
Francisco and Chicago to compliment the office already 
servicing Miami.  The Minister has found his job to be more 
challenging than expected, but is determined to continue 
finding new, innovative ways to attract additional tourism 
to Honduras.  End comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"5192","1/17/2003 15:19","03TEGUCIGALPA132","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE257751","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR PPC/P: L. BUTLER, E. HULLANDER 
FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, EFIN, ETTC, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: USAID/HONDURAS - NO PLANS FOR MONEY LAUNDERING 
TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 257751 
 
1.  USAID/Honduras does not have any current or planned 
activities involving training and/or technical assistance in 
the areas of money laundering, counter terrorism finance, or 
financial intelligence unit development.  The Mission is not 
aware of any training and/or technical assistance in these 
activities that are being or will be conducted or sponsored 
in Honduras by other donors, IFIs, and NGOs. 
 
2.  The Mission notes that in order to help the Honduran 
government implement its new anti-money laundering law, 
which entered into force in June 2001, the Embassy has 
coordinated with experts in Treasury over the last six 
months to provide several money laundering technical 
assistance activities.  USAID/Honduras has not been involved 
in this effort. 
 
Palmer 
"
"5193","1/17/2003 15:19","03TEGUCIGALPA133","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE254964","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000133 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GENEVA FOR USTR 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH, ANN MAIN, PETER COLLINS 
FOR EB/TPP/MTA/MST 
 
E.O. 12958 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, HO, WTO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS - REGULATION OF SERVICES BY SUB-CENTRAL 
ACTORS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 254964 
 
1.  Per reftel request, Post provides the following 
information on the regulation of services in Honduras by sub- 
central government entities. 
 
2.  There is little regulation of services in Honduras by 
sub-central entities.  Services are primarily regulated per 
laws issued in the National Congress.  The Law of Public 
Administration gives the Executive Branch, including 
ministries and other central government entities (state- 
owned telephone and electricity companies), the right to 
issue implementing regulations governing particular public 
services.  CONATEL, the government\'s telecommunications 
regulator, also has the authority to pass regulations for 
the telecom sector. 
 
3.  There are 199 municipalities in Honduras.  The Law of 
Municipalities gives municipal authorities the right to fix 
prices and requirements for construction permits, water 
rates, trash removal and operating licenses for markets, 
restaurants, bars and other establishments.  In an effort to 
promote further decentralization and improve services in the 
health and education sectors, the GOH has proposed passing 
the management and care of some schools and hospitals in 
selected areas to municipalities and community groups. 
 
4.  The law governing the creation of professional 
organizations gives these bodies the right to establish fees 
for services rendered in their profession.  There are at 
least ten bodies for licensed professionals in Honduras, 
including for the engineering, architectural, accounting, 
legal, medical and nursing professions, among others. 
 
Palmer 
"
"5206","1/17/2003 18:42","03TEGUCIGALPA137","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE261842|02STATE264666|02STATE268741|03TEGUCIGALPA51","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/USOAS, WHA/AND, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PARM, KDEM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN DELEGATION TO OAS CSBM MEETING 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 51 
     B. 02 STATE 268741 
     C. 02 STATE 264666 
     D. 02 STATE 261842 
 
1. This is an action request.  Please see para. 3. 
 
2. MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin informed PolOff 
January 16 that the Honduran delegation to the OAS CSBM 
meeting would be AMB Policarpo Callejas, Advisor to the 
Foreign Minister, and AMB Salvador Redezno, OAS PermRep. 
Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias is unable to 
attend.  It does not appear that the Ministry of Defense will 
send any officials to the meetings. 
 
3. Action request for WHA/USOAS: The Honduran MFA requested 
information about the exact location of the meetings, as well 
as a draft agenda.  Post would appreciate WHA/USOAS proving 
this information as soon as possible to Deputy Political 
Chief Derrick Olsen, unclassified and classified e-mail, 
phone: 504-236-9320 x4394, IVG: 539-4394, fax: 504-238-4446. 
Palmer 
"
"5207","1/17/2003 18:47","03TEGUCIGALPA139","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE7902","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/USOAS, S/CT, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, AORC, HO, OAS 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN DELEGATION TO CICTE IN EL SALVADOR; GOH 
HAS SIGNED BUT NOT RATIFIED 1971 AND 2001 OAS CT CONVENTIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 7902 
 
     B. OLSEN/MAKENS E-MAILS DECEMBER 2002 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 3318 
 
1. (U) PolOff delivered reftel A demarche January 10 on the 
CICTE Third Regular Session January 22-24 in El Salvador to 
MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin.  Fortin informed 
PolOff January 16 that the Honduran delegation to the CICTE 
meeting would be AMB Policarpo Callejas, Advisor to the 
Foreign Minister, AMB Jaime Guell Bogran, Ambassador to El 
Salvador, and Fortin. 
 
2. (SBU) Post notes that the GOH has signed but not ratified 
either of the two OAS counterterrorism (CT) conventions (1971 
and 2001).  EmbOffs have continuously pressed the GOH to 
become a party to these conventions, along with five other 
international counterterrorism conventions still pending. 
EmbOffs have requested a meeting with Vice Minister Anibal 
Quinonez to deliver official copies in Spanish of the two OAS 
CT conventions.  WHA/USOAS and WHA/CEN obtained these 
documents and forwarded them to Post and Honduran OAS PermRep 
AMB Salvador Redezno, at the request of the MFA Director 
General for Treaties Ivonne Bonilla (ref C).  Bonilla had 
said that the GOH wanted to become a party to all pending CT 
conventions but claimed that the GOH first needed official 
Spanish-language copies of the conventions that would be 
suitable for forwarding to Congress for consideration.  Post 
is guardedly optimistic that once the MFA has the official 
copies of the two OAS CT conventions it will finally move to 
send the two conventions to Congress for approval. 
Palmer 
"
"5208","1/17/2003 21:57","03TEGUCIGALPA145","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE261607","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000145 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/C/CP (MRIGGS AND RWERKSMAN), WHA/PPC (KHAMANN) 
STATE FOR WHA/USOAS (MSTICKLES) AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, SNAR, KJUS, PGOV, EAID, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HIGHLIGHTS OF ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. 02 STATE 261607 
 
     B. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 01927 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
In July 2002 Post submitted Ref B, which contains detailed 
information regarding anti-corruption efforts and 
achievements in Honduras.  In December 2002, the National 
Congress approved the creation of a Tribunal Superior de 
Cuentas (TSC) - a new three (3) member panel selected by 
Congress to oversee all corruption investigations and trials. 
 The TSC has brought the Comptroller General of the Republic, 
the Directorate of Administrative Probity, and the Office of 
State Assets under one roof and under the direction of the 
panel.  In October 2002, the Supreme Court dismissed the 
entire three (3) judge Court of Appeals after one of its 
members publicly accused another judge of accepting a bribe 
for his ruling in a case.  Other than these two incidents, 
there have been no significant other anti-corruption efforts 
to report. 
Palmer 
"
"5216","1/20/2003 13:36","03TEGUCIGALPA154","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: \"CAFTA\" AETN Program with Barbara 
Bowie Whitman 
 
1. January 16 \"La Tribuna,\" Liberal Party Tegucigalpa-based 
daily, carried an article on CAFTA with the headline \"U.S. 
proposes to reinforce security at Central American Ports\". 
 
2. \"Tiempo,\" San Pedro Sula-based liberal paper owned by 
businessman and congressional deputy Jaime Rosenthal, 
carried a half-page story: \"In CAFTA the U.S. goal is 
lowering subsides in 15 years.\" 
 
3. \"El Heraldo,\" moderate Tegucigalpa-based daily, carried a 
half-page article entitled \"U.S. won\'t eliminate all 
agricultural subsidies.\"  The story focused on the U.S. call 
for a worldwide reduction in subsidies\". 
 
4. National TV and radio news programs gave full coverage to 
the CAFTA program.  Nation-wide radio station Radio America 
did a live transmission and retransmitted the entire program 
on its nightly news. 
 
6. An editorial in \"La Tribuna,\" 1/12/03, was entitled: 
\"Inch by Inch\" \"Representatives and Negotiators from the 
Honduran Council for Private Enterprise said that Honduras 
is not prepared for CAFTA. On the other hand the Costa Rican 
and El Salvadoran economies are well poised to take 
advantage of CAFTA.\" 
 
\"As for Honduras and Nicaragua, their agricultural sectors 
are more sensitive than countries with economies that have a 
more developed economic system. Does the negotiation team 
have the necessary qualified people who can meet the 
challenges of CAFTA?  And prior to beginning negotiations, 
has the government consulted with the other sectors to 
present a consensus position at the negotiation table?  From 
here, it looks as if no one is in a hurry to workout a 
national position on this important issue that will 
determine our economic and commercial future.\" 
 
\"The fact is, we are lagging behind the process waiting 
until someone else raises an issue or take action. We 
remember that during the NAFTA negotiations with Mexico and 
the Dominican Republic (sic), while other countries were 
taking strong positions and fighting over every inch, here 
everything was off the rails. 
 
7. Editorial in \"El Heraldo\" 1/12/03 entitled: \"Honduras and 
the Free Trade Agreement with the U.S.\"- \"Since the Summit 
meeting in 1994, the process for toward an FTAA has moved 
forward silently, but unceasingly. Honduras along with other 
countries has been involved in this process. But it is clear 
that Honduras and Nicaragua are the two countries in the 
region with the weakest economies when you compare them to 
Guatemala, El Salvador and Costa Rica.\" 
 
\"But we are still have time to recover, if we are able to 
strengthen the fragile economic bases, diversify and make 
the economy more efficient, and emphasize our competitive 
advantages -labor and nearness to U.S. Atlantic ports. But 
these factors are not enough; we need a united position 
among government, the private sector and labor.\" 
 
\"It is necessary to eliminate corruption, end the delays in 
legal procedures, offer legal and physical security, create 
new dynamic opportunities, improve infrastructure, and train 
the negotiation team. And only if we forgo both national and 
special interest concerns can we hope to succeed within the 
regional block. Otherwise we will be condemned to be just a 
small consumer of foreign products and services.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"5246","1/21/2003 18:15","03TEGUCIGALPA161","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: \"CAFTA AND HONDURAS\" 
 
 
1. TVC morning talk show 1/17/03: \" Following the 
participation of the Minister of Labor and the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce as panelists in last week\'s AETN 
dialogue on CAFTA, several print, radio and TV news 
organizations featured them on CAFTA and its advantages. 
Renato Alvarez, Director of TV talk show \" Frente a Frente\" 
invited them to come on his one-hour to discuss CAFTA and 
its benefits for Honduras\". 
 
2. Comments: Alvarez: \" The United States won\'t negotiate 
bilaterally with any country but instead wants to complete 
an agreement with Central as a unit.  A fair justice system, 
strong anti- corruption efforts and the treaty are the 
fundamental pillars that will help grow the economy and 
consolidate democracy. We need to produce quality products 
for lower prices if we wish to avoid further increases in 
unemployment. This is a year of challenges for Honduras and 
we should be open to these challenges in order to achieve 
modernization, increased production, sustainable 
development, and low prices so that we can compete in the 
international market.  We also want foreign investment that 
will generate more job opportunities and strengthen 
democracy and the economy. 
 
 
3. \"Vice Minister of Industry and Commerce Irvin Guerrero: 
\"We should study the Mexico experience with NAFTA - they 
very successfully were able to increase exports and job 
opportunities over the past years. Free trade is 
important for the U.S. because it wants to consolidate 
NAFTA; the only area left behind is Central America, which 
is why is so important for us to be in the block and sign 
the treaty.  It is a great opportunity and we intend to 
take advantage of it. 
 
4. \"Minister of Labor German Leitzelar: I agreed with Dr. 
Bowie-Whitman, the U.S. Representative for FTAA, when she 
said that free trade agreements benefit countries. In 
Honduras we have problems of attitude and creativity. 
There is the feeling that CAFTA is a political issue, but 
development and transformation is for our own benefit. Free 
trade won\'t transform Honduras but Honduras can. Foreign 
investment does not come to countries that do not 
offer adequate education, training, technology and high 
productivity. If the employment issue is not analyzed within 
the framework of production - Honduras will be part of CAFTA 
but other countries will be the ones opening 
business in Honduras not Hondurans.  Honduras has the 
advantage of having the most important port in the region. 
Honduras should seize the advantages that CAFTA offers-- if 
we succeed with CAFTA, we can became a prosperous 
country. All of us should support CAFTA. 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"5264","1/22/2003 21:18","03TEGUCIGALPA185","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, DRL/PHD, AND OES/EID 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND EGAT/HCD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PREL, EAID, KSUM, ECON, SOCI, TBIO, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: INVENTORY OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE ON 
LABOR ISSUES 
 
REF: 02 STATE 147754 
 
1. Honduras is receiving the following technical assistance 
on labor issues.  Sources for this information include the 
Honduran Ministry of Labor, ILO/IPEC, the Department of 
Labor, and other international donors.  Post notes that due 
to the wide range of projects and sources of information some 
project information may be outdated.  Post welcomes any more 
updated information on specific programs.  (Note: Central 
America is defined as Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Honduras, and Nicaragua for the purposes of this cable.  End 
Note.) 
 
USG assistance 
-------------- 
 
Project Title: Freedom of Association, Collective Bargaining 
and Industrial Relations in Central America Project 
(RELACENTRO). 
Participants: Ministry of Labor and Labor Courts, major trade 
unions and employer groups. 
Expected Results: Being re-defined based on mid-term 
evaluation; project objective is to promote industrial 
relations, collective bargaining, and conflict resolution in 
Central America. 
Funded by: DOL/ILAB. 
Funding Level: USD 1,500,000 for all five countries 
Project Duration: January 2001 - January 2003. 
 
Project Title: Regional Occupational Safety and Health 
Project (CERSSO) (Central America, Panama, Belize, and the 
Dominican Republic). 
Participants: Ministry of Labor, major trade unions and 
employer groups, vocational institutes. 
Expected Results: regional center; demonstration projects; 
maquila training; labor ministry support; vocational 
training; awareness raising.  Project objective is to reduce 
the number of accidents and injuries in the workplace. 
Funded by: DOL/ILAB. 
Funding Level: USD 3,600,000 for all eight countries 
Project Duration: August 2000 - August 2003. 
 
Project Title:  Statistical Program for Advocacy on the 
Elimination of Child Labor and the Protection of Working 
Children in Central America and the Dominican Republic 
(SIMPOC) 
Participants: household survey 
Expected Results: Design, methodology, and implementation of 
statistical child labor surveys. 
Funded by: USDOL/ILAB via ILO/IPEC. 
Funding Level: USD 2,210,173 for all five countries 
Project Duration: October 1999- December 2003. 
 
Project Title:  Regional Program to Eliminate Child Labor in 
the Coffee Sector in Central America and the Dominican 
Republic - Management and Coordination 
Participants:  Working children/youth and their parents. 
Expected Results: Aims at removing children from or 
preventing children from exploitative work, and aims to 
provide educational opportunities and social services for 
children and their families. 
Funded by: USDOL/ILAB via ILO/IPEC. 
Funding Level: USD 1,169,503 for all six countries 
Project Duration: September 1999- March 2003. 
 
Project Title: Combating Child Labor in the Coffee Industry 
of Honduras 
Participants:  Working children/youth and their parents. 
Expected Results: Aims at removing children from or 
preventing children from exploitative work, and aims to 
provide educational opportunities, social services, and 
micro-credit assistance for families. 
Funded by: USDOL/ILAB via ILO/IPEC. 
Funding Level: USD 441,770 
Project Duration: November 1999 - March 2003. 
Project Title:  Combating Child Labor in Commercial 
Agriculture in Central America and the Dominican Republic - 
Management and Coordination 
Participants:  Working children/youth and their parents. 
Expected Results: Regional project encompassing project on 
melon industry in Honduras. 
Funded by: USDOL/ILAB via ILO/IPEC. 
Funding Level: USD 1,122,501 for all six countries 
Project Duration: April 2000 - March 2003. 
 
Project Title: Elimination of Child Labor in the Melon 
Industry in Honduras 
Participants:  Working children/youth and their parents. 
Expected Results: Aims at removing children from or 
preventing children from exploitative work, and aims to 
provide educational opportunities, social services, and 
micro-credit assistance for families. 
Funded by: USDOL/ILAB via ILO/IPEC. 
Funding Level: USD 792,241 
Project Duration: October 2000 - March 2003. 
 
Project Title: Educational Response Strategies for Working 
Children in Valle, Honduras 
Participants:  Working children/youth of migrant workers and 
children involved in the worst forms of child labor and their 
parents. 
Expected Results: Aims at removing children from or 
preventing children/youth from exploitative work and 
providing educational opportunities for them. 
Funded by: USAID. 
Funding Level: USD 105,252 
Project Duration: September 15, 2002 - September 15, 2003. 
 
Project Title:  Contribution to the Prevention and 
Elimination of Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in 
Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic. 
Participants:  Working children/youth and their parents. 
Expected Results: Regional project encompassing project in 
Honduras. 
Funded by: USDOL/ILAB via ILO/IPEC. 
Funding Level: USD 3,795,285 for all seven countries 
Project Duration: June 30, 2002 - May 2005. 
 
Project Title: Program Supporting Participation in the Free 
Trade of the Americas (PROALCA II) (Central America, Belize, 
Panama, and the Dominican Republic) 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor, labor unions, and civil 
society organizations. 
Expected Results: More equitable and efficient labor markets. 
Funded by: USAID. 
Funding Level: USD 6,300,000 for all eight countries 
Project Duration: July 20, 2002 - September 30, 2007. 
 
Other Donors 
------------ 
 
Project Title:  International Program for the Eradication of 
Child Labor (IPEC) in Latin America (Central America, Panama, 
and the Dominican Republic) 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor, employers, civil society, 
and working children/youth and their parents. 
Expected Results: Combating child labor. 
Funded by: ILO/IPEC. 
Funding Level: USD 1,242,634 for all seven countries 
Project Duration: January 2002 - December 2003. 
 
Project Title: Program to Eradicate Illnesses from the Sexual 
Transmission of HIV/AIDS For Workers in Honduras 
Participants:  maquila and industrial workers in San Pedro 
Sula and Tegucigalpa. 
Expected Results: Aims at contributing to the reduction of 
the sexual transmission of HIV/AIDS through promoting changes 
in sexual behavior in workers. 
Funded by: GTZ (German AID Agency) using EU funds. 
Funding Level: approximately USD 27,758 
Project Duration: project ends April 2003. 
 
Project Title: Continual Help/Rotating Fund for Honduras 
Participants:  varies 
Expected Results: Promote microenterprises to help provide 
jobs for unskilled labor. 
Funded by: AECI (Spanish AID Agency). 
Funding Level: USD 72,597.70 
Project Duration: indefinite. 
Project Title: Regional Project: Modernization of the 
Administration of Work (MATAC) - Central America, Belize, 
Panama, and the Dominican Republic 
Participants: Ministries of Labor 
Expected Results: Promote conditions for the transformation 
of the administration of work in Central American countries. 
Funded by: AECI (Spanish AID Agency). 
Funding Level: USD 2,930,000 for all eight countries 
Project Duration: October 1997 - December 31, 2002. 
 
Project Title: Special Rights Protection in Honduras 
Participants:  Ministry of Labor 
Expected Results: Strengthening institutional ability of MOL; 
better awareness of and participation in combating child 
labor by municipal authorities; investigation of child labor 
in salt and sugar industries in Valle. 
Funded by: UNICEF. 
Funding Level: USD 15,000/year 
Project Duration: project planned for 2002-2006. 
 
Project Title: Special Rights Protection/Good Start to Life 
in Honduras 
Participants:  Ministry of Labor 
Expected Results: Strengthening institutional ability of MOL; 
better awareness of and participation in combating child 
labor by municipal authorities; investigation of child labor 
in salt and sugar industries in Valle; two child care centers 
for the children of working women. 
Funded by: UNICEF 
Funding Level: USD 30,000/year 
Project Duration: project planned for 2002-2006. 
 
Project Title: Incorporating the Gender Dimension in Policies 
of Eradicating Poverty and Generating Employment in Latin 
America (Argentina, Bolivia, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, 
and Peru). 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor 
Expected Results: Improving employment options for female 
workers. 
Funded by: ILO 
Funding Level: USD 1,250,000 for all six countries 
Project Duration: April 1, 2002 - December 31, 2003. 
 
Project Title: Worker Education Assistance for Rural Workers 
Organizations in Latin America for the Promotion of 
International Core Labor Rights (Costa Rica, Dominican 
Republic, Honduras, and Nicaragua). 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor 
Expected Results: Improved living conditions for rural 
workers. 
Funded by: ILO/Government of Norway 
Funding Level: USD 1,480,740 for all four countries 
Project Duration: February 2000 - June 2003. 
 
Project Title: Prevention and Eradication of Child Labor in 
Garbage Dumps of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor 
Expected Results: Reduction of child labor in garbage dumps. 
Funded by: ILO/Government of Italy 
Funding Level: USD 2,753,812 for all three countries 
Project Duration: July 2002 - June 2004. 
 
Project Title: Tripartism and Social Dialogue in Central 
America: Strengthening the Processes of Consolidation of 
Democracy. 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor, labor unions, and 
employers 
Expected Results: Improve government relations with civil 
society and business. 
Funded by: ILO/Government of Norway 
Funding Level: USD 1,750,000 for all five countries 
Project Duration: June 2002 - June 2004. 
 
Project Title: Extension of Social Security Coverage to the 
Excluded and Poor in Honduras. 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor, NGOs/civil society, and 
employers. 
Expected Results: Extend social security coverage. 
Funded by: Government of The Netherlands 
Funding Level: USD 207,667 
Project Duration: April 2002 - December 2003. 
 
Project Title: Regional Program for Sustainable Employment 
(Central America, particularly Honduras and Nicaragua). 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor, NGOs/civil society, and 
employers. 
Expected Results: Create quality jobs in small businesses. 
Funded by: Government of The Netherlands 
Funding Level: USD 356,700 for all five countries 
Project Duration: July 2002 - June 2003. 
 
Project Title: Decent Work for Formation and Innovation 
(Cuba, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, 
and Nicaragua). 
Participants:  Ministries of Labor and universities. 
Expected Results: Create decent work and improve human 
resources development. 
Funded by: Government of Italy 
Funding Level: USD 650,000 for all six countries 
Project Duration: June 2001 - May 2004. 
 
Project Title: International Commercialization of Products 
from Small Businesses in Central America, Panama, and the 
Dominican Republic. 
Participants:  Governments and cooperative associations. 
Expected Results: Promotion of exports of products produced 
by cooperatives. 
Funded by: Government of Italy 
Funding Level: USD 300,000 for all seven countries 
Project Duration: second half of 2002 - 2004. 
 
Palmer 
"
"5265","1/22/2003 22:18","03TEGUCIGALPA189","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000189 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INR, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, MASS, HO 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING REQUEST FOR JOINT TRAINING 
OPERATION IN HONDURAS: 1ST SPECIAL FORCES BATTALION AND 2ND 
AIRBORNE BATTALION 
 
 
1. Embassy requests the Department to perform a background 
check on the following Honduran Army units:  1st Special 
Forces Battalion, La Venta, Department of Francisco Morazan, 
and 2nd Airborne Battalion, Tamara, Department of Francisco 
Morazan.  Vetting is in support of Special Operations Urban 
Training 12 Feb - 9 Mar 03. 
 
2. Embassy is performing a background check concurrently on 
these units. 
 
PALMER 
"
"5312","1/24/2003 21:55","03TEGUCIGALPA223","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INR, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, MASS, HO 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING REQUEST FOR JOINT COMBINED 
EXERCISE FOR TRAINING (JCET) 310W IN HONDURAS 
 
 
1. Embassy requests the Department to perform a background 
check on the following Honduran Army units: 
 
     1st Infantry Battalion, El Ocotal, Department of 
Francisco Morozan 
     3rd Infantry Battalion, Naco, Department of Cortes 
     5th Infantry Battalion, Mocoron, Department of Gracias 
a Dios 
     7th Infantry Battalion, Cucuyagua, Department of Copan 
     9th Infantry Battalion, Jamastran, Department of El 
Paraiso 
     10th Infantry Battalion, Marcala, Department of La Paz 
     11th Infantry Battalion, Salamar, Department of Valle 
     12th Infantry Battalion, Santa Rosa de Copan, 
Department of Copan 
     14th Infantry Battalion, El Cajon, Department of Cortes 
     15th Infantry Battalion, Trujillo, Department of Colon 
     4th Artillery Battalion, Las Trincheras, Department of 
Choluteca, 
     1st Cavalry Regiment, Las Trincheras, Department of 
Choluteca, 
     101st Infantry Brigade Headquarters, Choluteca, 
Department of Choluteca 
     105th Infantry Brigade Headquarters, San Pedro Sula, 
Department of Cortes 
     110th Infantry Brigade Headquarters, Ojo de Aqua, 
Department of El Paraiso 
 
Vetting is in support of Special Operations JCET 310W, 23 
Apr - 20 Jun 03.  Human Rights Vetting for the other units 
associated with the JCET (1st Special Forces Battalion, La 
Venta, 2nd Airborne Battalion, Tamara, and the Puerto 
Castillo Naval Base, Trujillo) conducted by separate cable. 
 
2. Embassy is performing a background check concurrently on 
these units. 
 
PALMER 
"
"5314","1/24/2003 22:55","03TEGUCIGALPA225","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

242255Z Jan 03
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEGUCIGALPA 000225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, USTR, EXIM, OPIC, USED IDB, USED 
WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, ETRD, ELAB, EAID, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras: 2002 Preliminary Macroeconomic Update 
 
 
-------- 
CONTENTS 
-------- 
1-4      MACROECONOMIC OVERVIEW 
5-6      ECONOMIC GROWTH 
7-8      PRICES AND WAGES 
9-13     MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY 
14-18    BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
19-21    TRADE 
22       TOURISM 
23       UNEMPLOYMENT 
24       PUBLIC SECTOR FINANCES 
25       DEBT 
26       FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT 
 
 
---------------------- 
MACROECONOMIC OVERVIEW 
---------------------- 
 
1. The Central Bank of Honduras estimates economic growth in 
terms of real GDP in 2002 of two percent, lower than the 
rate of growth in 2001 and lower than the rate of population 
growth.  The Consumer Price Index rose by 7.7 percent in the 
first eleven months of 2002; inflation for the year is 
projected to be 8 percent.  The exchange rate at the end of 
September 2002 was Lps. 16.6731 per one USD, with an 
accumulated nominal depreciation of 4.7 percent; total 
depreciation for the year is expected to be about six 
percent.  In September, the money supply had grown by 12.9 
percent over the year before; credit to the private sector 
was up by 5.5 percent.  The average nominal interest for new 
loans in national currency in September was 21.2 percent, 
and the average interest on new long-term deposits in 
national currency was 12.9 percent. 
 
2. As of July, exports (excluding textiles) were down in 
value terms by 6.3 percent, compared to the same period last 
year, with a decrease in the value of imports of 7.5 
percent.  As a result, the trade balance for merchandise 
registered a deficit of USD 912.9 million, USD 85.2 million 
less than the deficit in 2001. 
 
3. In the month of October 2002, income from family 
remittances was 35.2 percent higher than the year before. 
On the other hand, income from the textile industry 
(primarily apparel) declined by 4.9 percent compared to the 
same period in 2001. 
 
4. At the end of September 2002, net international reserves 
reached USD 1.77 billion; USD 1.18 billion were held in the 
Central Bank and USD 589.4 million in the rest of the 
financial system. 
 
 
--------------- 
ECOMOMIC GROWTH 
--------------- 
 
5. The rate of real GDP growth this year is the lowest in 
five years, with the exception of 1999 when Honduras 
suffered the effects of the devastation of Hurricane Mitch. 
In 2000, a significant 5.2 percent growth rate was reached, 
but last year it was only 2.6 percent.  Three important 
factors contributed to the slow economic growth of the 
economy: the economic recession in the U.S., (Honduras\' most 
important commercial partner); continued declines in prices 
in the world market for the major Honduran export products; 
and delays in international financial institution 
disbursements that resulted from Honduras\' problems in 
complying with its IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility 
(PRGF) program. 
 
6. Both agriculture and manufacturing were stagnant in 2002. 
Only mining showed a significant increase, growing by 19.3 
percent in 2002, which was influenced mainly by increases in 
the production of silver (up 33.7 percent), lead (up 45.5 
percent) and zinc (up 15.2 percent). 
 
  REAL GDP GROWTH RATE 
     (Percent) 
 
  1997  5.1 
1998  2.9 
1999 -1.9 
2000  5.2 
2001  2.6 
2002  2.0 
 
 
 INDEX OF ACTIVITY IN KEY PRODUCTIVE SECTORS 
     1999 = 100  (figures up to June 2002) 
                                       Pct change 
                2001           2002     2002/01 
 
Agriculture    161.8          160.3     -0.9 
Mining         157.8          188.2     19.3 
Manufacturing  257.7          256.6     -0.4 
---------------- 
PRICES AND WAGES 
---------------- 
 
7. The monthly change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in 
November 2002 was 0.6 percent.  The accumulated growth from 
January to November 2002 was 7.3 percent, and the annual 
variation from November 2001 to November 2002 was 7.7 
percent. 
 
 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX  (CPI) 
 
(December 1999=100) 
                         Percent 
          Average        Change 
 
1997       75.2          20.2 
1998       85.5          13.7 
1999       95.4          11.6 
2000      106.6          11.1 
2001      116.2           9.6 
2002*     124.7           7.6 
 
* Figures for 2002 are up to November 
 
 
MONTHLY CPI FOR 2001 AND 2002 (through NOV) 
 
     End of    Pct Change          End of    12 month 
2001 Period    Same Month     2002 Period     Percent 
               Year early                      Change 
 
JAN  111.1          10.5      JAN  120.2          8.2 
FEB  112.5          10.3      FEB  121.5          8.0 
MAR  113.5          10.2      MAR  122.2          7.7 
APR  114.2           9.5      APR  123.1          7.8 
MAY  115.6           9.8      MAY  123.7          7.0 
JUN  116.3           9.4      JUN  125.1          7.6 
JUL  116.9           9.3      JUL  126.1          7.9 
AUG  117.7           9.5      AUG  126.9          7.8 
SEP  118.6          10.1      SEP  127.1          7.2 
OCT  118.8           9.7      OCT  127.8          7.6 
NOV  119.4           9.0      NOV  128.6          7.7 
DEC  119.8           8.8 
 
 
8. The legal official minimum wage increased by 12 percent 
in May 2002 to USD 119.00 per month.  Negotiations to reset 
this salary for 2003 are underway and are expected to 
conclude by May 2003.  The reason the GOH can maintain 
minimum wage at this low level is their promise not to raise 
the price of the basic goods basket. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
MONETARY INTEREST RATE AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
9. At the end of September 2002, money supply registered an 
annualized growth rate of 12.9 percent, similar to the one 
observed in December 2001.  This growth is explained by the 
increase of 11.7 percent in the supply of local currency and 
16.1 percent in the supply of foreign currency. 
 
10. Interest rates for credit from the financial system to 
the private sector reached 5.5 percent, 5.2 percentage 
points less than that registered in December 2001.  This 
growth is explained by the 7.0 percent and 0.7 percent 
growth in the loan balances of local and foreign currencies 
respectively. 
 
11. In September 2002, the average nominal interest rate on 
new loans in local currency reached 21.2 percent, 1.0 
percentage points less than the rate registered in December 
2001.  The average interest rate on new long-term deposits 
in local currency was 12.9 percent, 1.2 percentage points 
less than the rate observed at the end of 2001. 
 
12. The total internal credit of the financial system 
experienced a slight reduction of 0.1 percent (Lps.36.2 
million), explained by the fall of 22.6 percent (Lps. 1.78 
billion) in the Central Bank\'s net credit and 14.0 percent 
(Lps. 485.5 million) in the rest of the financial system\'s 
net credit to the non-financial public sector.  These 
downward movements were offset by the increase of 5.5 
percent (Lps.2.23 billion) in credit from the rest of the 
financial sector to the private sector, which registered a 
lower interest than that in August of 5.6 percent. 
 
13. The Lempira suffered an inter-annual depreciation in 
December 2002 of 6.3 percent compared to December 2001. 
 
 
ANNUAL INTEREST RATES -COMMERCIAL BANKS 
    (weighted averages) 
 
YEAR      LENDING            DEPOSIT 
 
1998      30.61               16.00 
1999      29.46               15.04 
2000      24.57               12.23 
2001      23.18               11.76 
2002 
JAN       23.13               11.44 
FEB       23.08               11.36 
MAR       23.11               11.35 
APR       23.08               11.13 
MAY       22.89               11.13 
JUN       22.92               11.03 
JUL       22.81               10.52 
AUG       22.63               10.15 
SEP pr/   22.43               10.02 
 
      NET INTERNAL CREDIT 
          END OF              PCT CHANGE 
          PERIOD 
       (USD MILLION) 
 
2000      25,707.2 
2001      29,775.0               15.8 
2002p/    28,795.3               -0.1 (Sep. 2002) 
 
(Exchange rate Lps. 16.6731 = USD 1.00) 
 
 
               EXCHANGE RATE 
             (Lempiras for USD) 
 
YEAR      END OF    YEAR           ANNUAL 
          PERIOD    AVERAGE        DEVALUATION (PERCENT) 
 
1998      13.92     13.54               5.4 
1999      14.66     14.35               5.0 
2000      15.31     15.01               4.39 
2001      16.05     15.65               5.14 
2002(Nov) 17.00     N/A                 6.3 
 
 
------------------- 
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
------------------- 
 
14. In the period from January 1 to October 30, 2002, 
foreign currency income was USD 2.25 billion, higher by 5.4 
percent than the USD 2.13 billion of the last period.  In 
2001 it increased 5.3 percent compared to 2000. 
 
15. Of the total 2.2 billion plus dollars received in 2002, 
foreign currency income from exports accounted for USD 438.4 
million, USD 351.0 million came from the maquila industry, 
services contributed USD 426.9 million, and USD 35.6 million 
derived from rent.  Foreign currency income from transfers 
totaled USD569.6 million (this includes USD 526.2 million 
from family remittances alone, equal to 23.4 percent of 
total 2.2 billion dollars received), USD 189.5 million in 
private sector external debt, USD 6.5 million in foreign 
investment, USD 169.1 million from other capital income, and 
USD 63.2 million from the purchase of the financial system 
by CADD\'s (Monetary Absorption Certificates Denominated in 
Dollars). 
 
16. One of the most important sources of foreign currency is 
family remittances, reaching USD 526.2 million in October 
2002, of which USD 431.3 million were received by the 
financial system, exchange houses counted for USD 91.3 
million, and lending and savings associations reported USD 
3.6 million. 
17.  At the end of October 2002, Net International Reserves 
were USD 1.72 billion, of which USD 1.14 billion were in the 
Central Bank and USD 0.58 billion were held in the rest of 
the financial system.  International reserves have been 
rising steadily since 1998.  They currently exceed four 
months of imports, and a visiting IMF mission in October 
2002 noted that this level is considered adequate. 
 
18. The Central Bank\'s international reserves were USD 1.13 
billion, 2.4 percent higher than at the end of 2001.  The 
16.6 percent decline in receipts from exports was offset by 
the higher decline in demand for foreign currency by 
importers.  The Central Bank continues with a system of 
public auctions of foreign currency in order to eliminate 
speculation.  At the end of May 2002, USD 615.5 million were 
appropriated through auctioning, up 8.9 percent from the 
amount appropriated in March 2001. 
 
 
 
      ACCUMULATED INCOME FROM FOREIGN CURRENCY BY ORIGIN 
                     (In USD millions) 
 
ORIGEN           2000    PCT    2001    PCT    2002p/  PCT 
 
Exports         489.6    22.8   476.4   20.9   474.4   19.7 
Maquila         369.9    17.2   391.0   17.2   379.8   15.7 
Services        428.4    19.9   515.2   22.6   445.6   18.5 
Invest. Rent     26.0     1.2    21.8    1.0    38.8    1.6 
Transfers       341.5    15.9   458.3   20.1   612.9   25.4 
Remittances     305.6    14.2   420.3   18.4   564.9   23.4 
External Debt   270.0    12.5   195.4    8.6   203.7    8.4 
For Investment   45.5     2.1    57.0    2.5     6.5    0.3 
Other Income    180.1     8.4   162.0    7.1   211.3    8.8 
CADD Bonds        0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    39.9    1.6 
 
(p/ preliminary Sep. 2002) 
 
 
 
               FAMILY REMITTANCES 
 
          YEAR         TOTAL (In USD Millions) 
 
          2000 283.4 
2001 390.6 
          2002p/      526.2 
 
  (Year 2002 amount is preliminary to October) 
 
 
NET INTERNATIONAL RESERVES 
(Billions of Dollars) 
 
1998 (Dec)      0.90 
1999 (Dec)      1.37 
2000 (Dec)      1.49 
2001 (Dec)      1.64 
2002 (Oct)      1.72 
 
 
----- 
TRADE 
----- 
 
19. The merchandise trade balance for the period of January 
to August 2002 showed a deficit of USD 1.06 billion, USD 99 
million less than the trade deficit during the same period 
in 2001.  The value of exports FOB in 2002 of USD 857.5 
million represented a decrease of 4.9 percent in relation to 
the same period last year.  The value in imports CIF of USD 
1.92 billion was 7.0 percent less than the level during the 
same period in 2001. 
 
20. The reduction in exports is mainly due to the decrease 
in the export value of coffee and bananas, Honduras\' 
traditional export commodities.  Coffee exports declined by 
30.4 percent as a result of both low international coffee 
prices and decreased production.  Banana exports dropped 
33.7 percent compared to the first trimester of 2001; the 
main reason was the 19.3 percent price decrease for a 40 lb. 
box.  Other exports like zinc, shrimp and wood also declined 
in value terms in 2002.  Exports of gold and sugar 
experienced an increase in 2002.  Sugar exports rose because 
of the opening of new markets in the U.S. and Europe. 
 
21. Imports declined by USD 79.7 million.  The most 
significant decreases occurred in the food industry (22.1 
percent), metals (25.8 percent), and mineral products (14.0 
percent).  Some imports that increased during the first 
quarter of 2002 are machinery and electronic products and 
vegetables. 
 
 
                  Banana Exports 
 
         Value           Volume         Avg. Unit Price 
     (USD Millions)    40 lb. Boxes        in USD 
 
2000      81.5           11,865.0          6.87 
2001     140.0           15,939.6          8.78 
2002*    105.7           14,054.0          7.52 
 
* 2002 figures up to August 
 
 
                 Coffee Exports 
 
       Value        Volume    Price   Volume      Price 
  (USD Millions)  60kg bags    USD   46kg bags     USD 
 
2000   319.9       2,643.0    121.05  3,447.0      92.80 
2001   151.0       2,234.6    67.58   2,915.3      51.80 
2002*  156.3       2,348.6    66.53   3,063.3      51.01 
 
*2002 figures up to August 
 
 
           Other Important Exports 
 
                    Wood (Ft) 
 
          Value 
        USD Millions     Volume (ft)    Unit Price (USD) 
 
2000      20.3           26,738.0             0.76 
2001      21.6           28,070.2             0.77 
2002      19.2           25,329.6             0.76 
 
 
            Refrigerated Meat (Kgs) 
 
          Value 
       USD Millions    Volume (Kgs)     Unit Price (USD) 
 
2000       1.19          677.0               1.75 
2001       0.57          311.9               1.82 
2002       0.25          115.4               2.14 
 
(2002 figures up to August) 
 
 
               Gold (Oz. T) 
 
          Value 
       USD Millions    Volume (Oz.T)    Unit Price (USD) 
 
2000       2.15            8.3               258.83 
2001      34.42          131.8               261.11 
2002      53.29          178.7               298.32 
 
(2002 figures up to August) 
 
 
                  Silver (Oz. T) 
 
          Value 
       USD Millions    Volume (Oz.T)    Unit Price (USD) 
 
2000      2.96           611.0               4.85 
2001      3.14           724.6               4.33 
2002      2.05           464.3               4.41 
 
(2002 figures up to August) 
 
 
                   Zinc (Lbs) 
          Value 
       USD Millions    Volume (Lbs)     Unit Price (USD) 
 
2000      28.98          50,920.0            0.57 
2001      21.48          50,704.5            0.42 
2002      21.12          66,928.5            0.32 
 
(2002 figures up to August) 
 
 
                   Sugar (Kgs) 
 
          Value 
       USD Millions    Volume (Kgs)     Unit Price (USD) 
 
2000       5.76            15,342.0          0.38 
2001      28.37           148,083.1          0.19 
2002      16.97            93,088.1          0.18 
 
(2002 figures are up to August) 
 
 
IMPORTS (CIF USD Millions) 
 
          Total 
 
  1999 2.68 
2000 2.85 
2001 2.98 
2002 0.94 
 
  (Figures do not include fuel imports; 2002 figures are up 
  to August) 
 
 
MAQUILA INDUSTRY (In USD Billion) 
            Exports 
 
  1999    2.16 
2000    2.36 
2001    2.34 
2002    1.74 
 
  (Figures for 2002 are up to September) 
 
 
------- 
TOURISM 
------- 
 
22. In the last few years, there has been slow growth at the 
national level in the tourism sector, primarily because of 
the effects of Hurricane Mitch and then the events of 
September 11 and the world economic downturn.  The Maduro 
Government has initiated a process to strengthen this sector 
with various projects and activities to consolidate and 
diversify what the sector has to offer, especially to its 
principal customers: the U.S. and Europe.  The increase in 
the number of visitors this year is mainly the result of 
cruise ships that dock at the Bay Islands.  Around 850 
thousand visitors are projected to have visited Honduras in 
2002, yielding an expected revenue for 2002 of USD 350 
million. 
 
 
               Total Visitors      Foreign        Foreign 
                                   Exchange       Exchange 
               (thousands)         Income         Outflow 
                              (USD million)  (USD million) 
 
  1999         428.1              195.0            94.0 
  2000         688.4              259.8           106.7 
  2001       809.8              256.2           156.6 
  2002*           850.0              350.0             N/A 
 
  *Figures for 2002 are estimates 
 
 
------------ 
UNEMPLOYMENT 
------------ 
 
23. The May 2002 survey showed unemployment in Honduras to 
be 4.1 percent, a little bit higher than the rate in 
September 2001.  The fact that only a few hours a week of 
work means a person can qualify as employed under the ILO 
definition used in Honduras.  Hidden underemployment is 
considered to better reflect changes in the employment 
situation in the country and is believed to be far higher 
than the reported unemployment figures. 
 
UNEMPLOYMENT (PERCENT OF LABOR FORCE) 
 
  1997 Sep.  4.3 
1998 Sep.  3.0 
1999 Sep.  3.3 
2000 N/A 
2001 Sep.  3.9 
2002 May   4.1 
 
 
---------------------- 
PUBLIC SECTOR FINANCES 
---------------------- 
 
24. In 2002, government fiscal policy was aimed at trying to 
lower the fiscal deficit of approximately 6.1 percent of GDP 
that the previous government left in 2001.  Given the 
growing increase in government expenditures, resulting 
primarily from the mandated increase in public wages and 
payments to cover defaults in the banking sector, the 
incoming government had to find new ways to increase tax 
revenues.  In May 2002, the financial balance registered a 
surplus in net terms of Lps. 407.9 million (USD 24.8 
million) or 0.9 percent of GDP, due mainly to low capital 
expenditures.  Tax collection has increase by 8.5 percent 
compared to last year.  Running expenses were determinant 
especially due to increments in the salaries of teachers and 
health care providers, which increased 11.6 percent. 
Payments for interest on debt, on the other hand, were less 
than 11.1 percent due to negotiations with the Paris Club to 
reprogram expired debt payments. 
 
                CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FINANCES* 
                 (in billions of Lempiras) 
                                      Pct 
                       2001     2002      Increase 
 
  Total Revenues 7.60      8.24        8.5 
  Current Income 7.55      7.79        3.2 
  Direct Taxes        6.71      6.71        0.1 
  Indirect Taxes 0.84      1.07       28.3 
  Others              0.05      0.45      781.2 
 
  Current Expend.  5.62      6.22       10.7 
  Current Savings  1.93      1.57      -18.6 
 
   Capital 
   Expenditures     2.40      1.62      -32.6 
 
   Net Total 
   Expenditures     8.02      7.83       -2.3 
 
   Net Global 
   Balance         -0.42      0.41      197.5 
   Debt Payments    0.86      0.83       97.4 
 
   Gross Global 
   Balance         -1.27     -0.42      -66.7 
 
*(Figures for 2002 are up to June) 
 
 
---- 
DEBT 
---- 
 
25. In 2002, the Government of Honduras missed the principal 
targets of the IMF\'s Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility 
(PRGF) program and did not receive the disbursements from 
the final year of the three-year PRGF. The government hopes 
to reach an agreement on a new three-year PRGF with the IMF 
by June 2003, in order to reach the completion point for 
HIPC debt relief (an estimated USD 900 million over fifteen 
years). 
 
    STOCK OF FOREIGN DEBT 
      (USD Billions) 
 
  Year          Value 
 
  1997 4.07 
1998 4.40 
1999 4.73 
2000 4.71 
2001 4.75 
 
(Current exchange rate is Lps.17.00 X USD 1.00) 
 
  DOMESTIC DEBT BALANCE 
  (Billions of Lempiras) 
 
   Year           Value 
 
  1997 1.40 
1998 1.34 
1999 1.27 
2000 0.96 
2001 0.94 
 
 
------------------------- 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT 
------------------------- 
 
26. According to Central Bank data, foreign direct 
investment (FDI) flows in Honduras in 2001 totaled USD 186 
million.  The U.S. continues to be the dominant source of 
FDI in Honduras, with U.S. investment in 2001 reaching an 
estimated USD 84 million, (or 45 percent of total FDI in 
Honduras).  Post informally calculates U.S. FDI stock in 
Honduras to be approximately USD 750 million, based 
primarily in the apparel-assembly and agriculture sector 
(especially bananas). 
 
ANNUAL FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT BY COUNTRY OF ORIGIN 
                 (USD Millions) 
 
                    1998       1999      2000     2001 
 
United States       33.05     113.86    117.90    83.75 
Canada              12.00      55.10     58.69    41.69 
Panama               0.97      19.47     21.50    15.27 
El Salvador          7.65      13.91     15.35    10.91 
Switzerland          3.75       6.95      7.67     5.45 
Costa Rica           5.59       6.44      7.11     5.05 
Spain                1.65       5.88      6.50     4.61 
Italy               11.88      -3.61      5.24     3.72 
Mexico               1.18       4.61      5.09     3.62 
Guatemala            5.19       3.35      3.70     2.63 
England              6.61       2.57      2.83     2.01 
Japan                1.90       0.12      0.68     0.48 
Germany              4.19       0.16      0.17     0.12 
Other countries      3.71       8.52      9.40     6.68 
 
Total               99.32     237.33    261.83   186.00 
 
  Accumulated Investment in Textile Industry 2001 
   (Information for 2002 is not available yet) 
 
                    Amount           Percent of 
                 (USD Millions)          Total 
 
Honduras            670.1               47.1 
U.S.                370.2               26.0 
Korea               145.5               10.2 
Hong Kong            43.8                3.1 
Taiwan               55.2                3.9 
China                33.8                2.5 
Singapore            18.8                1.3 
Canada               49.2                3.5 
Colombia              2.0                 .1 
Barbados               .1                0.0 
Co-investment        32.9                2.3 
                    -----               ---- 
Total              1421.6              100.0 
 
 
 
PALMER 
"
"5441","1/31/2003 16:57","03TEGUCIGALPA288","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 000288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA DAS FISK, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE FOR PM, INL, EB, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2013 
TAGS: OVIP, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, ETRD, ECON, MOPS, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR WHA/DAS FISK\'S VISIT TO HONDURAS 
FEBRUARY 5-8 
 
REF: 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2829 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, in 
office for one year, faces numerous challenges in one of the 
poorest and most corrupt countries in the Western Hemisphere. 
 His Administration has been stalled on its domestic agenda 
since June 2002 as it tries to reconcile its ambitious goals 
to its straitjacketed financial situation, but is trying to 
start the new year with structural reforms.  Bilateral 
relations between the U.S. and Honduras are excellent; 
Honduras was the first country in Central America (and the 
second in Latin America) to sign an ICC Article 98 Agreement 
with the U.S. and its support for the international 
counterterrorism effort is steadfast.  The United States and 
Honduras have maintained a long-standing close relationship 
framed by such events as the establishment of the banana 
plantations in the late 1800s, the Contra wars of the 1980s, 
and reconstruction efforts in the wake of the October 1998 
fury of Hurricane Mitch.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Key Issues in Bilateral Relationship 
------------------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) The central themes in our bilateral diplomatic 
efforts in Honduras are combating international crime by 
strengthening governance and attacking corruption, assisting 
American citizens, fostering economic development, promoting 
regional stability, promoting trade and investment, and 
combating terrorism.  However, the underlying difficulty to 
realizing USG objectives is improving the administration of 
justice and rule of law.  President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
government is fully engaged on all of these issues, supports 
judicial and political reform, and is seeking to transform 
Honduras so that law and order can be restored and economic 
growth ignited.  Maduro has spoken also out strongly on 
tackling corruption.  He faces formidable challenges from 
entrenched economic and political interests in moving his 
agenda forward. 
 
------------------------------- 
Status of the Maduro Government 
------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) President Maduro is facing increasing criticism 
from the political opposition over his government\'s policies 
and continued dissatisfaction from his own party\'s Members of 
Congress because of his Administration\'s technocratic style. 
The Honduran Congress is a focal point of political 
opposition to his policies.  It is a corrupt institution 
riddled with avaricious politicians, and Maduro\'s National 
Party does not control a majority of the unicameral body. 
The ongoing problems within his own party are serious and 
threaten his broader political agenda, which will require 
legislation to advance.  Continuing political negotiations 
will be needed to manage this situation.  Maduro recently 
scored a victory in rallying congressional support for his 
energy program by securing approval of the direct purchase of 
electricity from two firms, including U.S. company AES. 
Maduro\'s personal life also intruded into the political 
sphere.  His October 2002 wedding to a Spaniard was 
criticized by many Hondurans who viewed the President as 
distracted by his personal life. 
 
4.  (SBU) The President\'s standing has remained stalled at a 
low point since June 2002.  Faced with slow progress in his 
efforts to promote regional economic integration, Maduro\'s 
team is pinning its hopes that a U.S.-Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA) can serve as a catalyst to regional 
economic cooperation.  Maduro is also beginning to hear wider 
disillusionment among the Honduran public as violent crime 
levels are increasing once again despite his successful 
initial \"zero tolerance\" law and order campaign. 
Notwithstanding his crackdown on street crime, criminal 
investigations and case closure rates, in particular 
homicides, remain very low. 
 
---------------------------- 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Maduro is a good and reliable friend of the U.S. on 
counterterrorism.  His government hosted a major U.S. 
military counterterrorism exercise in March 2002 and has 
quickly responded with freeze orders to all U.S. requests 
regarding suspect terrorist bank accounts.  No terrorist 
assets have been found in Honduran financial institutions, to 
date.  The GOH still needs to take the following concrete 
steps: designate a national coordinator for counterterrorism, 
file its national report in accordance with United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 1373, and most of all, 
sign and/or ratify the five outstanding international 
conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions (1971 and 2002) 
against terrorism.  It is also of vital importance for 
Honduras to improve security at its maritime ports, 
particularly Puerto Cortes. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
6.  (C) The GOH is in general supportive of key USG foreign 
policy goals, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will 
support the USG position on Iraq.  Securing a UNSC Resolution 
on Iraq helped mollify MFA officials concerns about the need 
for multilateral support via the United Nations.  Lacking Rio 
Group consensus the GOH is not yet willing to make a public 
statement backing U.S. policy on Iraq. 
 
-------------- 
Anticorruption 
-------------- 
 
7.  (C) U.S. policy against corruption struck a nerve in 
Honduras, especially any mention of our visa revocation 
authorities.  Politicians in Congress and certain business 
elements feel the U.S. is attacking them.  Maduro appears 
committed to addressing corruption, even if it will cost him 
political support within his party.  The Supreme Court 
President is also on board.  However, individual judges 
remain susceptible to offers of bribes and the Attorney 
General is unwilling to prosecute high-profile cases.  Given 
the scope of the problem, any public discussion about the 
country\'s pervasive corruption is a positive development. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The Supreme Court is developing into an independent 
branch of power, unlike all of its predecessor courts since 
democracy was restored in 1982.  It is pro-reform in 
orientation and fighting for its prerogatives.  A key 
emerging issue is whether it can become a fully independent 
and co-equal branch of political power, consistent with the 
separation of powers provision in the Honduran Constitution. 
The established political order is fighting that prospect 
with all its might.  In fact, the Congress seized the 
political opportunity to introduce legislation that would 
amend the constitution to give itself the power to interpret 
the constitutionality of the laws it passes.  A ruling by the 
Supreme Court on the constitutionality of this proposed 
amendment is expected before the end of February.  The 
Supreme Court recently replaced some corrupt judges in San 
Pedro Sula and the entire court of appeals in Tegucigalpa. 
 
---------------------------- 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27, 2002 President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
out-of-control crime situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 
soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The public 
responded enthusiastically.  However, despite the initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides and kidnappings, has only 
fallen marginally.  Public support is fading and the campaign 
needs some visible victories to restore confidence in the 
government\'s program.  The USG is helping the Maduro 
government establish an anti-kidnapping unit, increase 
intake/training of police recruits, create a model tourist 
police force, boost its counternarcotics efforts, and expand 
the frontier police.  The country\'s geographic position makes 
it an obvious strategic transit point for narcotics 
trafficking, alien smuggling operations and other organized 
crime activities. 
 
10.  (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults between 1998-2001, have been a source 
of serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to 
take steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases. 
There are serious problems with child labor in several 
industries, particularly melon, coffee, and sugar cane (but 
not the maquila) sectors, and trafficking in persons of 
women/children for prostitution in the U.S. and children for 
commercial sexual exploitation in Central America.  USAID and 
Peace Corps have both been involved in HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
11.  (SBU) Some 500,000 Hondurans, both legal and illegal, 
live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration issues high 
on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of Honduras is 6.5 
million.)  There is deep appreciation for the 
Administration\'s extension of Temporary Protected Status 
(TPS) in the U.S. and interest in possible congressional 
action on the pending Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central 
American Relief Act (NACARA), which would give immigration 
parity for Hondurans.  It is quite likely that you will be 
queried about the prospects for another renewal of TPS in 
July.  With 14,000 American citizens residing in Honduras and 
many thousands visiting Honduras annually for tourism and 
business, American Citizen Services are a key part of the 
Embassy\'s work.  Until recently, there was little progress in 
most of the now more than 30 American citizen murder cases; 
however, there have been four convictions in these cases in 
recent months.  In the last year the GOH has increased 
cooperation with the Embassy on these cases, including 
establishing two prosecutors.  However, little progress has 
been made on extradition cases involving American Citizens 
wanted for felonies in the U.S. 
 
-------------- 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three 
Central American land neighbors and its seven maritime 
neighbors.  Maduro is personally engaged with his 
Presidential counterparts to address these issues.  Its land 
and maritime disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the 
most heated.  The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast is a 
particularly difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) ruling laid out shared areas of control in the 
Gulf of Fonseca and established the land border between 
Honduras and El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow 
to implement the ruling.  In September of this year El 
Salvador requested a revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling.  The 
Honduran response to El Salvador\'s request is due at the ICJ 
on April 1. 
 
13.  (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua 
have a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.   Honduras provoked Nicaraguan retaliation when it 
signed a maritime treaty with Colombia recognizing the 15th 
parallel as its maritime border in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an 
ICJ case over the maritime border and more importantly in 
1999 slapped a punitive 35 per cent tariff on Honduran goods 
that remains in place despite a Central American Court of 
Justice ruling that it is illegal.  With former Nicaraguan 
President Arnoldo Aleman deposed as President of the National 
Assembly, GOH officials were expressing optimism that 
Nicaraguan President Enrique Bolanos would make good on 
private assurances to lift the tariff and thereby take an 
important step forward toward regional economic integration, 
especially given the fact that the ICJ recently ruled in 
favor of the GOH\'s petition against the tariff.  However, 
frustration has mounted recently in Honduras as Bolanos has 
still not scrapped the tariff.  The Congress may force 
Maduro\'s hand by passing a retaliatory tariff in the near 
future.  The border dispute with Nicaragua is also hampering 
joint narcotics interdiction efforts. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Troubled Economy Endangers IMF Program and HIPC Debt Relief 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
14.  (SBU) President Maduro inherited a stagnating economy 
and seriously deteriorated government finances from the 
previous government.  The GOH missed all key International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) targets in 2001.  Even after the Maduro 
economic team won passage of austerity and tax measures in 
May 2002, the government\'s budget deficit is still expected 
to be a high 5.6 percent of GDP.  It is important for the GOH 
to undertake the meaningful and long overdue reforms needed 
to work out a new IMF program. 
 
15.  (C) The GOH failed to reach agreement with the IMF 
mission in November 2002 on draft terms of a three-year 
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Program (PRGF) because 
of the GOH\'s limited efforts to address the budget deficit. 
On January 29, the macro team went to Washington to discuss 
with the IMF its planned measures (elimination of tax 
exemptions and loopholes, freezing of many government 
salaries, and a draft civil service reform law).  The GOH 
believes it can reduce the central government deficit to 
three percent in 2003.  If approved, the GOH will try to get 
the legislation through Congress in February, setting the 
stage for the signing of a letter of intent in March and IMF 
Board approval in April. 
 
16.  (SBU) International Financial Institution (IFI) and 
bilateral donor disbursements (USD 140 million) will be held 
up until the new IMF program is in place.  There could also 
be pressure on GOH Paris Club debt service payments (USD 100 
million per year).  In the meantime, the completion point for 
Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt reduction (worth 
USD 900 million) continues to slip back further.  If 
unaddressed, this fiscal situation could also impact 
Honduras\' eligibility for Millennium Challenge Account grants. 
 
17.  (SBU) The Honduran economy is growing slowly (estimated 
real GDP growth of two percent in 2002).  Low world coffee 
prices continue to hurt the economy in rural areas. 
Inflation continues to decrease slowly, estimated at 8-9 
percent in 2002.  The currency is depreciating at a rate of 
about five percent per year.  The economy is dominated by 
agriculture - particularly the production of coffee, bananas 
and cultivated shrimp - although the in-bond apparel assembly 
industry has grown dramatically over the past decade and 
remittances, from Hondurans living overseas, continues to 
grow rapidly (up 38 percent in the first six months of 2002) 
and have become the most important source of foreign 
exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras\' largest trading partner; 
roughly 150 U.S. companies do business here.  While many 
social indicators are improving, two-thirds of all Hondurans 
live in poverty and average educational levels are very low. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
18.  (SBU) Maduro has personally identified himself with 
CAFTA as his government\'s principal trade objective.  The 
Minister of Industry and Trade is reorganizing the Ministry 
(historically fairly weak) and adding staff in a belated 
effort to get ready for and keep up with the negotiations. 
The Maduro administration has also been more cooperative with 
the U.S. in the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Geneva. 
Honduras (along with other Central American countries) has 
been supportive in the FTAA ministerials but to date has not 
taken an active role in the negotiating groups. 
 
19.  (SBU) Latent protectionism exists in the private sector, 
especially agriculture, but the general attitude toward a 
free trade agreement in Honduras is guardedly positive.  The 
textile and apparel industry in particular believes an FTA is 
the only way that the Honduran apparel sector can survive the 
elimination of quotas in 2005 and compete with Asian 
manufacturers.  As such, it is the strongest supporter of 
CAFTA. 
 
------------------------------ 
U.S. Investment Faces Problems 
------------------------------ 
 
20.  (SBU) The Maduro government understands that Honduras 
needs foreign (and domestic) investment to spur economic 
growth but in 2002 placed emphasis on the more immediate 
problems of political and judicial reforms, the fiscal 
deficit, and needed improvements in security, education and 
health.  The government identified tourism, agribusiness, and 
forestry as important sectors that could create much-needed 
jobs.  While some efforts to promote tourism have paid off, 
little headway has been made in the other sectors. 
 
21.  (SBU) Much needs to be done to declare Honduras \"open 
for business.\"  Maduro needs to find a way to get his cabinet 
(and the prickly legislative and judicial branches) to make 
meaningful changes that will resolve the key problems: poor 
and expensive infrastructure; weak legal system; personal 
security, education and health conditions; land tenure 
problems; and opposition to large foreign investments by 
well-connected vested interests. 
 
22.  (SBU) The Honduran government has stalled in its past 
efforts to liberalize and privatize the electricity and 
telecommunications markets.  After failure of the National 
Electric Energy Company\'s (ENEE\'s) 210 mega-watts electricity 
tender in late 2002, the GOH negotiated quick contracts with 
the top bidders Lufussa and U.S. company AES (which seeks to 
build a $600 million combined cycle plant in Puerto Cortes). 
Initial congressional ratification of the contracts 
(controversial in the case of AES) occurred January 30.  The 
GOH is studying ways to restructure and liberalize the energy 
sector.  The GOH telecom regulatory agency is also bidding 
out a second cellular phone license this year; one U.S. 
company has been pre-qualified.  In late January, Maduro 
announced that the GOH will issue tenders for supply of some 
basic telephony service by the private sector during 2003 (an 
acknowledgment of the lack of capability of the state-owned 
Hondutel to add new line). 
 
23.  (SBU) Land tenure problems (combined with a weak 
judicial system) are endemic in Honduras, and undermine 
efforts to develop the tourism, agriculture and forestry 
sectors.  They also deter new investments in a variety of 
other sectors.  The Embassy has files on 112 property dispute 
cases (generally squatter/land reform cases and title 
disputes), of which 15 are active.  There are an additional 
65 commercial disputes, of which eight are currently active. 
The GOH has adopted a law allowing some of the land cases to 
be submitted to arbitration within the next six months and is 
working on an improved property registry system.  In recent 
months, we have seen notable progress in handling by the 
judicial system of commercial and investment disputes 
involving U.S. citizens.  It would be very useful if, during 
your visit, you could raise the importance of continued 
progress, especially in the Moore case in Roatan. (reftel). 
 
---------------------------------- 
Money Laundering and Bank Failures 
---------------------------------- 
 
24.  (SBU) Strengthened money laundering legislation, with an 
anti-terrorist financing clause, was the first law to be 
adopted by the new Congress in late February 2002.  The GOH 
has followed up rapidly with creation of a Financial 
Information Unit (FIU).  Currently, 87 potential cases are 
under investigation.  The FIU has seized over USD 1.5 million 
in frozen accounts, with another 50 million lempiras (USD 
2.94 million) in cash and 40 million lempiras (USD 2.35 
million) in goods (vehicles, real estate, etc.) in money 
laundering investigations.  Weakness of the financial system 
remains a key concern.  The GOH took over the two most 
troubled banks in May 2002 (one has since been closed), 
arranged for the absorption of a third undercapitalized bank 
and is actively promoting mergers among the remaining 20 
private banks. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Bilateral Political/Military Issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
25.  (C) In January of 1999, the constitution was amended to 
abolish the position of military commander in chief of the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF), thus codifying civilian 
authority over the military.  Honduras now has a civilian 
Minister of Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint Staff who 
heads the HOAF.  Civilian control is well accepted by the 
HOAF, and the transition to civilian control has resulted in 
greater transparency and fiscal accountability.  The current 
MOD, Fred Breve, enjoys a good relationship with the HOAF 
military leadership, but the Office of the Minister of 
Defense still lacks a staff that could provide institutional 
memory and continuity between the change in political 
administrations. 
 
------------------- 
Cerro La Mole Radar 
------------------- 
 
26.  (C) In 1993, the U.S. entered into an agreement with the 
GOH regarding the maintenance of the radar located at Cerro 
La Mole, under which it agreed to pay 75 percent of 
maintenance costs up to $400,000 per year.  The U.S. has paid 
nothing under the agreement, and the issue affects relations 
between the U.S. and Honduran militaries.  Post has sought 
guidance from DOD and State on how to resolve our 
obligations, and recommended that the U.S. either replace the 
radar with a solid state version (TPS-78) or with another 
TPS-70 transferred from counterdrug programs.  Alternatively, 
the U.S. could repair the radar to operational status.  When 
operational, the radar provides a view of the 
Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador border areas and the Gulf of 
Fonseca on the Pacific Ocean.  If operational, the radar 
could be helpful in the fight against narcotrafficking. 
 
--------------- 
A Great Tragedy 
--------------- 
 
27.  (U) At approximately 8:55 p.m. on December 11, 2002, a 
U.S. Army Black Hawk helicopter from Joint Task Force Bravo 
crashed while engaged in a night training exercise -- killing 
five U.S. soldiers who belonged to the 1st Battalion, 228th 
Aviation Regiment.  The helicopter flew from Soto Cano Air 
Base to La Mesa international airport in San Pedro Sula to 
participate in a night landing exercise.  After refueling the 
helicopter headed back to Soto Cano, and 40 minutes later 
crashed into the mountains near Santa Cruz de Yojoa, which is 
85 miles north of Tegucigalpa.  A U.S. Army investigation 
into the cause of the crash is ongoing. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
28.  (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  Our Peace Corps program, with more than 220 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY02 budget of USD 34.5 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula.  Five-hundred and fifty 
U.S. service men and women are stationed at Honduras\' Soto 
Cano Air Base under the auspices of SOUTHCOM as Joint Task 
Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a Bilateral 
Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their intention 
to work closely together to foster peace and security in the 
Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 Agreement with 
Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment, and will enable our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster recovery, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
Palmer 
"
"5580","2/6/2003 16:24","03TEGUCIGALPA349","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE26652","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000349 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR AC, NP, PM, IO, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, AORC, TRGY, MNUC, KNNP, KSAF, PINS, HO, IAEA 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN MFA GIVEN SECRETARY ABRAHAM LETTER ON 
IAEA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SECURITY OF RADIOACTIVE 
SOURCES; GOH UNLIKELY TO ATTEND CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. STATE 26652 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 138 
     C. STATE 4364 
 
PolOff delivered reftel A letter from DOE Secretary Abraham 
on the IAEA International Conference on Security of 
Radioactive Sources to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
January 29.  MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin told 
PolOff February 3 that, as noted in ref B, the GOH was not 
planning to attend the conference, but that the MFA would 
reconsider the issue in response to Secretary Abraham\'s 
letter. 
Palmer 
"
"5581","2/6/2003 16:24","03TEGUCIGALPA350","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE23992","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR NP, IO, PM, NEA/NGA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, MNUC, MOPS, IZ, HO, IAEA, UNSC 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS GIVEN USG JANUARY 27 REMARKS ON IRAQ; 
CARDINAL CRITICIZES POSSIBLE WAR WITH IRAQ BUT MOD SAYS GOH 
WILLING TO SEND TROOPS 
 
REF: STATE 23992 
 
1. PolOff delivered reftel text of Ambassador Negroponte\'s 
January 27 to the UNSC and the Secretary\'s January 27 press 
statement January 29 to MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario 
Fortin.  The MFA has not had a substantive reply but Fortin 
told PolOff that the GOH appreciated the information. 
 
2. Cardinal Oscar Andres Rodriguez Maradiaga, in his homily 
during a February 3 mass in honor of the 256th anniversary of 
the Virgin of Suyapa, criticized movement toward what he 
termed a \"third world war,\" which was quickly interpreted in 
the press as a statement against a possible war with Iraq. 
 
3. On the same day, Minister of Defense Federico Breve 
Travieso told reporters that Honduras is prepared to send 
troops to help in any war in Iraq.  Breve also highlighted 
the fact that the U.S. and Honduran armed forces had trained 
together previously.  Meanwhile, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias was more equivocal in his 
statements to the press the same day, saying that Honduras 
would support whatever decision was taken by the UNSC. 
Eventually, President Maduro also issued a statement 
indicating Honduras would act consistent with UNSC 
resolutions. 
Palmer 
"
"5694","2/12/2003 14:00","03TEGUCIGALPA407","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE180302|02TEGUCIGALPA1775|03STATE23800","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR OIG/ISP - COMPLIANCE OFFICER WILLIS 
 
INFO:  WHA/EX, WHA/CEN, HR/OE, CA/EX AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASIG, AMGT, APER, CMGT, SNAR, HN 
SUBJECT:  INSPECTION OF EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA (ISP-I-02-26) 
 
REF:      A) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001775 
          B) 02 STATE 180302 
          C) 03 STATE 023800 
 
1.  Ref C requests a compliance update on OIG\'s post 
inspection of Embassy Tegucigalpa, ref: ISP-I-02-26.  The 
inspection was completed in February 2001 and has been in 
the compliance reporting phase since that time. 
 
2.  Embassy is providing additional information on the 
outstanding recommendations.  We are not repeating all 
past exchanges for each recommendation -- only the 
original recommendation itself is repeated for your 
reference. 
 
3.  Recommendation 2:  The department should endorse 
embassy Tegucigalpa\'s request for two additional Drug 
Enforcement Administration special agents.  Action: INL, 
in Consultation with Embassy Tegucigalpa. 
 
Updated post response:  In ref A post provided background 
Information to INL on the need for these agents.  We also 
included the new positions in the past two Mission 
Performance Plans for Honduras.  We await further action 
by the INL bureau. 
 
4.  Recommendation 5:  Embassy Tegucigalpa, in 
coordination with the department, should establish 
another junior officer position to do non-immigrant and 
immigrant visa Work.  Action:  Embassy Tegucigalpa and 
CA/EX. 
 
Updated post response:  CA/EX has established and filled 
a new Consular JO position.  The new officer will arrive 
in March 2003.  We assume that CA and WHA will add the 
necessary position support costs to our budget base this 
fiscal year. 
 
5.  Recommendation 6:  Embassy Tegucigalpa, in 
coordination with the Department, should authorize 
another consular FSN position to handle correspondence 
and public inquiries.  Action:  Embassy Tegucigalpa and 
CA/EX. 
 
Updated post response:  As stated in Ref A and 
previously, post is willing to establish a new PSA 
position.  Between WHA and CA, funding issues need to be 
addressed so that post will have the ongoing program or 
MRV budget money to fill this position. 
 
6.  Recommendation 10:  Embassy Tegucigalpa, in 
coordination with the Department, should phase out 
personnel management services provided to Joint Task 
Force Bravo for their host country employees.  Action: 
Embassy Tegucigalpa, in coordination with HR/OE. 
 
Updated post response:  In late September 2002, the 
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources 
(M/DGHR/OE), with the concurrence of OIG/ISP, signed a 
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with the Undersecretary of 
Defense for Personnel and Readiness.  Under the new MOA, 
State agrees to exercise its PSA hiring authority for an 
additional two-years with respect to the 62 Honduran 
nationals working at JTF Bravo, with the understanding 
that Defense will seek its own PSA authority from the 
Congress during that time period.  Human resources 
management services for the JTF Bravo Honduran employees 
will continue under the US Mission\'s existing ICASS 
arrangements until September 30, 2004. 
 
PALMER 
"
"5724","2/13/2003 17:21","03TEGUCIGALPA425","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA2928|02TEGUCIGALPA2987","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/CCA, DRL/IL, AND DS/OP/WHA 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, PINR, SOCI, ASEC, CU, HO 
SUBJECT: DEMONSTRATIONS IN TEGUCIGALPA: FOCUS IS ON GOH 
POLICIES, BUT SUB-THEMES ARE ANTI-U.S. AND PRO-CUBA 
 
REF: A. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2987 
     B. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2928 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Political demonstrations continue off and on in 
Tegucigalpa, led by various small organizations, the loose 
political alliance known as the Popular Block, secondary 
teachers (COPEMH), and others.  Sometimes the protests are 
staged outside the Embassy, but more commonly they are held 
downtown in front of Congress.  Frequently, many of the 
\"demonstrators\" are bused in from outside Tegucigalpa.  These 
\"protesters for hire\" are paid for their services prior to 
leaving Tegucigalpa.  At some of the smaller demonstrations, 
few of the demonstrators, other than the leaders, appear to 
be from Tegucigalpa.  While persistent, they pose little 
threat to social order and do not appear to have captured the 
broader general public\'s support or interest. 
 
2. (U) The most recent demonstration outside the Embassy 
occurred January 30 with about 100-130 demonstrators 
organized by the Civic Council of Popular Organizations and 
Indigenous of Honduras (COPINH), and led by Salvadore Zuniga. 
 Protesters opposed a possible war in Iraq, privatization, 
and \"neocolonialism.\"  The demonstrators also criticized Plan 
Colombia, CAFTA, U.S. policy in Cuba and Venezuela, U.S. 
military cooperation with Honduras, and the electricity 
contract for U.S. company AES.  The group then linked up with 
a larger group downtown organized by the Popular Block.  At 
the end of this larger demonstration protesters were told 
that there would be worldwide demonstrations at U.S. 
embassies, including in Tegucigalpa, on Saturday, February 
15.  The press has also repeated information about a possible 
anti-U.S. demonstration February 15. 
 
3. (U) Demonstrations are often pro-Cuban in flavor, such as 
the December 5, 2002 demonstration by 200 people outside the 
Embassy organized by the Honduras-Cuba Friendship Association 
(AHC), which protested alleged U.S. injustices against Cuba. 
The same day a larger demonstration downtown protested 
against the \"privatization\" of health services.  Carlos 
Reyes, leader of the Popular Block, criticized alleged U.S. 
\"imperialism\" at the larger demonstration. 
 
4. (U) The Popular Block and the secondary teachers are the 
most frequent demonstrators.  They protest privatization, 
civil service salary levels, and the public health system. 
These protests, however, are usually focused on GOH polices 
and not the USG, although they often have a anti-USG sub-text 
to them.  Popular Block leader Carlos Reyes has also written 
an anti-CAFTA and anti-FTAA booklet. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  None of the recent demonstrations, unlike 
one in October 2002 (ref A), have been violent, and they are 
still more a worry than a serious problem for the Maduro 
Administration.  Protests, however, are likely to heat up 
over a draft Civil Service Framework Bill, which the GOH has 
yet to introduce to Congress, that will likely de-link civil 
service salaries from being indexed to raises in the minimum 
wage.  Post also notes that there may be Cuban support for 
some of the anti-U.S. demonstrations, as evidenced by the 
December 5 demonstration organized by the Honduras-Cuba 
Friendship Association and the continual criticism of U.S. 
policy on Cuba in kitchen-sink style protests.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"5725","2/13/2003 17:23","03TEGUCIGALPA426","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA10|03TEGUCIGALPA2972|03TEGUCIGALPA3040","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, WHA/CEN, AND EB 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB - A/DUS MAGAN 
DOL FOR BLS (SFLECK, PSB RM 2120) 
GUATEMALA FOR AID, COMATT, AND AGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PREL, PHUM, PGOV, ETRD, EFIN, EAGR, HO 
SUBJECT: DOL A/DUS MAGAN MEETS CA LABOR MINISTERS IN 
HONDURAS AND TALKS CAFTA; LABOR UNIONS OPPOSE CAFTA 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 10 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 3040 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2972 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Associate Deputy Under Secretary for 
International Labor Affairs Mike Magan visited Honduras 
January 23-25 to attend the Central American Labor Ministers 
Meeting and held discussions with labor, management, and 
government on the U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA).  All three Honduran labor confederations oppose 
CAFTA, and complained that there had been a complete lack of 
consultation by the GOH with labor unions on CAFTA.  A/DUS 
Magan urged the labor leaders to make their views known on 
key issues related to CAFTA to the Ministry of Labor. 
Central American Labor Ministers are seeking a larger role in 
CAFTA, but it is not clear if that will happen.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Associate Deputy Under Secretary for International 
Labor Affairs Mike Magan visited San Pedro Sula, Honduras to 
attend the Central American Labor Ministers Meeting January 
23-25.  Deputy Under Secretary for International Labor 
Affairs Thomas Moorhead had been invited, but was unable to 
attend.  LabAtt accompanied A/DUS Magan to all meetings and 
the conference. 
 
3. (U) Ministers of Labor from Honduras, Costa Rica, the 
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua, as 
well as the Vice Minister of Labor from Belize, and a MOL 
official from Guatemala attended the meeting.  Former 
Panamanian Minister of Labor Joaquin Jose (JJ) Vallarino also 
attended.  President Ricardo Maduro opened the conference, 
and emphasized the importance of a career civil service in 
his remarks.  During the day and half conference the 
ministers heard presentations from various ILO technical 
assistance projects on OSH, labor relations, and 
modernization (but not child labor).  The best presentation 
was by the Spanish director of the Spanish-funded 
Modernization of the Administration of Work (MATAC) regional 
project, who emphasized the need for better coordination of 
technical assistance projects by international donors, the 
ILO, and Central American ministries of labor.  He noted that 
these projects could only succeed with the strong backing of 
the ministers and a civil service in the ministries that did 
not constantly turn over with political changes. 
 
 
Labor Unions Oppose CAFTA; Appreciate USG Outreach to Labor 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
4. (SBU) A/DUS Magan held a roundtable meeting January 23 
with the CGT (General Workers\' Central) - Daniel Duron, 
SecGen, CGT is affiliated with World Confederation of Labour 
(WCL); CTH (Confederation of Honduran Workers) - Dinora 
Aceituno, SecGen, CTH is affiliated with the International 
Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU); and CUTH (United 
Confederation of Honduran Workers)- Israel Salinas, SecGen, 
CUTH is applying for affiliation with the ICFTU.  All three 
labor confederations oppose CAFTA, and are not supportive of 
free trade agreements in general.  The unions noted, as they 
have in the past, that several sectors of the Honduran 
business community, most notably agriculture, are opposed to 
or skeptical of CAFTA.  The unions shared the concern of 
Honduran agricultural producers, and feared that in general 
Honduran products would not be able to compete with U.S. 
products.  In response to complaints about U.S. agricultural 
subsidies LabAtt explained briefly the USG\'s proposal in the 
WTO and A/DUS Magan noted that European Union subsidies were 
higher than U.S. subsidies.  During the meeting the labor 
leaders discussed their concern that the GOH would be forced 
to make concessions on public sector salaries to reach a deal 
with the IMF (see ref A for more details on GOH-IMF 
negotiations).  They also criticized what they termed bad 
experiences with privatization in Honduras.  The unions 
complained that there had been a complete lack of 
consultation with labor unions on CAFTA.  The unions\' 
concerns echoed comments from previous meetings that LabAtt 
and Political Counselor had held in December and January with 
the three confederations. 
 
5. (SBU) A/DUS Magan noted that input from civil society, 
including labor unions, is necessary for CAFTA.  He urged the 
labor leaders to make their views known on key issues related 
to CAFTA to the Ministry of Labor.  A/DUS Magan encouraged 
the leaders to work with the AFL/CIO Solidarity Center 
(regional office in San Jose), something that the CTH and 
CUTH said they are doing.  He emphasized that labor issues 
are a key part of U.S. Trade Promotion Authority (TPA). 
A/DUS Magan and the union leaders also discussed labor 
aspects of GSP, the U.S.-Chile FTA, and NAFTA.  He 
highlighted DOL-funded technical assistance projects in 
Honduras and the region, as well as the USAID-funded PROALCA 
II.  He also noted the use of trade adjustment assistance in 
the U.S. for industries affected by free trade. 
 
6. (U) Both the CGT and CTH told A/DUS Magan that the Embassy 
played a helpful role on labor issues.  They praised A/DUS 
Magan for meeting with them and noted that it was rare for 
the leaders of the three confederations to be in a room 
together for a meeting like this. 
 
Maquila Association - Strongest Supporter of CAFTA 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7. (SBU) A/DUS Magan had dinner January 23 with the Honduran 
Apparel Manufacturers Association (AKA the maquila 
association), including association president Jesus Canahuati 
(younger brother of Honduran Ambassador to the U.S. Mario 
Canahuati) and discussed CAFTA, the importance of respect for 
core labor rights, and the 1995 MOU between USTR and the 
Honduran Ministry of Labor.  (A/DUS Magan also spoke briefly 
January 24 with Honduran Council of Private Business (COHEP) 
President Jacobo Regalado, who was unable to make the 
dinner.)  The maquila association is by far the strongest 
private sector booster for CAFTA, a fact evidenced by 
Canahuati\'s past flirtations with the GOH about possibly 
leading the Honduran negotiating team, something that he 
chose not to do (see ref B for more information on GOH trade 
team).  The maquila association warned that in the business 
community the agricultural sector was the most skeptical 
about CAFTA.  The maquila association said they had a 
positive relationship, in general, with the three labor 
confederations and highlighted the importance of Salinas\' 
support in lobbying for passage of the Caribbean Basin Trade 
Partnership Act (CBTPA), that benefits Honduran maquila 
exports. 
 
Central American Labor Ministers Seek Larger Role in CAFTA 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
8. (SBU) A/DUS Magan had a private meeting January 24 with 
the ministers to discuss CAFTA and labor issues (see ref C 
for more information on bilateral trade and non-trade issues 
potentially affecting CAFTA).  He gave them all a copy of the 
USTR Trade Facts \"Highlights of Trade Capacity Building 
Initiatives In Support of the U.S.-CAFTA Negotiations\" that 
describes DOL-funded regional technical assistance projects 
(CERSSO and the Freedom of Association, Collective Bargaining 
and Industrial Relations in Central America Project 
(RELACENTRO) that aims to promote industrial relations, 
collective bargaining, and conflict resolution in Central 
America).  He stressed that MOL officials had a role in the 
negotiations, as did labor unions and businesses.  The 
ministers noted that many unions opposed CAFTA.  A/DUS Magan 
suggested that governments reach out to unions, especially to 
individual unions that supported free trade.  He urged the 
ministers to use an inter-agency process to build consensus 
within the government on CAFTA issues. 
 
9. (SBU) The ministers bemoaned their anemic budgets, 
including a lack of travel funds for MOL officials to attend 
CAFTA negotiating sessions.  The ministers praised DOL-funded 
technical assistance projects, as well as the Spanish-funded 
MATAC.  Honduran Minister of Labor German Leitzelar 
emphasized that this technical assistance is even more 
important with CAFTA. 
 
10. (SBU) Note: Although he did not say it to A/DUS Magan, 
MOL Leitzelar told Department of State FTAA Coordinator Dr. 
Barbara Bowie-Whitman January 15 in an American Embassy 
Television Network (AETN) interactive program on CAFTA that 
with regard to labor issues in CAFTA, it would be 
insufficient to just call for the improved enforcement of 
existing labor laws and regulations.  The agreement will need 
to address core labor rights if it hopes to garner any union 
support in Honduras.  End Note. 
 
Maquila Tours Show Benefit of DOL-funded OSH Project 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
11. (U) Prior to the start of the meetings A/DUS Magan toured 
January 23 the J.E. Morgan maquila (assembly manufacturing 
for export), a U.S.-owned Sara Lee maquila, and Dragon Maya, 
a Hong Kong/Honduran-owned maquila.  J.E. Morgan has been an 
active participant in the DOL-funded Regional Occupational 
Safety and Health Project (CERSSO) that aims to reduce the 
number of accidents and injuries in the workplace.  The plant 
manager proudly pointed out a sign on the wall that stated 
that the factory had gone 2,678,028 hours without a work 
accident.  A/DUS Magan and LabAtt noted that plant conditions 
were obviously superior at the U.S.-owned maquila. 
Separately, a recent visit by officials from the Customs 
Attache\'s office in Panama noted that the Honduran-owned 
maquila they inspected had superior working conditions and 
productivity to the Korean-owned maquila they inspected. 
 
Visit A Success, But Influence of Unions/MOL Remains Weak 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
12. (SBU) Comment.  A/DUS Magan\'s visit was successful from 
Post\'s perspective.  The ministers appreciated hearing 
insights on CAFTA and labor issues, and both the maquila 
association and labor unions thanked A/DUS Magan for engaging 
them in discussions.  At least in Honduras, it remains to be 
seen whether (a) the labor unions will work with the 
ministries of labor to voice their views on CAFTA, and (b) 
whether the Ministry of Labor will play a larger role in GOH 
policy formulation on CAFTA issues.  Post has a high opinion 
of Minister Leitzelar, but the fact of the matter is that 
Minister of Industry and Commerce is clearly in the driver\'s 
seat on CAFTA, and labor issues do not appear to be high on 
the GOH\'s CAFTA agenda.  End Comment. 
 
13. (U) A/DUS Magan did not clear this cable prior to his 
departure. 
Palmer 
"
"5753","2/14/2003 23:45","03TEGUCIGALPA442","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE27320","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000442 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND PRM/PRP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA RECOMMENDS EXTENSION OF TPS, 
WITH PLANNING FOR THE END GAME 
 
REF: A. STATE 27320 
 
     B. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 620 
     C. 01 TEGUCIGALPA 719 (AND PREVIOUS) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Honduras remains an extremely poor 
country, still trying to recover from the devastation of 
Hurricane Mitch.  While most USG-funded post-Mitch 
reconstruction efforts are complete, serious long-term 
challenges make the situation extremely difficult for the 
average Honduran.  Honduras is struggling to provide economic 
opportunities, health care, housing, and schooling for its 
current residents, and possibly another approximately 87,000 
that might return if Temporary Protected Status (TPS) is not 
extended.  A decision not to extend TPS would be seen as a 
serious blow to the Maduro administration and would make 
achieving USG goals in Honduras on a range of issues much 
more difficult.  Therefore, the State/AID country team 
members unanimously endorse a Department recommendation to 
the Attorney General that TPS be extended.  Post also 
recommends that Washington give consideration to the desired 
end game of TPS, since what was designed as a temporary 
program is now viewed by Hondurans as an annual process in 
which a decision not to extend TPS would be a shock.  The 
eventual ending of the program, without some final 
clarification of TPS beneficiaries\' immigration status, could 
put a large category of people into legal no-man\'s land and 
undermine USG efforts to better control our borders.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) With the help of the international donor community (of 
which USAID is the largest bilateral contributor), Honduras 
has largely recovered from the physical devastation of 
Hurricane Mitch and has begun to focus its efforts on the 
country\'s long-term development.  USAID\'s two-and-a-half 
year, USD 300 million recovery program focused on a wide 
variety of reconstruction interventions in the areas of 
education, housing, water and sanitation, rural roads and 
bridges, disaster mitigation, health, agriculture 
reactivation, credit, accountability, and transparency. 
Although the majority of this program has been brought to 
completion, two ongoing programs remain to be completed: one 
dealing with transparency and accountability, and the other 
the reconstruction of damaged urban water and sanitation 
systems - both of which are scheduled to be fully completed 
in FY04.  Despite the gains made in post-Mitch recovery, 
Honduras continues to face daunting long-term development 
challenges that will continue to stress its limited resources. 
 
3. (SBU) President Ricardo Maduro, upon assuming office in 
January 2002, inherited a stagnating economy and seriously 
deteriorated government finances from the previous 
government.  One year into his Administration, the economic 
situation is still bleak, with the GOH struggling to reach a 
deal with the IMF.  The necessary, but difficult, measures 
that the GOH is planning to take to achieve an IMF agreement 
will likely result in economic and political problems in the 
short-term, although they are necessary for long-term 
macroeconomic stability.  The economy is growing slowly 
(estimated real GDP growth of two percent in 2002), and 
Honduras is a Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC), with a per 
capita income of only USD 922 per year.  Low world coffee 
prices continue to undermine the economy in rural areas. 
Given this bleak economic situation, the GOH has been unable 
to provide sufficient economic opportunities, health care, 
housing, and schooling for the people of Honduras.  The 
result can be seen in high crime rates and the slow 
unraveling of the social fabric of the nation.  Maduro\'s team 
is hoping that a U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA) will serve as a catalyst to regional economic 
cooperation, foreign investment, and economic growth. 
 
4. (U) Remittances from Hondurans living overseas continue to 
grow rapidly (up 38 percent in the first six months of 2002) 
and have become the country\'s most important source of 
foreign exchange.  Post estimates that Hondurans in the U.S. 
sent approximately USD 550-600 million in 2002 in remittances 
to Honduras.  Any significant drop in remittance income, 
something likely to happen if Temporary Protected Status 
(TPS) is not extended, would cut the country\'s largest source 
of foreign exchange. 
 
5. (SBU) Post estimates that Honduras is currently receiving 
upwards of 10,400 deportees a year via the INS/JPATS 
deportation program, a manageable number.  In addition, the 
GOH receives assistance from the International Organization 
of Migration (IOM) for a reinsertion program.  Post suspects 
that many of these deportees attempt to return to the U.S. 
again illegally and thus it is unclear how many are actually 
remaining in Honduras.  An increase from what is currently 
the second highest number of deportees in Central America 
(after El Salvador) to a much higher number would be 
difficult for Honduras to handle. 
 
6. (SBU) There is deep appreciation in Honduras, especially 
among members of the Maduro administration, for the USG\'s 
2002 extension of TPS, and continual interest in possible 
U.S. congressional action on the pending Nicaraguan 
Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA), which 
would give immigration parity for Hondurans.  The wait for a 
possible extension of TPS, and GOH advocacy for such a step, 
has become an annual event, and TPS extension is supported 
equally by both the National and Liberal Parties. 
 
7. (SBU) President Ricardo Maduro\'s government is engaged on 
the key issues of improving the administration of justice and 
rule of law, and is seeking to transform Honduras so that law 
and order can be restored and economic growth ignited. 
Maduro has spoken out strongly on tackling corruption, but 
has yet to deliver concrete results.  He faces formidable 
challenges from entrenched economic and political interests 
in moving his agenda forward.  Notably, the President\'s 
popularity has remained stalled at a low point since June 
2002.  A decision by the USG not to extend TPS could be 
interpreted here by many as a sign of U.S. withdrawal of 
support which would be a serious blow to the Maduro 
administration.  In any case, it would make achieving USG 
goals in Honduras, including Honduran congressional passage 
of CAFTA next year, on a range of issues much more difficult. 
 
8. (SBU) In sum, Post believes the following three problems 
are the most serious difficulties Honduras would face if TPS 
is not extended and a substantial number of Hondurans 
previously on TPS were to return to Honduras: 
-- great difficulty providing jobs, housing, schooling, and 
health care for those who return, resulting in additional 
crime and social instability, 
-- a significant loss of remittances, and 
-- a loss of political support for President Maduro, which 
would hurt USG goals in Honduras. 
 
Recommendation: Extend TPS and Plan for the End Game 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
9. (SBU) Because of the situation outlined above, State/AID 
Country Team members unanimously endorse a Department 
recommendation to the Attorney General that TPS be extended. 
Post also recommends that Washington give consideration to 
the end game of TPS, since what was designed as a temporary 
program is currently seen by Hondurans as anything but 
temporary.  Given the high levels of poverty and slow 
economic growth in Honduras, there are likely to be good 
reasons to argue for the extension of TPS for the foreseeable 
future.  Whether it is an Executive Branch policy, such as 
Deferred Enforced Departure (ref c), Congressional action on 
NACARA-parity legislation, or some other solution, the USG 
should plan for an ordered end to TPS.  The alternative, in 
which TPS eventually ends and 87,000 people are suddenly 
illegally in the U.S., could provide serious challenges to 
the USG. 
Palmer 
"
"5832","2/19/2003 20:45","03TEGUCIGALPA469","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03STATE38880","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 000469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2013 
TAGS: ETTC, PARM, PREL, PTER, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN RESPONSE REGARDING MANPADS 
 
REF: STATE 38880 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger D. Pierce 
for reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1. (S) The Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) do not have any Man 
Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS).  Likewise, Post is 
not aware of any non-state actors in possession of MANPADS in 
Honduras.   Post believes HOAF would be receptive to 
information or training on MANPAD threats.  Chad P. Cummins, 
POL/MIL Officer, at (504) 238-4641 is the POC at Post. 
Palmer 
"
"5916","2/24/2003 15:46","03TEGUCIGALPA494","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03Tegucigalpa10","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000494 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR, EXIM, OPIC 
STATE PASS USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras Hopes For IMF Letter of Intent by March 31 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 00010 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Honduras is putting the finishing touches 
on a package of laws that will put the GOH\'s fiscal house in 
order and satisfy the International Monetary Fund (IMF) team 
negotiating the terms of Honduras\' three-year Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) program.  The package 
will include the long-awaited Civil Service Framework bill 
that will supercede the salary provisions in the profession- 
specific laws (called estatutos); expenditure measures that 
will reduce the central government wage bill to 10.1 percent 
of GDP in 2003 and reduce the wage bill of the entire public 
sector by one percent of GDP annually in 2004 and 2005; and 
a series of revenue measures that will widen the tax base 
for income and sales taxes.   The only important tax 
exemption elimination that the GOH plans to propose to 
Congress is the exemption for fuel products used in the 
power sector; however, it appears that the other tax 
measures will be sufficient to lower the deficit 
significantly.  The IMF and GOH are also working together 
closely on improvements to the financial sector.   The GOH 
hopes the whole fiscal package will go to Congress by the 
end of February and will be approved by mid March.  The goal 
is to sign a letter of intent with the Fund by the end of 
March.  The GOH believes that the letter of intent would be 
sufficient to hold off pressure from Paris Club creditors, 
until IMF Board approval in June.  Much will depend on the 
GOH\'s skill in getting the measures through Congress.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) In a February 18 meeting with econoffs, Minister of 
Finance Arturo Alvarado explained that the GOH is very close 
to an agreement with the IMF on the terms of Honduras\' three- 
year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility program.   The 
program includes commitments on creating a professional 
civil service, reducing the wage bill as a percent of GDP, 
and adopting revenue measures.  According to Ministry of 
Finance projections, this will bring the central government 
deficit down to three percent of GDP in 2003 (a marked 
improvement over the last two years). The IMF and GOH are 
also working together closely on policy changes to 
strengthen the financial sector. 
 
3. (SBU) After contentious late January meetings between the 
GOH and IMF in Washington (in which the Fund at first 
insisted on a constitutional amendment), there is now a 
basic agreement on the text of the long-awaited Civil 
Service Framework bill.  Article 110 of the bill will 
replace the salary provisions in the profession-specific 
laws - the so-called estatutos - immediately upon entry into 
force, except for the phasing in of the salary increases for 
teachers by 2006.   Alvarado is waiting for the IMF\'s final 
comments on the draft bill (due any day now). 
 
4. (SBU) The GOH identified expenditure measures that will 
allow it to reduce the central government wage bill to 10.1 
percent of GDP in 2003.  Many of these measures have already 
been implemented (wage freeze for non-unionized employees, 
elimination of 60 percent of vacant positions, elimination 
of ghost workers, retirement of public sector workers over 
the age of 65, etc.).  For 2004 and 2005, the GOH convinced 
the Fund they would have more flexibility to reduce the wage 
bill an additional one percent of GDP per year if they 
included the entire public sector.  Alvarado noted that 
reductions in staff are already underway in autonomous 
government agencies such as SANAA (the state water and 
sanitation company) and COHDEFOR (the Forestry Service). 
The IMF team agreed to exclude the severance payments from 
the wage bill calculations.  Note: IMF contacts indicate 
that the GOH still needs to present more detail on these 
planned expenditure measures in order to obtain Fund staff 
support. 
 
5. (SBU) The third part of the package is a series of 
revenue measures (amounting to at least 2.5 percent of GDP) 
that will widen the tax base for income and sales taxes. 
Many bonuses and allowances will now be included as income 
in the calculation for income tax and the minimum level of 
salary for individuals subject to the tax will be reduced. 
A type of withholding tax will be implemented for companies. 
Many more products will be subject to the sales tax, leaving 
only basic foods and medicines tax free (i.e., an expanded 
\"basic basket of goods\").  The government still plans to 
eliminate the tax exemption for fuel products used in the 
power sector and will direct the state electricity company 
ENEE to negotiate compensatory adjustments for the price of 
electricity in its contracts with the private power 
generators.  The expected increased revenue from these 
measures is expected to be: 
         Income tax                0.9 percent of GDP 
         Sales tax                 0.5 percent of GDP 
         Oil taxes and others      1.1 percent of GDP 
 
6. (SBU) Econcouns noted that the GOH has backed away from 
its intent to reduce the numerous special tax exemptions for 
companies, and that this would put the GOH on the defensive 
as only raising taxes on the poor and lower middle class. 
Alvarado acknowledged that elimination of special exemptions 
turned out to be politically unfeasible.  The GOH will do 
its best to explain to the public that in fact tax rates are 
not being raised.  Note: IMF sources indicated concern this 
week that the GOH might back off from some of the measures, 
based on criticism from the public. 
 
7. (SBU) Alvarado, who is consulting closely with President 
of Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo, hopes the whole fiscal 
package will go to Congress the week of February 24 and will 
be approved in Congress by early to mid March.  The IMF team 
would then return to Honduras March 24 to finalize and sign 
off on a letter of intent on a PRGF program by March 31. 
The package would go to the IMF Board in June.  The Fund 
staff said that once a letter of intent is signed, they 
would signal to the Paris Club that the GOH is basically 
back on track, taking pressure off from official bilateral 
creditors for resumed debt payments.  Honduras\' extension of 
debt relief from the Paris Club runs out on March 31. 
 
8. (SBU) Comment: Although the umbrella public sector 
organization COHEP expressed solidarity with the GOH on the 
need to regain fiscal equilibrium and stop the dramatic 
growth in public sector salaries (and despite the fact that 
the current plan leaves many investment incentives intact), 
key private sector groups have started to complain about the 
proposed tax measures.  Government pronouncements about the 
measures, their impact on the poor, and the relationship to 
the GOH\'s need for an IMF program have been confusing and 
inconsistent.  The next few weeks will be a key test of the 
Maduro government\'s commitment (and ability) to take the 
needed measures. 
 
Palmer 
"
"5960","2/26/2003 15:40","03TEGUCIGALPA527","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, DRL/PHD, INL/LP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KCRM, ASEC, SNAR, KJUS, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MADURO VOWS TO COMBAT RISING MINOR 
HOMICIDE RATE 
 
REF: 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2956 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger D. Pierce for reasons 
1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) On February 19, before a hastily convened 
international audience which included the ambassadors of 
Great Britain, Taiwan, Germany, France, Spain, as well as 
PolOff, President Ricardo Maduro vowed to combat Honduras\' 
surging homicide rate for minors.  Maduro expressed his 
administration\'s deep concern about the issue, calling the 
murder of children the \"ultimate human rights violation,\" and 
asserted that those perpetuating these crimes will be brought 
to justice.  At the same time, however, Maduro acknowledged 
the lack of law enforcement resources as a serious 
impediment, specifically mentioning that every homicide 
investigator is responsible for over 200 cases. The President 
was accompanied by Defense Minister Frederico Breve and the 
Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez. 
 
2. (U) Following Maduro\'s remarks Public Security Minister 
Alvarez presented government statistics compiled by his 
office outlining the scope of the problem.  Between 1998 and 
2002, the GOH\'s figures count 744 minors murdered in 
Honduras, primarily in the major urban centers of Tegucigalpa 
and San Pedro Sula.  This figure is substantially higher than 
the 574 cited by the Minister of Government and Justice in an 
October 2002 report (reftel).  Casa Alianza (a child advocacy 
NGO) has estimated that there were 1,500 extrajudicial 
killings of youth under age 23 (including minors) between 
January 1998 and December 2002.  Alarmingly, during 2002 
homicides of minors accounted for 42 percent of all cases. 
Alvarez believes increased gang activity is to blame for the 
killings.  This has become a particular concern since the 
U.S. government has stepped up deportations of Honduran 
nationals, many of whom were hardened gang members while in 
the United States. 
 
3. (SBU) During his remarks, Alvarez failed to address 
accusations of extrajudicial killings by GOH security forces. 
 Alvarez only restated often-repeated GOH policy that 
Honduras would not tolerate, condone, or  excuse the murder 
of children.  In a government handout titled \"Special Report 
on Child Homicide,\" (distributed after the event) the issue 
was broached, but then only to discount the possibility that 
security forces have played any major role in child homicide. 
 
 
3. (C) COMMENT: The homicide closure rate in Honduras is 
between 1-2 percent compared to a national U.S. closure rate 
of close to 70 percent. While the GOH has adequately 
identified the murder of minors as a serious issue, its 
inability to dedicate more resources and technical ability to 
address the problem underscores the GOH\'s lack of 
follow-through on commitments made to the international 
community last fall (reftel).  The failure to recognize the 
role of security forces in these killings and/or to report on 
the status of the over 20 cases where police are accused of 
involvement, signals that the GOH is not seriously addressing 
the possibility that its own security forces may be 
implicated and if so, to what degree. END COMMENT 
 
Palmer 
"
"5967","2/26/2003 19:31","03TEGUCIGALPA532","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA DAS FISK, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE FOR INL/RM, EB, AND CA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/26/2013 
TAGS: PREL, KJUS, PGOV, SNAR, ECON, PHUM, KCRM, OVIP, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION IN HONDURAS--IS RICARDO MADURO 
WILLING TO FOLLOW THROUGH WITH MORE THAN JUST RHETORIC? 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer, Reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  As President Ricardo Maduro enters the 
second year of his single four-year term in office, the 
looming question in his professed effort to transform 
Honduras, economy, judicial system and political environment 
is whether or not he is prepared to seek concrete results in 
his battle against the country\'s endemic corruption.  While 
the President\'s will appears strong and the Supreme Court has 
taken some important initial steps to clean up corruption in 
the courts, it remains to be seen if Maduro and his 
government, including the Court and the Congress, are 
prepared to press for action against major economic and 
political figures involved in corrupt practices.  Cardinal 
Oscar Rodriguez, the Chairman of the National Anti-Corruption 
Commission, gave a strong, but qualified, endorsement of 
President Maduro\'s efforts thus far.  But the newly formed 
anti-corruption entity, the Tribunal Superior de Cuentas 
(TSC), is off to a slow start and lacks the necessary 
prosecutorial zeal needed in an effective anti-corruption 
entity.  WHA DAS Dan Fisk directly explored this question 
during his February 5-8 visit in meetings with President 
Maduro, the President of the Supreme Court, the Ministers of 
Foreign Relations and Public Security, Cardinal Rodriguez, 
and the TSC.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
President Maduro Renews His Pledge to Fight Corruption 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
2. (C) In a meeting with Western Hemisphere Affairs (WHA) 
Deputy Assistant Secretary (DAS) Dan Fisk originally 
scheduled for one hour but extended to two hours, President 
Maduro spent much of the first hour outlining his 
government\'s efforts to combat corruption.  He highlighted 
the following achievements in his anti-corruption campaign: 
the selection of an independent Supreme Court; creation of a 
transparency commission for the energy contract solicitation; 
establishment of a task force to capture white collar 
criminals, such as the fugitive bankers involved in 
fraudulent banking practices; the first ever removal of 
congressional immunity from a deputy (in a rape case); and 
adoption of the national budget by Congress in an open and 
transparent process.  DAS Fisk told Maduro that the U.S. sees 
forward progress being made and that the President had a good 
agenda.  However, he reiterated the importance of holding 
people and institutions accountable. Fisk said that for all 
he has seen and hears from other sectors of Honduran civil 
society, many average Hondurans still did not feel that there 
was real change taking place and that Maduro needed more 
concrete results against individuals involved in corrupt 
activities. 
 
3. (C) Maduro responded that his government is taking a clear 
direction against corruption that should be clear to all.  He 
said that he was acting against vested interests, even though 
they wanted to be able to manipulate the system.  He also 
offered that he was pushing for the review of pending 
corruption cases and for establishing a higher level of 
transparency in these prosecutions.  He cited as another 
example his effort to decentralize authority for government 
programs to the municipalities and the people who are most 
responsible for delivering services so that the public can 
hold them more directly accountable for their actions.  He 
called attention to the poor performance of the Attorney 
General (AG) in prosecuting corruption cases.  He explained 
that the AG is an independent appointee from the Liberal 
Party with a seven-year term of office, which does not expire 
until next year.  Maduro said that the AG was not in sync 
with the rest of his government team. 
 
4. (C) DAS Fisk also raised with the President his discussion 
with the President of the Supreme Court about Congress\' 
effort to pass an amendment on constitutional interpretation. 
 Maduro said he was well aware of the effort in Congress and 
flagged another effort there to adopt a new constitutional 
method for the removal of constitutionally-designated 
officers, such as members of the Supreme Court, the AG, the 
TSC, and the Human Rights Commissioner.  Maduro expressed 
 
SIPDIS 
concern that such power would allow Congress to remove 
independent justices who did not follow the political 
parties\' interests.  He added that this proposed change would 
also undermine the court\'s effort on corruption and judicial 
reform. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Supreme Court Is Bright Spot on Anti-Corruption Horizon 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
5. (SBU) Supreme Court President Vilma Morales underscored to 
WHA DAS Fisk her firm commitment to improving the 
administration of justice in Honduras and her willingness to 
establish the Supreme Court as a co-equal branch of power 
with the Executive and Congress during her term.  She said 
that the new nominating process put in place to select the 
current court and the seven-year term had been the most 
important judicial reform measure enacted and had set the 
stage for her efforts to further judicial reform by granting 
this court far more political independence than any court 
that had proceeded it.  She acknowledged that judicial reform 
was a process and that these changes would take time to 
consolidate.  However, Morales said it would only be through 
a strengthened and independent judiciary that Honduras would 
be able to begin attacking corruption.  She told Fisk that 
she was removing corrupt judges and improving the selection 
process for new judges. 
 
6. (SBU) However, Morales warned Fisk that powerful political 
interests remained opposed to the Court\'s efforts.  She 
explained that the Congress was attempting to amend the 
Honduran constitution to give itself the power to interpret 
the constitutionality of its laws.  She said the Court was 
preparing a legal decision in a test case over the 
constitutionality of the proposed amendment.  Interestingly, 
the Attorney General had filed a brief supporting the 
Congress\' position.  Morales told Fisk she thought the Court 
would prevail but that it would be difficult and complicate 
the Court\'s relationship with the Congress. 
 
7. (SBU) DAS Fisk encouraged her to continue her efforts to 
attack judicial corruption.  Morales said she is working to 
strengthen the courts and thanked Fisk for U.S. and other 
international assistance.  She highlighted assistance for 
judicial training for judges and the effort to improve the 
performance of public defenders, a critical need in Honduras 
where the cost of an effective legal defense far exceeds what 
the great majority of the population can afford. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Cardinal Endorses Maduro Efforts but Notes Shortcomings 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
8. (C) DAS Fisk thanked Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez for his 
leadership of anti-corruption efforts in Honduras and asked 
him for his assessment of the problem.  The Cardinal said 
that Maduro\'s statements in early January against the 
fugitive bankers were a significant step.  He added that it 
was a good sign that Maduro is committed to fighting back 
against the corruption that had created the bank failures. 
The Cardinal noted that Honduras was still struggling to 
improve its democracy and that corruption was a critical 
area.   Ambassador asked how the U.S. could help ensure 
follow up on the bankers\' cases.  The Cardinal recognized 
that there were leading Nationalist Party figures in the bank 
failures who were not being pursued, and added that the legal 
system needed to go after them.  He too laid blame on the 
Attorney General, stating that the AG has not done much in 
any of these cases. 
 
9. (C) DAS Fisk replied that the Supreme Court was an 
optimistic point but that it appeared that the political and 
economic structures in the country were still resisting its 
independence.  He told the Cardinal that a broader societal 
effort against corruption was needed.  The Cardinal agreed 
that the Supreme Court was an important start.  However, he 
claimed that his main concern now was the Congress.  He said 
there needed to be an effort to reform the Congress: there 
was a \"dark side\" there that defends only its own interests. 
He relayed an anecdote of the direct involvement of a 
prominent Liberal Party deputy in extorting a USD 3 million 
commission for his son\'s law firm from a major health care 
development project. 
 
10. (C) In response to a question about the goals of the 
National Anti-Corruption Commission he chairs, the Cardinal 
explained that he wants to get the Commission more involved 
in social auditing.  He also shared that his life had been 
threatened for his work on corruption.  Ambassador offered 
the full support of the U.S. for the Cardinal\'s efforts.  The 
Cardinal said that U.S. visa revocations were an important 
tool and had an important impact on people.  The Ambassador 
responded that the Embassy would continue canceling visas. 
He also said the Embassy was prepared to pursue people who 
were involved in intimidation as well. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Stressing Anti-Corruption to Foreign/Security Ministers 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
11. (C) DAS Fisk also stressed the importance of 
anti-corruption activities to Minister of Foreign Relations 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias and Minister of Public Security 
Oscar Alvarez.  He told them it was essential that the GOH 
step up its campaign against corruption and produce some 
tangible results.  FM Perez-Cadalso, a justice on the 
previous Supreme Court, noted that the current court was not 
tainted by a politicized selection process as previous courts 
had been and assured Fisk the Maduro government would push 
the Court for success in this area.  Ambassador added that 
the support of the Maduro administration was critical.  He 
said that it takes courage to move the judicial system 
forward.  DAS Fisk and Ambassador gave assurances of complete 
U.S. support for these efforts.  FM Perez-Cadalso also 
focused on the need to view the judicial system as a whole. 
He said that judges cannot do it alone; prosecutors, police 
and the penal system were also critical parts.  He admitted 
that coordination among these entities did not work as well 
as it should.  DAS Fisk urged the GOH to work with the U.S. 
on anti-corruption and called attention to Millennium 
Challenge Account (MCA) criteria, which would weigh 
government\'s performance in this area.  He said fighting 
corruption was fundamental to U.S. policy objectives in 
Honduras. 
 
12. (C) In his meeting with Minister of Public Security Oscar 
Alvarez, Fisk urged Alvarez to take action against corrupt 
police, to send a strong signal about impunity by arresting 
fugitive policeman Juan Carlos \"Tiger\" Bonilla, and to act 
carefully against whistle-blowers, such as ex-Chief of Police 
Internal Affairs Maria Luisa Borjas.  He also encouraged 
Alvarez to address the problem of extra-judicial killings of 
youth and trafficking in persons.  Alvarez pledged his full 
cooperation in the war on corruption and to improve the 
capabilities of the internal affairs unit.  He acknowledged 
that the police force was a weak institution and that current 
law severely hamstrung his efforts to remove corrupt and 
under-performing officers.  He assured Fisk that the GOH was 
investigating extra-judicial killings and that the police 
were becoming more involved in law enforcement operations 
against alien smugglers and traffickers of people. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
New Anti-corruption Entity Off to a Slow Start 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
13. (SBU) The meeting with the new three-member Tribunal 
Superior de Cuentas (TSC - Superior Accounting Tribunal) 
proved disappointing.  DAS Fisk probed the TSC members for 
their views on how the TSC can operate more effectively 
against corruption, after acknowledging the difficult job 
they face starting up a newly created institution.  He 
pointed out that the TSC would be on the front line of the 
effort against corruption and urged them to more effectively 
align resources to anti-corruption priorities. 
Unfortunately, he found the panel had neither a broad 
anti-corruption vision nor a strong desire to lead a head-on 
charge against government corruption.  TSC President Renan 
Sagustume explained that the group has been in office less 
than a month and is in the process of consolidating the 
operations of three previously independent government 
institutions.  His technical presentation focused almost 
entirely on the bureaucratic challenges facing the TSC -- 
hiring new staff, deciding on who to keep from the old staff, 
locating the existing files (many of which are lost) and 
defining the necessary ethics standards that they will apply 
in their work.  He asked for U.S. assistance in developing 
mechanisms for sharing information about bank accounts in the 
U.S., for technical training for the staff in investigating 
corrupt practices, and for help in developing a better 
auditing function in the organization. 
 
14. (SBU) Fellow TSC commissioner, Fernando Montes, was 
uninspiring in his explanation of the process needed to 
review government officials\' financial disclosure forms, 
unconsciously revealing more of a preoccupation with the 
electronic storage of the forms rather than any interest in 
actually reviewing the forms for accuracy or making them 
publicly available.  He stated without any hesitation that he 
was more interested in securing the forms\' information from 
potential kidnappers or other criminal elements than in using 
them as a transparency tool to hold public officials 
accountable for their actions in office.  Montes did point 
out that the TSC will establish a \"follow through\" unit to 
follow cases referred to the Attorney General\'s office and 
Solicitor General\'s office for prosecution.  He noted that 
they had already referred 25 pre-existing cases but that the 
AG had only taken action on one case thus far. 
 
15. (SBU) Only former Liberal Party Congressman Ricardo Galo 
Marenco, who resigned from Congress to take this post, made 
any mention of leading the fight against corruption in the 
country, assuring DAS Fisk that the TSC would fully apply 
Honduran law and act firmly against corruption so that 
Honduras has credibility in its effort against this problem. 
Notwithstanding this professed commitment, his tone and 
language echoed the hollow promises to stop corruption which 
one hears all too often in the National Congress. 
 
16. (C) COMMENT:  Media coverage of DAS Fisk\'s visit squarely 
placed the corruption issue back on the public agenda and 
made it obvious to all that this issue remains a top policy 
priority for the U.S.  President Maduro was taken aback by 
Fisk\'s comments that the Honduran people want to see more 
concrete results. Obviously he feels that he has made more 
progress on this issue than any previous government and was 
surprised that many are questioning his results.  Maduro did 
present a persuasive case that anti-corruption remains a top 
priority for his administration; but privately we have heard 
that he is already backing away from aggressively pursuing 
bankers involved in the bank failures.  He has couched his 
reticence in terms of not wanting to undermine the stability 
of and public confidence in the financial sector.  The lack 
of any prosecutorial zeal at the TSC was also disappointing. 
However, the unmistakable message delivered by DAS Fisk\'s 
visit is that the U.S. wants to see some big fish caught in 
the GOH\'s anti-corruption net, even if it does have major 
holes in it. 
Palmer 
"
"5995","2/27/2003 22:43","03TEGUCIGALPA546","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA225","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000546 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/LEA/IL, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCD/IOI/WH/RD/DLUTTER 
USDOC FOR 4320/IEF/WH/OMCB 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/EJAFFEE 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON AND AGAH FCOOLIDGE 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, ENRG, EINV, EAIR, ELTN, PGOV, PREL, KPRV, KTDB, KPWR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ECON HIGHLIGHTS: DECEMBER 2002-JANUARY 2003 
 
REFS: A) TEGUCIGALPA 225 
 
      B) TEGUCIGALPA 10 
      C) TEGUCIGALPA 494 
      D) 2002 TEGUCIGALPA 3491 
      E) 2002 TEGUCIGALPA 3416 
      F) 2002 TEGUCIGALPA 3479 
 
TOPICS: 
 
-Macroeconomic Results for 2002 
-2003 Budget 
-GOH Housing Program Will Construct 30,000 Homes 
-GOH Eliminates the Commission for Privatization 
-Growth in the Maquila Industry 
-Construction Sector Paralyzed Due to Higher Cost 
-Liquidation of Banco Capital 
-Sears Opens Store in Tegucigalpa 
-Competition Forces Taca to Cut Prices Up to 50 percent 
-Standard Fruit Company Announces New Investment for 2003 
-AES Contract Approved 
 
 
Macroeconomic Results for 2002 
------------------------------ 
 
1.   The GDP rose by 2 percent in 2002, which was lower than 
economic growth rates in previous years of 2.7 percent in 2001 
and 4.8 percent in 2000.  Per capita income fell by 0.6 percent 
during 2002, and the Consumer Price Index rose by 8 percent.  The 
international reserves totaled USD 1.5 billion, and the gross 
family remittances totaled USD 700 million.  The reference 
exchange rate was 16.92 lempiras per dollar, which showed a 
nominal depreciation of 6.3 percent for the year. Ref A contains 
preliminary economic statistics for 2002. 
 
2003 Budget 
----------- 
 
2.   The 2003 budget adopted by Honduras\' National Congress in 
December amounted to 60 billion lempiras (USD 3.5 billion).  The 
Central Government was allocated 32 billion lempiras of the 
budget and divided in the following order: 50 percent for social 
expenditures, 13.6 percent for administration, 17.6 percent for 
public debt service, 12.7 percent for the economic agencies, and 
6.2 percent for security and defense.  Decentralized institutions 
will receive 27.9 billion lempiras.  Taxes and other sources of 
domestic income will fund 26.7 billion lempiras of the central 
government budget.  Foreign assistance will provide the remaining 
6.3 billion lempiras of the budget funding (4.8 billion lempiras 
in loans and 1.5 billion lempiras in grants).  The GOH is 
expected to submit amendments to the budget to Congress as part 
of its fiscal package (due by the end of February).  Refs B and C 
report on Honduran plans for new fiscal measures. 
 
GOH Housing Program Will Construct 30,000 Homes 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3.   As part of its housing program, the GOH has set the goal to 
construct 30,000 houses, worth 150,000 lempiras in 2003.  The 
houses will go to low-income families and will be paid off over a 
20-year period. 
 
GOH Eliminates the Commission for Privatization and Concessions 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
4.   The Commission for Privatization, which was created to 
assist the government in privatizing public enterprises, has been 
eliminated by the GOH.  The Vice-Minister of Finance explained 
that the only successful operation of the Commission was 
assisting in the concession to Interairports of international 
airport operation.  He reported that both the Commission for 
Privatization and the Commission for Modernization of the State 
had overlapping jurisdictions. The decision was made to eliminate 
the Commission for Privatization and allocate their task to the 
Commission for Modernization. 
 
Growth in the Maquila Industry 
------------------------------ 
 
5.   The Honduran Association of Assemblers for Export, an 
organization that represents maquiladores, has reported a 4.5 
percent growth for the sector over the last year.  President 
Maduro announced in January 2003, the maquila industry surpassed 
its expected growth, with the creation of 8,000 jobs.  The growth 
in jobs will come from new investment projects like cardboard, 
stockings, chemicals, and electrical cables, which total USD 100 
million.  In the second quarter of 2003, a Taiwanese firm is 
expected to construct a stockings factory. 
Construction Sector Paralyzed Due to Higher Cost 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
6.   The Honduran Chamber of Construction has reported that 80 
percent of the sector is paralyzed due to higher prices of 
materials and lack of funds to buy land.  The construction 
industry currently employs more than 120,000 individuals compared 
to the 600,000 it employed in the 1990\'s.  There is optimism 
amongst leaders of the industry that new road and bridge projects 
will induce growth, as well as GOH sponsored housing projects. 
 
Liquidation of Banco Capital 
---------------------------- 
 
7.   The National Banking and Insurance Commission (CNBS) 
liquidated Banco Capital and sold its deposit portfolio to Banco 
Ficohsa on December 20, 2002, at an auction conducted by the 
Deposit Insurance Fund.  The GOH is still working to sell off the 
troubled loan portfolio of Banco Capital.  The GOH approved a 
transfer of 517 million lempiras from Hondutel (the national 
telephone enterprise) to guarantee the Capital deposits (full 
report in Ref D). 
 
Sears Opens Store in Tegucigalpa 
-------------------------------- 
 
8.   Sears, Roebuck and Co. has invested close to USD 7 million 
for the construction of its new facilities in Tegucigalpa and the 
purchase of merchandise.  The company also intends to increase 
the size of its operation in San Pedro Sula. 
 
Competition Forces Taca to Cut Prices Up to 50 percent 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
9.   Taca Airlines is now facing competition from Sol Air, a new 
startup airline that offers service to Miami, Dallas, Honduras 
and Nicaragua.  The loss of Taca Airline\'s monopoly on the 
Central American airline market has forced the company to cut 
prices up to 50 percent in order to stay competitive.  This has 
benefited travelers to and from Honduras, who once paid USD 700 
and USD 800 and now pay USD 327 to USD 495.  Sol Air intends to 
expand to other markets in Panama, Costa Rica, Guatemala, New 
Orleans, and the Caribbean. 
 
Standard Fruit Company Announces New Investment for 2003 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
10.  The GM of Standard Fruit Company in Honduras, Gerald 
Brunelle, announced planned new investment of USD 11.7 million. 
The money will be used in banana and pineapple production on the 
Honduran Atlantic Coast.  The project will be completed within 
two years, and Standard Fruit will hire an additional 1,100 
employees.  Total exports from this investment will be USD 17-18 
million for pineapples and bananas. 
 
AES Contract Approved 
--------------------- 
 
11.  On January 31, the National Congress approved a contract 
between the American-owned electrical company, AES of Honduras 
and Honduran state-owned ENEE. The contract will provide the 
incentive to build a USD 650 million power plant that would 
provide 200 megawatts of electricity to both Honduras and El 
Salvador.  AES expects to make a profit of USD 500 million over 
12 years with additional profits coming from energy sales in El 
Salvador.  The contract will become effective upon signature by 
President Maduro and publication in the Gazeta. (See Refs E and F 
for background on contract). 
 
PALMER 
"
"5996","2/27/2003 23:21","03TEGUCIGALPA548","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, PM, EB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PBTS, PHUM, PREL, PTER, ECON, PINR, ES, HO 
SUBJECT: HOSTAGE SITUATION IN NAHUATERIQUE POCKET ON BORDER 
WITH EL SALVADOR ENDS PEACEFULLY 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger D. Pierce for reasons 
1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On February 25 at around 10:00am a Honduran 
patrol comprised of seven police and four military personnel 
was surrounded by approximately 400 compesinos in the 
Nahuaterique pocket on the border with El Salvador.  The 
incident occurred after the patrol had confiscated a number 
of chainsaws that were being used for illegal logging 
activities.  After a 27 hour standoff, and intervention by 
both Government of Honduras (GOH) and Government of El 
Salvador (GOES) officials, the incident ended without 
violence.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) According to information provided by the Honduran 
Ministry of Public Security, the Honduran Armed Forces, and 
press accounts on February 25 at around 10:00am a Honduran 
patrol comprised of seven police and four military personnel 
was surrounded by approximately 400 people near the town of 
Paso Mono, inside the Nahuaterique pocket on the border with 
El Salvador.  Local residents also reportedly destroyed a 
small wooden bridge (the only land route from Honduras) 
thereby preventing the patrol from leaving without entering 
El Salvador.  While the patrol was unable to withdraw, GOH 
personnel maintained control of their weapons and after a 
tense beginning were treated well by the local population. 
 
3. (SBU) The incident apparently occurred after the patrol 
had confiscated three chainsaws which were being used for 
illegal logging activities. On February 18, a similar patrol 
had confiscated illegal logging equipment, which resulted in 
a minor scuffle with local residents.  The community, made up 
largely of Salvadoran citizens who remained on the Honduran 
side of the border after the 1992 International Court of 
Justice ruling, has reportedly traditionally made its 
livelihood from logging activities.  Recent efforts to 
enforce Honduran law in the area have meet with considerable 
opposition due to the fact that other means of income are 
very limited. 
 
4. (C) The informal leader of the community, Santos Tulio 
Hernandez, is reportedly a former member of the Ejercito 
Revolutionario Popular, one of the strongest elements of the 
FMLN that operated in the Perquin-Torola area. Many of the 
residents in the surrounding area were also apparently 
guerrilla sympathizers in the 1980\'s.  After preventing the 
patrol from leaving, Hernandez demanded discussions with both 
GOH and GOES officials concerning the community\'s grievances. 
 
 
5. (SBU) On February 26, a GOH/GOES bilateral commission met 
in the town of Zancudo, Honduras to address the villagers 
demands and secure the release of the 11 patrol members. 
Taking part in the discussions were Honduran Police 
Commissioner Coralia Rivera, local military commanders, and 
representatives from both the GOH and GOES foreign 
ministries.  Sources report that officials involved in the 
mediation effort were able to secure the release of the 
patrol around noon after promising to address the community\'s 
needs. 
 
6. (SBU) Many of the residents of Nahuaterique, although now 
officially living in Honduras, remain citizens of El Salvador 
and continue to hold strong cultural and family ties to El 
Salvador.  Most local transportation is provided by El 
Salvador, villagers do most of their shopping in El Salvador, 
and El Salvador continues to be a large market for Honduran 
lumber. 
 
7. (C) COMMENT:  This incident highlights the need for 
demarcation of the border between the two countries. 
Honduras can be expected to use this incident to push for 
quicker action in this area.  Honduran authorities are also 
likely to attempt to assert greater control of the area 
through a larger official presence. The GOH will find it 
difficult, however, to enforce anti-logging in this poor 
region where Honduran law has not been regularly enforced. 
 
Palmer 
"
"5997","2/27/2003 23:29","03TEGUCIGALPA549","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SECSTATE36401","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EAGR, EAID, PGOV, HO, WTRO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN TRADE POLICY IN CAFTA, FTAA AND WTO 
NEGOTIATIONS - A PROJECT IN PROCESS 
 
REF: a) SECSTATE 36401 
 
     b) SECSTATE 15027 
     c) SECSTATE 50753 
     d) SECSTATE 26895 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  The Honduran government remains 
overstretched by the efforts to simultaneously establish a 
new trade team and participate actively in its new and 
ongoing trade negotiations.  Melvyn Redondo is emerging as 
the key figure in forging a congruent Honduran trade policy, 
but CAFTA by necessity will take up most of the GOH\'s 
attention in the trade arena.  Until the Ministry is able to 
staff up, develop fully a new organizational structure and 
get a clear picture of its overriding trade policy 
interests, it will be difficult to obtain clear Honduran 
positions on WTO Doha agenda and FTAA issues (except perhaps 
for high profile political issues such as the TRIPS 
moratorium for certain pharmaceuticals).  In CAFTA, the GOH 
objectives are to maintain the U.S. market access they 
already have, obtain duty free treatment for textiles and 
apparel made of regional product, protect sensitive 
agricultural products, look for opportunities in the 
services negotiation, obtain expedited sanitary- 
phytosanitary procedures that allow additional agricultural 
export to the U.S., and improve the ability of Honduras to 
attract foreign investment.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Embassy has delivered several demarches (see 
reftels) in recent months on WTO negotiations on 
agriculture, industrial market access and the financial 
services negotiations, as well as the TRIPS moratorium.  To 
date, it has been difficult to obtain clear enunciation of 
Honduran policy in these areas.   After Econcouns in January 
2003 emphasized the importance of Honduran support for the 
U.S. position on agriculture and the TRIPS moratorium with 
Trade Minister Norman Garcia, we were told that supportive 
instructions were being sent to Geneva, but no details have 
been available to date.  Garcia informed us he intends to 
rely on Melvyn Redondo, a former member of the Honduran 
mission to the WTO in Geneva and current chief negotiator 
for the Central American free trade talks (CAFTA), to 
develop WTO positions.  In a February 21 meeting, Redondo 
told Econcouns that he has not been following the issues 
lately but would do so after he gets back from the second 
CAFTA round in Cincinnati. 
 
3. (SBU) The FTAA negotiations have also been lost in the 
shuffle.  GOH trade ministry contacts indicated bafflement 
at being left out of El Salvador\'s market access offer for 
the region in February (El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua 
and Honduras generally participate jointly) and indeed were 
unaware that an offer had been made by the other three 
countries until receiving an inquiry from AUSTR Vargo - in 
fact, we aren\'t sure the GOH was even aware that FTAA offers 
were due.  Honduras\' market access negotiator in CAFTA\'s 
first round (where it was made clear by the U.S. side that 
FTAA offers were necessary to proceed in CAFTA) is from the 
Finance Ministry and perhaps did not pass the information 
along.  We understand that a stand-alone offer by Honduras 
was prepared hastily.  Redondo now plans to coordinate the 
GOH position for the FTAA as well. 
 
4. (SBU) In CAFTA, Redondo said the GOH\'s principal 
objective is to maintain the U.S. market access they already 
have.  He noted disappointment that the USG is seeking to 
start off market access negotiations from the MFN tariff 
level, but indicated understanding that this was an initial 
(and not final position).  Textiles is a vital sector of 
opportunity for the GOH.  Hondurans are hoping that the 
agreement will allow them to compete with Asia after 
elimination of quotas in 2005 by providing duty free 
treatment for textiles and apparel made of regional product. 
The GOH seeks to protect sensitive agricultural products 
(mentioning yellow corn, poultry and rice).  Honduran 
negotiators are looking for opportunities in the services 
negotiation; they expect pressure from the private sector to 
protect certain professional services.  Redondo emphasized 
that the GOH would like CAFTA to be Honduras\' principal 
forum for negotiation with the USG on services.  The GOH is 
putting strong emphasis on obtaining expedited sanitary- 
phytosanitary procedures that will allow additional 
agricultural export to the U.S. 
 
5. (SBU) In the trade capacity building arena, the GOH is 
asking if it is feasible to request help with creation of a 
mechanism to attract foreign investment.   Emboffs have 
drawn the trade officials\' attention to existing U.S. 
programs, such as the Trade Development Agency, the Overseas 
Private Investment Corporation and Eximbank, and USAID\'s 
programs in country.  In addition, we have discussed the 
positive effect of lower tariffs and other trade 
restrictions on generating interest by foreign investors. 
Finally, the Embassy at all levels continuously emphasizes 
the need for the GOH to improve the investment climate. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: The GOH is rightly putting its priority on 
the CAFTA negotiations.  Unfortunately, the extremely 
limited depth of the trade team makes it difficult for the 
USG at this time to address effectively our broader trade 
agendas.  We continue to work closely with the Ministry to 
improve its trade negotiating capacity (with a variety of 
USAID, USDA and PAS programs) and to emphasize the 
complementary nature of the negotiations in the WTO, FTAA 
and CAFTA.  Hopefully, as the GOH team gets more experience, 
USG requests for support in the WTO and FTAA will be met 
more promptly.   End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"6030","2/28/2003 17:53","03TEGUCIGALPA552","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000552 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DS/OP/WHA, DS/ICI/ITA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, CASC, PTER, HO 
SUBJECT: EAC TO REVIEW CURRENT SECURITY STATUS 
 
REF: A. 02 STATE 52222 (CME SCH FOR 4/03) 
 
     B. 02 TEGUC 02860 (EAC 9/10/02) 
     C. 02 TEGUC 02564 (EAC 10/10/02) 
     D. 02 TEGUC 03388 (EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS LIMDIS) 
     E. EAP SECTION 900 (CHEM-BIO) 
     F. SECSTATE 32644 
 
1.  At 10:00am on 02/19/03, a meeting of the EAC was convened 
by the Ambassador and chaired by the DCM. 
 
2.  The following sections/agencies were present during the 
EAC meeting: RSO, POL, JTF-B, USAID, PEACE CORPS, CONS, IPC, 
ADM, MSG, DEA, CLO, ECON, PAS, ORA and DAO. 
 
3.  The following issues were discussed by the EAC: 
- ARSO briefed EAC on current security situation in Honduras. 
 
- EAC reviewed status of security measures that are currently 
in place at Mission facilities and options available for 
emergency situations. 
 
- Concerns/implications for the schools attended by Mission 
children should the U.S. go to war with Iraq. 
-- RSO and Admin Officer will meet with school directors to 
discuss current security measures at each school. 
-- Security of busing American children was discussed. 
-- Unless, Department requests us to do so or front office 
deems it necessary, Mission employees (with the exception of 
DOD when policy dictates) will not be required to pull 
children from schools in the event of war.  Parents are 
encouraged to remove their children from schools anytime they 
feel the security of their children is at risk. 
-- CLO will send out a \"routine memo\" to schools of Mission 
children for the purpose of updating school student contact 
list. 
 
- RSO is planning a visit to the Alternate Command site for 
the EAC members on Friday, March 8th. 
 
- Monthly radio checks will be coordinated by RSO through 
IPC.  RSO and IPC will discuss current radio maintenance 
procedures and discuss alternative methods of radio 
maintenance. 
 
- RSO office will update the inventory of all Mission armored 
vehicles. 
 
- If war occurs, EAC will consider the use of home-to-office 
transportation through GSO. 
 
-  All Mission drills need to be reviewed and scheduled ASAP. 
-- Duck and cover, bomb threat drill, emergency destruction 
and fire drills need to be scheduled immediately. 
-- The RSO should review all drills and make suggestions of 
drills that need to be urgently performed. 
-- Check date for last ENS and Radio check drills. 
 
- Embassy currently has a satellite phone and two Iridium 
phones available for use in case of emergencies. 
 
- RSO staff is carefully tracking demonstrations against 
American interests, noting participants and motives. 
 
- Draw-down list should be reviewed and HR should review 
their preparedness for voluntary/ordered departures. 
 
- Town Hall meetings should be held on regular basis to 
include family members and FSNs,  Ambassador to consider 
town hall meetings for American communities. 
 
- Embassy community is reminded to review and familiarize 
itself with the Mission website including the Crime and 
Security Section. 
 
- Consular should consider some type of backup system for 
notifying the American community of emergency events, should 
primary system fail. 
 
- RSO/CLO are working on security awareness briefings for 
domestic employees. 
 
- RSO will review the Embassy access policy and suggest 
changes/improvements to Country Team. 
 
- Tripwires requiring immediate EAC action: 
   -- Significant Intel and surveillance reports. 
   -- American kidnappings and increased violence directed at 
      Amcits. 
   -- C-12 aircraft mishap 
   -- Delayed responses from Government Officials or local 
      Law Enforcement in wake of hostile environment. 
 
4.  Refs B and C detail EAC meetings, which addressed threat 
assessments and preparedness.  Ref D covers Security, 
Management and Consular issues in detail, as well as Chem-Bio 
Readiness and Post Communications including drills and 
off-site capability.  Ref E, the new Chem-Bio chapter, 
section 900 was completed and sent to DS on 12/13/02. 
 
5.  The Ambassador stressed that EAC members should fully 
review the EAP and be prepared for any contingency in the 
coming weeks given the possibility of U.S. action against 
Iraq.  He underscored that the security of the Embassy and 
its personnel is his top priority. 
Palmer 
"
"6033","2/28/2003 19:42","03TEGUCIGALPA555","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 
 
 
1. \"La Prensa\"2/22 San Pedro Sula-based liberal paper, 
carried a full-page story: \"Effects of a War against Iraq 
will be Less Dramatic for Honduras\": 
 
The Honduran Private Council for Business, the Tegucigalpa 
Industry Chamber of Commerce and the Forum for the 
Strengthening of Democracy hosted a conference with Giovanni 
Reyes, economist and Director of Development and Regional 
Cooperation for the Latin American System. He was invited to 
speak on \"Economic Capacity for Central America to prosper 
by liberalized trade during a possible war\". 
 
\"I don\'t think that the same economic problems will arise 
because of a war as occurred after September 11, because the 
circumstances are different.  And it will also benefit the 
regional economy, if, as estimated, the war is not drawn 
out, but rather as the U.S. intends, the conflict ends as 
soon as possible\". 
 
\"I do not discount that this conflict could have an impact 
on the commercial value of Central American products -- that 
is why farmers and governments should plan to export less 
bulk coffee and switch the industry to processed coffee 
because it offers added value. 
 
 
2. Also in daily \"La Prensa\"- 2/18, an op-ed by regular 
columnist Gloria Leticia Pineda:  \"War and Peace\": After 
receiving a lot of e-mails, my conclusion is that pacifists 
wouldn\'t be as fanatically opposed as they are now if a 
country other than the U.S. was the one calling for war- Why 
do they have such sympathy and consideration for Saddam 
Hussein?  There are sincere people that seek peace to avoid 
harm to people, but at the present, there are a lot of 
hypocrites pretending that they are neutral.  There are many 
people in America and Europe who are opposed for acceptable 
reasons, but there are also a lot of countries that envy the 
United States and would like to see it on its knees.  But 
what do Honduras and the world gain with a United States on 
its knees?  History has not taught us anything: there were 
no seriously coordinated efforts to stop Hitler and the 
world paid a high price in blood. 
 
\"The dream of peace is not an easy thing to achieve.  A 
Syrian runs the presidency of the United Nations Council. 
Libyan has a high position as the leader of the committee on 
\"Defense of Human Rights.\"  These nations do not view the 
U.S neutrally; both Syria and Libya are under suspicion of 
being terrorist countries.  Besides, Hussein is not an 
educated man such as Alejandro I (King), and the United 
States won\'t leave its military forces to die of illness as 
Napoleon did to his eighty thousands soldiers.  Already U.S. 
medical doctors have been sent to the war zone.  Only a 
miracle can stop this war. Pray for it. 
 
3. TV talk show \"Frente a Frente\" 2/25 - Renato Alvarez, 
director and anchor, at the beginning of an interview with 
Narcis Serra, a European socialist leader and a former 
Minister of Defense and the former Vice President of Spain 
during the administration of Felipe Gonzales, quoted 
Secretary of State Powell as saying made recently during his 
 
SIPDIS 
trip to Asia that with or without the United Nation\'s 
blessing, the U.S. will go to war against Iraq.  Serra 
commented: \"The Spanish government\'s recent decision to 
support the U.S. in an invasion of Iraq is only the 
government\'s position not that of the Spanish people.  They 
have held strikes, because they do not want a war. 
 
\"Without any doubt Saddam Hussein has to be disarmed - 
because we cannot allow a country that invaded Kuwait and 
prosecuted a bloody war with Iran resulting in thousands and 
thousands of victims.  This country must not have 
destructive and dangerous weapons, but during the Gulf War a 
great number of Iraq\'s military weapons were destroyed, and 
since then more weapons have been deactivated and destroyed. 
Why not continue with an inspection system that guarantees 
the international world that this problem is under control 
without declaring a war, because a war means thousands of 
civilian and military casualties, and it will provoke the 
feeling of humiliation that the Islam world feels toward the 
U.S.  Why not continue with a method that maintains this 
country under control without a war. 
 
4. Another \"Frente a Frente\" talk show invited Ambassador 
Rafael Leiva Vivas, Director of the Diplomatic Academy of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Dr. Jose Maria Leiva, a 
university professor of International Relations, to analyze 
and evaluate a possible U.S. and Iraqi conflict. 
 
After both commentators discussed historical issues of past 
wars and conflict, they discussed the possibility of war 
between the U.S. and Iraq based in many respects on articles 
provided by PAS to both the invitees and the journalist. 
Rafael Leiva Vivas commented that the U.S has the right of 
self-defense as it is established under the rules of the 
United Nations because they were attacked by terrorists. 
 
5. Many other TV and Radio stations also have used the 
Washington File as supporting documents when they have 
commented on the conflict or when they have invited experts 
to talk about the U.S. and its allies. 
Palmer 
"
"6035","2/28/2003 21:27","03TEGUCIGALPA558","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB, AND INR/B 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EAID, PREL, SOCI, PHUM, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES FUTURE OF AMHON EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR WITH HONDURAN MINISTER OF GOVERNMENT AND JUSTICE 
 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  Honduran Minister of Government and 
Justice, Dr. Jorge Ramon Hernandez Alcerro, hosted a lunch 
at his home for Ambassador Palmer on February 14.  Hernandez 
requested the meeting to discuss issues of bilateral 
importance but dominating the discussion was the effort 
underway to replace Guadalupe Lopez, Director of the 
Honduran Municipal Association (AMHON).  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Minister of Government and Justice, Dr. Jorge Ramon 
Hernandez Alcerro, hosted a lunch at his home for Ambassador 
Palmer on February 14.  Hernandez requested the meeting to 
discuss issues of bilateral importance.  Also attending the 
lunch were Vice Minister of Government and Justice, Cesar 
Gonzalez, Congressman Hugo Vasquez, and USAID Director. 
Dominating the discussion was the recent turmoil in the 
Honduran Municipal Association (AMHON) and the effort 
underway to replace its Executive Director, Guadalupe Lopez. 
 
3. (SBU) Over the past month, political pressure has been 
mounting from the Nationalist Party to remove Lopez, a 
former Liberal Party mayor, and replace him with an 
Executive Director that would be more amenable to the 
policies and programs being promoted by the Ministry of 
Government and Justice.  This has entailed active 
solicitation by Maduro administration officials to 
sympathetic AHMON board members to move forward with a 
replacement.  AMHON by-laws do provide for a mechanism to 
remove the Executive Director with a two-thirds majority 
vote of the Board of Directors (16 of the 24 the members). 
However this has never been done before. 
 
4. (U) The current AMHON board is configured as follows:  12 
board members are Nationalist Party (NP) mayors, 11 are 
Liberal Party (LP) mayors, and one is a Christian Democratic 
Party mayor.  The current president of the Board of 
Directors, Oscar Orlando Burgos (NP), Mayor of Yoro, is 
among the active partisan minority advocating the 
Nationalist party line to remove the Executive Director. 
The vice-president, Juan Carlos Elvir (LP), Mayor of Santa 
Rosa de Copan, is leading the opposition within the board, 
arguing for a competitive selection process to replace both 
the Executive and Deputy Director of AMHON. 
 
5. (U) Minister Hernandez noted that it was important for 
the Ambassador to understand the Ministry\'s version of the 
developments and made the point of reiterating the 
ministry\'s non-intervention in this or any AMHON issue.  The 
Minister did mention, however, that since last year several 
meetings have taken place with groups of mayors (most likely 
Nationalist Party mayors) who have stated their discontent 
with the Executive Director.  Specific mayoral complaints 
allegedly include fiscal irresponsibility, an accumulation 
of power and influence by the Executive Director, lack of 
transparency with the Board of Directors, and the supposed 
promotion of Mayor Elvir (LP) of Santa Rosa de Copan as the 
next AMHON president.  Congressman Vasquez mentioned that 
members of Congress have also participated in similar 
meetings with mayors.  He emphasized that they too were 
careful in respecting the independence of AMHON and were not 
involved in the particulars of recent decisions. 
 
6. (U) Although Minister Hernandez did not demonstrate an 
overt understanding of the procedures for selecting a new 
executive director, the Ambassador suggested that it would 
be important for the selection process to be an open and 
transparent competition.  The Mission Director noted that 
through USAID-funded technical assistance, 
PriceWaterhouseCoopers had already worked to develop terms 
of reference for the position and had already assisted AMHON 
in the contracting process for other positions.  The 
Ambassador added that it is common to undertake these hiring 
processes with the aide of a professional search firm. 
Minister Hernandez and other GOH representatives 
emphatically agreed that it would be important for this 
contracting process to be openly competed, to adhere to 
transparent procedures and technical criteria, and to 
include the participation of a professional search firm.  In 
relation to this, the Ambassador noted the importance of 
appearances, suggesting that it is not only important for 
one\'s conduct to be correct, but also to take care in 
appearing to conduct oneself correctly. 
 
7. (SBU) COMMENT: While Lopez has come under attack by 
Nationalist Party members, Post has found him to be a person 
of integrity representing the interests of all 
municipalities in AHMON.  If external political pressure is 
successful, the independence of AHMON will be threatened, 
potentially returning the organization to a de-facto 
extension of the central government, as it was pre-1992. 
The political independence of AHMON has been a goal of 
Post\'s support of decentralization efforts.  As such, USAID, 
in conjunction with the international donor community, has 
dedicated significant resources in an attempt to enable the 
organization to provide an alternative voice to the federal 
government at the municipal level.  Post also notes that 
Minister Hernandez\'s importance in the Maduro administration 
appears to be growing, as is his desire to exert more 
control over decentralization efforts.  END COMMENT. 
 
PALMER 
"
"6039","2/28/2003 22:19","03TEGUCIGALPA560","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SECSTATE43684","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000560 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IPC WILSON 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR ALVAREZ 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, COPYRIGHT FOR TEPP 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USPTO FOR URBAN 
GENEVA PASS USTR 
DOC FOR LASHLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, HO, KIPR 
SUBJECT: 2003 SPECIAL 301 REVIEW: HONDURAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 43684 
 
1. (U) Sensitive But Unclassified Post submission of the 2003 
Special 301 Review for Honduras follows. 
 
2. (SBU) Summary and Comment: Honduras is largely in compliance 
with the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS), but there have been no additional moves in the past year 
by Government of Honduras (GOH) to strengthen the protection of 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).  Embassy recommends that 
Honduras remain on the watch list. 
 
OPTICAL MEDIA PIRACY 
-------------------- 
2. (U) Although Honduras has yet to experience large-scale in- 
country optical pirating, it is believed that a significant 
amount of pirated goods is imported from neighboring countries 
and that the piracy of books, sound and video recordings, compact 
discs and computer software is still widespread.  Confiscation 
has been erratic and usually involves minor seizures of CDs. 
Success in controlling optical piracy rests on the GOH\'s ability 
to effectively implement current laws. 
 
USE/PROCUREMENT OF GOVERNMENT SOFTWARE 
-------------------------------------- 
3. (U) The GOH has made progress in its protection of the use and 
procurement of government software.  After a meeting in 2002 
between the new government and Econoff during which he reminded 
them of their responsibilities, Honduras\' IPR Division sent 
letters to all government agencies informing them that all 
government software use must comply with Honduran national law 
and international agreements.  Due to a lack of resources and 
personnel at the IPR division, oversight and enforcement has been 
nonexistent. 
 
TRIPS COMPLIANCE 
---------------- 
 
4. (U) Honduras largely has complied with the WTO Agreement on 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), 
through legal revisions enacted in December 1999.  The Honduran 
Congress still must, for instance, adopt reforms related to 
integrated circuit designs and plant variety protection to be in 
full compliance with TRIPS. Honduras and the U.S. initialed a 
Bilateral Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Agreement in March 
1999, but substantive issues arose during the language conformity 
process.  Embassy expects that the current U.S.-Central America 
free trade negotiations will provide a convenient forum for the 
USG to push for additional IPR commitments. 
 
5. (U) Honduras\' copyright law, updated in 1999, added more than 
20 different criminal offenses related to copyright infringement 
and established fines and suspension of services that can be 
levied against offenders.  U.S. companies are concerned that 
recent attempts to prosecute computer software infringement cases 
have been met with inadequate support by officials in the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade\'s IPR Division and the Attorney 
General\'s office. 
 
6. (U) Honduras ratified the Paris Convention for the Protection 
of Industrial Property in 1994.  The Honduran Congress enacted a 
1999 Law of Industrial Property to provide improved protection 
for both trademarks and patents.  To be protected under Honduran 
law, patents and trademarks must be registered with the Ministry 
of Industry and Trade. 
 
7. (U) Recent modifications to the Patent Law of 1993 include 
patent protection for pharmaceuticals, and extend the term of 
protection for a patent from seventeen to twenty years from the 
date of filing to meet WTO standards.  The term for cancellation 
of a trademark for lack of use has been extended from one year to 
three years.  Trademarks are valid for up to 10 years from the 
registration date.  The illegitimate registration of well-known 
trademarks has, in the past, been a persistent problem in 
Honduras. 
 
8. (U) The protection of data exclusivity by the GOH has been 
raised by the pharmaceutical and pesticide companies.  A U.S. 
pharmaceutical company has complained that the Ministry of 
Health, in approving a competing company\'s pharmaceutical 
product, did not respect their data exclusivity rights as 
guaranteed in article 77 of Honduras\' Industrial Property Law and 
article 39 of the WTO TRIP\'s agreement.  The Ministry of Health 
approved the competing pharmaceutical product, despite 
communication from Honduras\' IPR Division that the U.S. company\'s 
research and data were protected under Honduran law.  The U.S. 
company argues that in order for the competing product to be 
legally registered with the Ministry of Health, the company needs 
to provide the research and data to support their application. 
Honduran law provides five-year exclusive use of data provided in 
support of registering pharmaceutical products.  Further, a 
regional association of pesticide companies met with Econoffs on 
a number of occasions to express concern over the GOH\'s 5-year 
data exclusivity period which from their perspective is 
insufficient to justify product development and testing in 
Honduras. 
 
 
WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS ORGANIZATION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
9. (U) Honduras became a member of the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) in 1983.  Honduras has not yet 
ratified the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) or the WIPO Performances 
and Phonogram Treaty (WPPT).  The treaties were signed two years 
ago and are still awaiting ratification in the National Congress. 
 
IPR ENFORCEMENT 
--------------- 
 
10. (U) The 1999 Copyright Law specifies three different avenues 
in the prosecution of copyright infringement cases: 
administrative, civil and criminal.  After confiscating pirated 
goods, the GOH can file an administrative case that may result in 
a fine.  However, the law requires companies whose rights have 
been violated to file civil and criminal charges.  Few U.S. 
companies have asserted their right to file either a civil or 
criminal case, leaving the resource strapped prosecutor\'s office 
responsible for the lawsuits.  As a result, few cases are tried 
to the full extent of the law. 
 
11. (U) Enforcement of the law relies largely on periodic sweeps 
in the market and on investigations carried out after an 
accusation has been made.  The GOH Customs and Tax Authority 
(DEI) is responsible for impeding the flow of illegal goods into 
Honduras.  IPR officials commented that police and DEI officials 
lack the skills and resources to identify and control the flow of 
pirated products. 
 
Palmer 
"
"6112","3/4/2003 20:56","03TEGUCIGALPA583","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE6760|03TEGUCIGALPA116","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS, SENV, ETRD, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH PROPOSAL FOR SHRIMP RECERTIFICATION 
 
REF: (A) SECSTATE 06760 (B) TEGUCIGALPA 116 (C) SECSTATE 
54094 
 
1. (U) Summary and Action Request.  On February 19, 2003, 
the Honduran Ministry of Agriculture, along with the 
Department of Fisheries, sent the Embassy their proposal for 
improvement of enforcement of turtle excluder device (TED) 
regulations (ref a) following the January 2003 decision to 
decertify Honduras, effectively banning the exportation of 
wild Honduran shrimp to the U.S.  Immediate tasks the GOH 
plans to undertake include sanctioning vessels found in 
violation of TEDs requirements, reactivation of an agreement 
between private, military and government agencies to finance 
patrolling and auditing of vessels, canceling fishing 
licenses of boats found in violation of fishing regulations, 
inspecting all fishing vessels in port during the off-season 
prior to issuance of new licenses, and creation of new 
fishing laws to give the GOH better legal grounds for 
prosecution of boat owners found in violation.  The Minister 
has requested assistance from the US for training of 
officials and fishermen. Department is requested to provide 
guidance for a response to this training request.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) EconOff notified GOH officials in January 2003 of the 
failed TEDs inspection and subsequent pending de- 
certification from exportation of Honduran commercially 
harvested shrimp to the U.S. as a result of their failure to 
comply with TEDs requirements (ref b).  In response to the 
demarche and inspection report (ref a), the Ministry of 
Agriculture, along with its Department of Fisheries, have 
come up with a plan for improving fishing regulations and 
compliance with TEDs requirements.  In order to avoid 
evasion of the country\'s fisheries regulations, especially 
that part dealing with TEDs devices, the GOH plans on taking 
the following steps: 
 
     - The GOH is sanctioning and fining the ships that were 
found in violation of TEDs with the nets sewn closed in the 
amount of L 50,000.00 lempiras (approximately USD 2,900) 
each for the vessels Wendy Weather, Admiral, and Carnival V. 
 
     - Reactivation of the agreement between the Department 
of Fisheries (Digepesca), the National Merchant Marines, the 
Honduran Naval Forces, and the Caribbean Association of 
Fisheries in order to finance patrols, fishing controls and 
auditing of fishing vessels, both aboard the fishing ships 
and at the processing plants at the time of off-loading of 
their catch. 
 
     - Canceling the fishing licenses of the shrimp boats 
that fail to correctly install and/or utilize TEDs devices. 
 
     - Complete inspections of all shrimp fishing vessels 
that will be in port during the off season from February 1, 
2003 to July 16, 2003, in order to ensure that all boats 
have the required TEDs devices installed prior to issuance 
of a fishing license. 
 
     - Continue to convene periodic meetings between GOH 
officials and representatives of the fishing industry 
(APESCA) to establish a guide for better control and 
performance of fishing activities. 
 
     - Immediate application of Ministerial Agreements for 
regulation of acts which infringe on the National Fishing 
Law, its regulations and annexes. 
 
     - Drafting and adoption of a new Fishing Law and 
regulations in order to have a legal instrument that will 
permit the GOH to severely sanction shrimp or other fishing 
boat owners who are in violation of the law. 
 
     - Request assistance from the U.S. Fisheries Service 
(through the State Department OES Bureau) for the training 
of Honduran inspectors and fishermen in the installation, 
manufacturing and maintenance of TEDs devices. 
 
3. (U) Note: EmbOff was approached on a 2/27 trip to Roatan 
by several shrimp fishermen asking what the GOH was doing to 
rectify Honduras\' failure of the TEDs inspection and 
subsequent exclusion of importation of captured shrimp. 
Both GOH officials and fishermen are aware of the potential 
economic impact of the failed inspection and express a 
desire to rectify the situation as expeditiously as 
possible.  End note. 
 
PALMER 
"
"6162","3/6/2003 14:49","03TEGUCIGALPA606","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000606 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: PBTS, ETRD, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MADURO ANNOUNCES RETALIATORY TARIFFS AGAINST 
NICARAGUA 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  On March 3, President Maduro announced a 
number of retaliatory countermeasures against Nicaragua 
including a 35 percent tariff on goods and increased fees 
for the use of Puerto Cortez and national highways.  The 
retaliatory action by the GOH is the latest chapter in the 
long-running dispute between Honduras and Nicaragua over 
their maritime boundary.  The GOH hopes that this action 
will force the GON to repeal the 35 percent tariff they 
imposed in 1999 in response to the ratification of a 
maritime treaty between Colombia and Honduras recognizing 
the 15th parallel as the maritime boundary.  The 
announcement of the countermeasures has allowed Maduro to 
look proactive, boost his popularity ratings and has 
provided the GOH the leverage against Nicaragua.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) On March 3, President Ricardo Maduro announced that 
he was sending to the Congress a decree to apply retaliatory 
countermeasures against Nicaragua in response to the GON\'s 
failure to repeal the 35 percent tariff that was imposed in 
1999.  The retaliatory countermeasures include a matching 35 
percent tariff on all Nicaraguan goods and increased fees 
for the use of Puerto Cortez and national highways.  In the 
announcement, Maduro stated that the Nicaraguan tariff had 
severely damaged the Honduran economy and called on the GON 
to abandon its anti-integrationist position. Further, he 
noted that the measure Nicaraguan President Bolanos had 
proposed to send to the Nicaraguan National Assembly to 
temporarily repeal the tariff was unsatisfactory.  If the 
tariffs are imposed, Honduras believes they would deal a 
serious blow to the Nicaraguan economy, especially the 
coffee industry, since almost 100 percent of Nicaraguan 
exports pass through Puerto Cortez. 
 
3. (U) The GOH\'s announcement of the imposition of 
retaliatory tariffs against Nicaragua is the latest chapter 
in their long-running dispute over their maritime boundary. 
The dispute began when Honduras ratified a maritime treaty 
with Colombia in 1999, recognizing the 15th parallel as the 
maritime boundary.  That same year, Nicaragua retaliated by 
filing an ICJ case and more importantly, imposing a 35 
percent tariff on Honduran goods and services.  The 
Nicaraguan tariff has remained in place despite a Central 
American Court of Justice ruling that it is illegal. 
 
4. (U) With former Nicaraguan President Arnoldo Aleman 
deposed as President of the National Assembly, the GOH had 
expressed optimism in the last few months that Bolanos would 
make good on private assurances to lift the tariff and 
thereby take an important step toward regional economic 
integration.  The ongoing U.S.-Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (U.S.-CAFTA) negotiations and the recent ICJ 
ruling in favor of the GOH\'s petition against the tariff 
were viewed as additional incentives. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment:  After three years of restraint, the GOH 
finally reached the point where they felt the leverage 
provided by Honduran countermeasures was the only way to 
ensure repeal of the Nicaraguan sanctions.  The Honduran 
Congress was prepared to consider a retaliatory tariff bill 
in January, but postponed the action after public assurances 
from Bolanos.  However, after intense pressure from the 
Honduran business community in the last two weeks, Maduro 
promised to take action after a ten-day waiting period.  By 
taking the initiative, Maduro was able to look proactive, 
possibly boost his sagging popularity and deflect attention 
from the recently introduced tax package.  Further, the 
announcement of the retaliatory measures solidified his 
support in the business community. 
 
6. (SBU) There still remains a possibility that the GON will 
repeal the 35 percent tariff in the next week to avoid both 
the countermeasures and regional squabbling during the U.S.- 
CAFTA negotiations.  We understand that there have been 
discussions between the countries Congressional Vice 
Presidents in an attempt to resolve the issue before 
countermeasures are enacted.  If the sanctions are adopted, 
vested interests may develop, making repeal both politically 
and economically difficult.  The Honduran press is already 
quoting figures on badly needed government revenue that will 
accrue from the countermeasures.  It remains to be seen 
whether the Honduran proposal will only add fuel to an 
already volatile situation or act as the final catalyst to 
successfully repeal the Nicaraguan tariff. 
 
Palmer 
"
"6176","3/6/2003 22:51","03TEGUCIGALPA611","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, INL/C/CP, AND INL/LP 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, PHUM, PGOV, EAID, KCRM, SNAR, PREL, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE: A SUCCESSFUL 
FIRST YEAR, BUT CHALLENGES REMAIN 
 
REF: 02 Tegucigalpa 3349 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  A year after the implementation of 
Honduras\' new Criminal Procedure Code (CPC), opinions 
regarding its level of success are positive overall, but 
critics remain.  Supporters cite the commencement of oral 
trials under the new system in 2002 as evidence of the 
Code\'s success.  Critics, however, contend that the changes 
have not done enough to eliminate corruption in the judicial 
system and that the new Code is already in need of reform. 
The current independent Supreme Court, which represents 
another separate milestone in Honduran judicial reform, has 
strongly embraced the Code.  Post is optimistic about the 
potential long-term benefits of the new Criminal Procedure 
Code.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Until February 2002, the Honduran justice system 
operated under a criminal procedure code that was still 
based in part upon Spanish colonial law.  It did not provide 
for oral trials; cases were resolved based on written 
submissions.  The system was slow, subject to corruption, 
and not transparent.  In the mid-1990\'s, the United States 
first began supporting efforts to create a new CPC.  Since 
1997, the U.S. has contributed approximately USD 12.5 
million for judicial reform in Honduras, with a particular 
focus on the CPC.  On December 30, 1999, due in large part 
to U.S. policy initiatives, the Honduran Congress approved a 
new Criminal Procedure Code.  The new code came into full 
effect on February 20, 2002.  It introduced wholesale change 
into the criminal justice system, including oral trials, an 
adversarial trial process, increased protections for 
defendants, and overall changes intended to facilitate the 
growth of a more transparent and effective system.  The CPC 
also introduced a strong prosecutorial function similar to 
that of the United States, whereby the prosecutor has 
significant discretion in terms of moving a case forward. 
 
3. (U) According to the Honduran Interinstitutional Criminal 
Justice Commission (CIJP), since the implementation of the 
new Code, there have been 3,341 preliminary hearings, 3,989 
initial hearings, and 1,184 pleadings.  The majority of 
trials have involved prosecution of crimes such as homicide, 
rape, drug possession, and drug trafficking.  Of the limited 
cases processed thus far, approximately 6.6 percent have 
resulted in convictions and 9.4 percent have resulted in 
acquittals. Thirty-eight percent of cases have been resolved 
through plea bargaining and 45 percent were dismissed due to 
lack of evidence or technical reasons.  In cases of drug 
trafficking and financial fraud, there is a much higher 
conviction rate (52 percent), with 28 percent of cases 
resulting in acquittal and just 20 percent dismissed. 
Resolved cases have been processed with far greater 
efficiency under the CPC, in contrast to the former system 
in which cases languished for years. 
 
4. (U) Despite these advances, there are many challenges 
that the judicial system has yet to overcome.  Foremost 
among these, according to the CIJP, is the attitude of 
judicial officials.  While the Code calls for impartial 
public judgment, the often secretive attitude of the older, 
written system sometimes prevails.  Second, effective 
investigation of crimes is an ongoing problem.  Poor 
coordination with police on investigations means few cases 
requiring significant investigation are ever brought to 
court.  As listed above, 45 percent of all cases since the 
inception of the CPC have been dismissed (not all because of 
poor investigations, but many have been).  Most prosecutions 
are based on cases in which the accused is caught in the act 
or which are resolved within 24 hours of the crime.  Lack of 
sufficient forensic medicine resources or lack of discretion 
in using those resources, including a morgue that is still 
housed in a tiny post-Hurricane Mitch \"temporary\" facility, 
also contribute to a continually low case closure rate.  A 
third challenge facing the new Code lies in the opposition 
to some of its policies, particularly those that allow the 
release of suspects before trial.  Advocates for the 
revision of the new Code, including the Minister of Public 
Security and other law enforcement officials, appear to be 
gaining momentum. 
 
5. (U) The Supreme Court also faces challenges in the 
Congress and in the media.  Perhaps due to its increased 
status and greater independence, the Supreme Court came 
under attack this year from the Congress.  In August 2002, 
in an apparent attempt to undermine the power of the 
judiciary, the Congress approved a constitutional amendment 
appropriating to itself the power to interpret the 
Constitution.  A legal challenge to this move is pending 
with the Supreme Court (reftel) and the amendment must still 
be ratified before it becomes law.  As the judiciary 
increases in strength and independence, similar attacks from 
the legislative and executive powers should be expected.  In 
another highly publicized controversy, Vilma Morales, 
President of the Supreme Court and a Nationalist Party 
nominee, has been criticized for supposedly partisan 
dismissal of Liberal judges. 
 
6. (SBU) COMMENT:  Post foresees many challenges ahead for 
the CPC.  It is clear that there must be constant vigilance 
against corruption if the justice system is to effectively 
utilize the new CPC to the benefit of the population. 
Public confidence in the system is also vital if the CPC is 
to be a success.  Both the controversy over the partisan 
dismissal of judges and legislative challenges to judicial 
power, combined with reports of pervasive corruption, will 
continue to undermine public confidence in the judicial 
system and, by proxy, the new Code.  However, Post is 
pleased with the progress the courts have made in 
implementing the CPC thus far.  The Ambassador and all 
elements of the mission have strong relations with the 
Supreme Court and other judicial system actors.  USAID 
support for the CPC is ongoing, despite limited funds. 
Because Honduras is a high-crime country, Post believes that 
a more efficient criminal justice system that provides for 
fair process is critical to efforts to increase citizen 
security.  If the CPC is successful in improving public 
perceptions of justice and law enforcement, the CPC may also 
play a role in the reduction of the high rate of 
extrajudicial killings in Honduras.  Moreover, since the 
current security situation dissuades investors, a more 
secure environment will lower the risk to investors and may 
ultimately help to attract much-needed foreign capital.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
PALMER 
"
"6207","3/7/2003 21:25","03TEGUCIGALPA619","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA3206","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CCA,WHA/CEN, 
INR, S/CT, AND DS/ICI/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETTC, PINR, ASEC, EAID, HO, CU 
SUBJECT: GOH OPEN TO CUBA RESOLUTION IN GENEVA; REITERATES 
CONCERN ABOUT CUBAN MEDDLING IN INTERNAL HONDURAN POLITICS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 03206 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B), and (D). 
 
1. (C)SUMMARY: WHA Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan Fisk 
discussed Cuba in meetings with President Maduro, Foreign 
Minister Perez-Cadalso and Minister of Defense Fred Breve 
during his February 6-7 visit to Honduras.  Foreign Minister 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso indicated that Honduras might be 
willing to vote for/co-sponsor a Cuba human rights resolution 
at the UN Commission on Human Rights, further noting that 
Honduras may obtain a seat on the commission.  Defense 
Minister Frederico Breve in another meeting once again raised 
concerns about Cuban meddling in internal Honduran politics. 
In the meeting with President Maduro, Fisk noted that 
President Maduro had raised concerns about Cuban meddling in 
Honduran affairs with former WHA A/S Reich in mid-2002.  Fisk 
also  reiterated the United States\' disappointment with the 
way the restoration of full diplomatic relations between 
Honduras and Cuba had been handled in the last days of the 
previous Flores government.  While the U.S. preference would 
be to have President Maduro reconsider the status of GOH-Cuba 
relations, Fisk asked that, should Honduras name an 
Ambassador to Havana, at a minimum it should appoint a 
forceful advocate for human rights and civil society.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
2. (C) The issue of Cuba was raised in DAS Fisk\'s February 
6-7 meetings  with President Maduro, Foreign Minister 
Perez-Cadalso, and Minister of Defense Fred Breve. In his 
meeting with the Foreign Minister, Fisk  noted that the U.S. 
remained  disappointed in the Honduran decision to normalize 
fully relations with Cuba and stated that the U.S. preference 
would be to have the decision reconsidered, appreciating the 
difficulty of such a move.  He also noted, from his 
discussions with the GOH Ambassador to the U.S., that 
Washington was aware that there was some continuing 
discussion within the GOH  over the naming of a Honduran 
ambassador to Cuba.  Fisk encouraged the GOH not to move 
ahead at this time, adding  that if the GOH felt compelled to 
do so, the U.S. hoped it would appoint a strong advocate for 
human rights and civil society  as the first Honduran 
ambassador to Cuba.  Fisk  emphasized the U.S. assessment 
that there has been no noticeable improvement in the human 
rights situation in Cuba and urged the GOH to engage Cuba on 
this issue, especially since President Maduro had raised it 
directly with then-A/S Reich last year. 
 
3. (C) Fisk reiterated these same points in his meeting with 
President Maduro as well and added that the U.S. would 
appreciate being given some forewarning if the GOH decided to 
move forward with naming an ambassador to Cuba.  Maduro once 
again claimed to have been completely uninformed of the 
decision by the outgoing government to normalize relations 
with Cuba.  He added a new wrinkle this time, telling Fisk 
that he had opposed the decision and had so communicated that 
view to the outgoing Honduran government. 
 
4. (C) DAS Fisk asked FM Perez-Cadalso for Honduras\' support 
on the annual Cuba human rights resolution at the UN 
Commission on Human Rights.  Perez-Cadalso replied that 
Honduras shared U.S. concerns about the human rights 
situation in Cuba and would be inclined to co-sponsor a 
resolution again this year.  More significantly, 
Perez-Cadalso informed Fisk that Honduras was working to 
obtain GRULAC support for one of the Latin American seats on 
the UNCHR.  While Perez-Cadalso did not offer an 
unconditional Honduran vote in favor of a Cuba CHR 
resolution,  he reaffirmed strongly that insistence on 
greater respect for human rights in Cuba was a fundamental 
tenet of Honduran foreign policy toward the island.  He added 
that given this context, the GOH would likely co-sponsor a 
resolution this year and would consider voting for a 
resolution as well. 
 
5. (C) Fisk mentioned that President Maduro\'s call to then 
WHA Assistant Secretary Otto Reich about Cuban meddling in 
internal affairs was not the only concern we had heard in the 
region about Cuban interference in internal affairs. He added 
that in his meeting earlier in the day MOD Breve had also 
raised the issue.  (In addition, President Maduro also 
touched on this problem in his meeting with DAS Fisk the next 
day.)   Fisk advised the FM that if Cuba meddles in Honduras, 
the GOH could send a strong message back by appointing an 
ambassador who would engage on democracy and human rights 
issues there.  He told the FM that the GOH would need a tough 
person in Havana to deal with the Cubans, someone who could 
send a message.  The FM accepted this point.  However, he 
noted that with more than 600 Hondurans now studying medicine 
in Cuba, it was very important to have a Honduran diplomatic 
presence there. 
 
6. (C) During his meeting with DAS Fisk, MOD Breve asked 
about the resurgence of leftist group activities throughout 
Latin American and opined that he felt there was an evident 
effort to coordinate activities, themes, and tactics across 
the region, particularly in Central America.  Breve said the 
GOH was concerned about the sources of funding for some labor 
unions and NGOs in Honduras and noted that there appeared to 
be a link to Cuban intelligence.  Fisk expressed agreement 
that this resurgence was worrisome and commented that Cuba 
was neither the sole source of support nor the threat it had 
once been.  He also cautioned Breve that in democratic 
societies political opposition exists and that civil dissent 
was a legitimate form of political expression.  Fisk conceded 
the need to be wary of efforts to manipulate that opposition, 
but pointed out that recognizing Cuba had not helped Honduras. 
 
7. (C) Breve then bemoaned the Liberal Party ties to Cuba and 
charged that the two sides were working together to promote 
the leftist agenda in Honduras.  He also opined that it was 
now obvious that the Liberals had normalized relations with 
Cuba in order to obtain resources to fund their political 
opposition to the Nationalist government. 
 
8. (C) COMMENT:  Given FM Perez-Cadalso\'s comments, we 
believe that Honduras could be a possible co-sponsor of a 
Cuba resolution.  Maduro\'s and Breve\'s comments on Cuban 
meddling follow a consistent pattern of concern that we are 
hearing.  However, as with so much in Honduras, there seems 
to be little or no effort to take action against the Cubans 
or to actually substantiate the alleged connections. 
Interestingly, FM Perez-Cadalso is the first GOH official 
(and we would have thought least likely on the national 
security team) to suggest a willingness to take action by 
reviewing the status of Cuban doctors in Honduras.  He added 
that he would try to remove them if they were involved in 
inappropriate political activities.  (There was a noticeable 
physical reaction against this comment by Vice Foreign 
Minister Anibal Quinonez, a career foreign service officer, 
who was in the meeting.)  Finally, Maduro\'s comment that he 
opposed normalization of relations with Cuba prior to the 
previous government\'s decision should be added to the annals 
of revisionist history.  At best, his transition advisors 
preserved his plausible deniability; at worst he acquiesced 
in the decision. 
Palmer 
"
"6208","3/7/2003 22:18","03TEGUCIGALPA622","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA606","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, EB, AND OES 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCD/IOI/WH/RD/DLUTTER 
USDOC FOR 4320/IEF/WH/OMCB 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/EJAFFEE 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON AND AGAH FCOOLIDGE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, ENRG, EAGR, EINV, ELAB, PGOV, SENV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ECON HIGHLIGHTS: FEBRUARY 2003 
 
REFS: A) TEGUCIGALPA 00606 
 
TOPICS: 
 
-IMF Criteria 
-Coffee Production Declines 
-Minimum Wage Negotiation Ends in Impasse 
-Records Fuel Prices Induce GOH to Reduce Fuel Taxes 
-Looming Retaliatory Tariffs on Nicaraguan Products 
-Papaya Exports to the United States 
-Cocoa Harvest to Decline by 70 percent 
-Impact of Illegal Logging on National Economy and Poverty 
 
IMF Criteria 
------------ 
 
1.    As  part of the GOH efforts to reach an agreement with  the 
IMF, an executive decree was issued by President Maduro to reduce 
public  expenditure in salaries to the equivalent of 10.1 percent 
of  the  GDP.   The  measures  include:  freezing  public  sector 
employee  wages for all of 2003, excluding teachers and employees 
covered by collective bargaining agreements; cancellation  of  60 
percent of positions vacant at the end of 2002; freezing of up to 
50  percent of vacant positions as they occur this year; reducing 
representation  expenditures  by  85  percent;  reducing   travel 
expenditures  by  85 percent; limitations on cellular  phone  and 
vehicle  privileges;  and  centralized management  of  government 
procurement. 
 
Coffee Production Declines 
-------------------------- 
 
2.   The Honduran Association of Coffee Producers has estimated a 
loss of 40 percent of the coffee harvest for the 2002-2003 season 
from 4.2 million sacks in 2001-2002 to 2.1 million sacks in 2002- 
2003.  The association has attributed the decline in production 
to cold weather that impacted the coffee zones.  The association 
has also attributed the decline to torrential rains that 
destroyed roads, which prevented workers from maintaining coffee 
groves and transporting the harvest to the market.  Coffee 
producers are also being hurt by continually low international 
coffee prices.  The president of the Honduran Institute of Coffee 
requested financing from the GOH to aid growers in their recovery 
from losses.  There is pessimism that the government will have 
the financing to aid growers and international institutions are 
being asked for assistance. 
 
Minimum Wage Negotiation Ends in Standstill 
------------------------------------------- 
 
3.   After bilateral negotiations between labor confederations 
and businesses ended without an agreement, the GOH announced 
plans to intervene in establishing the minimum wage for 2003. 
Labor unions were asking for an increase of 25 percent to the 
base minimum wage while businesses made a counter proposal of 5 
percent.  A proposed minimum wage will be presented to the 
president, which will likely be approved by him by the end of 
March.  Minister of Labor German Leitzelar has stated that to 
make a fair decision on the issue, the government will consult 
with the Central Bank and other ministries.  Leitzelar said he 
believes that the government\'s decision will be criticized by 
labor unions and businesses, but will benefit the nation as a 
whole.  LabAtt spoke to Leitzelar\'s assistant March 7, who 
confirmed press reports, but said that the timing of the final 
decision was up to the President. 
 
Record Fuel Prices Induce GOH to Reduce Fuel Taxes 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
4.   In February, Honduran fuel prices increased to record levels 
for the following grades of fuel per gallon; Super 48.82 
lempiras, Regular 47.21 lempiras, Diesel 38.02 lempiras, Kerosene 
33.22 lempiras.  On February 27, the GOH adjusted the calculation 
of ad valorem fuel taxes so that the base price used in the 
calculations will be capped at USD 30 per barrel.  The change 
will mitigate the volatility in tax revenues and temper the 
effects of future increases in the world price of oil.  With the 
approval of the decree, fuel prices were lowered by the following 
amount; Super 3 lempiras, Regular 1.81 lempiras, Diesel 12.05 
lempiras, Gas LPG 2.63 lempiras, and Kerosene 1.39 lempiras. The 
GOH previously expected to earn 5 billion lempiras from fuel 
taxes in 2003 and expects to lose 1 billion of this with the 
approval of the decree. 
 
Looming Retaliatory Tariffs on Nicaraguan Products 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
5.   Honduran hopes were dashed when Nicaraguan legislators 
apparently balked at the proposed rescinding of Nicaragua\'s 35 
percent tariff sent to the National Assembly on February 11 by 
President Enrique Bolaos.  The Nicaraguan National Assembly 
implemented the tariff called the \"Patriotic Tax\" in December of 
1999, after Honduras ratified a treaty with Colombia recognizing 
a Nicaraguan-Colombian maritime dispute as a Colombian 
possession.  The Honduran Association of Industries (ANDI) has 
estimated that the tariff has affected 55 business industries at 
a cost of USD 210 million.  In 1999, when the tariff was 
implemented Honduran exports to Nicaragua totaled USD 74 million, 
by 2001 they had decreased to USD 23 million and are continuing 
to decline. President Maduro announced, on March 3, that he would 
introduce legislation to the National Congress that imposes 
retaliatory tariffs of 35 percent on Nicaraguan goods, and 
possibly on Nicaragua\'s use of Puerto Corts to distribute its 
products (full report in Ref A). 
 
Papaya Exports to the United States 
----------------------------------- 
 
6.   For the first time, Honduras will export 600,000 tons of 
f 
papaya to the United States.  To produce better quality the seed 
of the papaya has been genetically modified by the Agricultural 
Institute of Science and Technology.  There are currently 28 
orchards and in March papaya growers expect a harvest of 30,000 
tons per hectare.  By the end of June 2003 they hope to have 
increased production to 100 orchards.  The papaya export is being 
facilitated by a USAID assisted hot water treatment project (to 
rid the papayas of medfly infestation). 
 
Cocoa Harvest to Decline by 70 percent 
-------------------------------------- 
 
7.   This year\'s cocoa harvest is expected to decline by 70 
percent due to the Monilia plague that has destroyed most of this 
year\'s crop.  The decline will affect 30,000 people who depend on 
cocoa production and cost the economy a loss of 50 million 
lempiras (USD 2.9 million).  The industry is looking for 
government and international aid to obtain better fertilizers, 
fungicides, and develop new varieties that are resistant to 
diseases. 
 
Impact of Illegal Logging on National Economy and Poverty 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
8.   A World Bank study, which investigated illegal logging in 
Honduras and Nicaragua, addressed the impact it has on the 
national economy and poverty.  The investigation concluded that 
the governments of Honduras and Nicaragua lose USD 300 million to 
USD 1 billion annually from illegal logging in national, private, 
and public forest. These losses include profits not received by 
the governments for the sale of the wood and tax revenue not 
received.  Other economic losses that are not quantified are 
lower per capita income for the workers and lower levels of 
literacy and life expectancy.  The study determined that in 
Honduras 70 to 80 percent of the annual cutting of hardwood and 
30 to 50 percent of the pine harvesting is illegal.  It was 
estimated that annually USD 50 to USD 70 million, is earned from 
illegal logging in Honduras, which has flourished due to the 
reluctance of local officials to enforce logging laws. 
 
9.   The study stated that companies who illegally log obtain the 
cooperation of local officials through bribery.  To resolve this 
problem, several laws have been proposed that will make 
corruption less prevalent and use locals in detecting and 
reporting illegal logging activity.  Recent efforts by Honduran 
authorities to stop illegal logging have been met with 
resistance.  On February 25, when authorities attempted to stop 
illegal logging in Nahuaterique a town next to the El Salvadorian 
border, 7 police and 4 military officials were held by close to 
400 local residents.  This incident shows the difficulties the 
GOH faces in stopping illegal logging because it is sometimes the 
only source of income in the region. 
 
PALMER 
"
"6209","3/7/2003 23:40","03TEGUCIGALPA625","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000625 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/07/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: THREAT TO CARDINAL RODRIGUEZ 
 
 
Classified By: Francisco L. Palmieri, Reason 1.5 (d). 
 
1.  At an event hosted by the Papal Nuncio, Cardinal Oscar 
Rodriguez privately told the Ambassador that he had received 
a recent death threat that he was taking very seriously. 
Apparently, the gatekeeper at Cardinal Rodriguez\'s office had 
been kidnapped while running an errand recently.   The 
gatekeeper was blindfolded and driven around by a group of 
individuals who were wearing army fatigues and had grenades 
on their belts.  The group kept the gatekeeper blindfolded as 
it drove him to a remote area.  Throughout the long drive, 
the members were talking about how unhappy they were with the 
Cardinal and his support for Maduro government policies. 
They openly discussed their plans to destabilize the 
government before finally making it clear that they were 
going to kill the Cardinal.  The group allegedly offered to 
pay the gatekeeper 7 million lempiras to set up the Cardinal. 
 They claimed to have conducted surveillance of the Cardinal 
and to know his routines.  Eventually, the group allowed the 
gatekeeper to escape after reaching a remote area by putting 
down their weapons and leaving him unguarded. 
 
2.  The Cardinal said he felt that this threat was the most 
serious he had received.  He believed it was linked to either 
his statements about the fugitive bankers or to a 
long-standing conflict he has had with Jaime Rosenthal, a 
Liberal Party leader and business oligarch from San Pedro 
Sula.  The Cardinal made it clear that he was not afraid but 
that the kidnapping represented an escalation that he had not 
experienced before.  Previously he has received written and 
telephonic threats.  The Ambassador encouraged him to bring 
this information to Minister of Security and offered Embassy 
assistance in evaluating the threat.  The Cardinal said he 
would contact the Minister and expressed appreciation for the 
Ambassador\'s offer. 
 
3.  Comment: We will keep our ears close to the ground to see 
if we can pick up any other information related to the 
Cardinal\'s security.  The Cardinal, while taking this threat 
seriously, made it clear he did not plan to curtail any of 
his efforts to root out corruption or to call attention to 
the shortcomings in Honduran society. We have no way of 
assessing the gatekeeper\'s credibilty. 
Palmer 
"
"6237","3/10/2003 13:37","03TEGUCIGALPA626","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000626 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA DAS FISK, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE FOR PM, INL, EB, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL, OVIP, PGOV, SNAR, ETRD, ECON, MOPS, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: TRANSFORMING CENTRAL AMERICA,S SECURITY PARADIGM: 
NEW MISSIONS, MORE APPROPRIATE WEAPONS, BUT LINGERING 
DOUBTS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer, Reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  President Maduro reiterated his personal 
commitment to regional disarmament and expressed his 
willingness to move forward on this issue. He also asked for 
U.S. support, mentioning directly the possible need for a 
multilateral security guarantee and asked whether the U.S. 
could provide transition assistance for demobilized soldiers. 
Western Hemisphere Affairs (WHA) Deputy Assistant Secretary 
(DAS) Dan Fisk informed Maduro that the U.S. does not see 
threats to any Central American country coming from their 
regional neighbors.  Fisk commented that he had delivered 
similar messages in San Salvador and Managua over the last 
month and said that the U.S. wanted to understand how 
Honduras was restructuring to meet the new threats to 
national and international security.  He encouraged Maduro to 
take bold steps to rationalize the region\'s military forces. 
Fisk stressed that better regional security relationships 
would help Central American countries realize the full 
benefits of a Central American integration, including a 
Central American Free Trade agreement with the United States. 
 END SUMMARY 
 
---------------------------------- 
U.S. Interest In Regional Security 
---------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) During WHA DAS Dan Fisk\'s February 5-8 visit he 
discussed Central American disarmament efforts, regional 
military arrangements, and ongoing border disputes with 
President Ricardo Maduro, Minister of Defense Frederico 
\"Fred\" Breve, and Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso 
Arias.  DAS Fisk conveyed the U.S. view that  Honduras had 
nothing to fear from its two neighbors, El Salvador and 
Nicaragua.  He added further that the U.S. does not see 
threats to any Central American country coming from their 
regional neighbors, commenting  that he had delivered similar 
messages in San Salvador and Managua over the last month.  He 
said the U.S. welcomed the Honduran perspective on regional 
security issues and was interested in understanding how 
Honduras is  restructuring its military to meet the new 
threats to national and international security.  He 
encouraged President Maduro to take bold steps to rationalize 
Honduras\' military and to pursue similar initiatives 
regarding a new regional security framework.  He 
underscored to the Hondurans that better regional security 
relationships would help the region realize the full benefits 
of  Central American integration, including a U.S-Central 
America Free Trade agreement. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Maduro Still Willing To Pursue Disarmament 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3. (C) President Maduro reiterated his personal commitment to 
regional disarmament during his February 7 meeting with WHA 
DAS Fisk.  He told Fisk that he wants to reduce the amount of 
money spent on weapons in Honduras.  Maduro emphasized that 
he is willing to move forward on this issue and that his 
government has a proposal to do so. (COMMENT: We are not 
aware of, and doubt there is, any concrete proposal prepared 
by the Government of Honduras (GOH) at this time. END 
COMMENT.)   Noting that the militaries in El Salvador and 
Honduras were more subordinate to civilian authority than 
were those in Guatemala and Nicaragua, he commented that his 
fellow Central American presidents have favorably received 
his suggestions on this topic.  However, Maduro asked for 
U.S. support, mentioning directly the possible need for a 
multilateral security guarantee and whether the U.S. could 
provide economic assistance for demobilized soldiers to be 
integrated into local economies. 
 
4. (S) DAS Fisk said Washington recognized President Maduro\'s 
leadership and reiterated the U.S. assessment that most of 
the weapons in Central American military inventories 
represented a Cold War security frame of reference and are 
not the most effective means to  address current threats.  He 
urged President Maduro to take advantage of this historic 
moment and the good will of his fellow presidents to 
rearrange Central American security arrangements in a manner 
that addressed the current threats.  Fisk also urged Maduro 
to consider a dramatic gesture to seize the moral authority 
to lead this process.  He then suggested that Honduras\' F-5 
aircraft did not enhance Honduras\' ability to confront these 
new emerging security threats and that the costs of the 
logistical support for them crowded out other more pressing 
Honduran military needs.  Fisk continued by saying that the 
Bush Administration was willing to engage on this issue, 
including noting, for example, that the idea had been raised 
of U.S. engagement through such regional mechanisms as the 
Central American Armed Forces Conference (CFAC).  He also 
offered his view that whichever Central American country took 
the first concrete steps towards transforming its 
security/military framework would be in a strong position to 
define the process for the region and would bring positive 
attention to its actions from Washington. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
MOD Outlines New Regional Military Missions 
------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) In DAS Fisk\'s first meeting in Honduras on February 6, 
Defense Minister Fred Breve said that his country\'s and the 
region\'s military are preparing themselves for the new 
transnational threats to their sovereignty and that his 
President, Ricardo Maduro, is ready to pursue regional 
disarmament in order to better align the types of weapons and 
size of the region\'s militaries to these new threats.  As an 
example, Breve pointed to the Central American Armed Forces 
Conference (CFAC) declaration in December that calls on the 
Central American militaries to prepare a common plan to 
combat terrorism.  In addition to this recognition of new 
threats, Breve said that CFAC is also working to downgrade 
their concern about the old threats (i.e. invasion by one 
country in the region against the other).  He said CFAC knows 
it must now unify in order to act against the new common 
enemy.  As an important first step, the CFAC agreed to new 
intelligence sharing on organized crime, with specific 
cooperation in the areas of d 
rug trafficking, narcoterrorism, and Arab alien smuggling. 
Breve also added that the countries agreed to work toward 
establishing a \"true\" regional inter-agency military 
taskforce. (COMMENT: He did not elaborate on what its mission 
would be. END COMMENT.)  He admitted it will take the 
countries time to identify first the units for the force and 
then the resources to support it. 
 
6. (C) Breve specifically stated that, given his reduced 
military budget, regionalization of Central American military 
efforts presented an opportunity for more effective use of 
the limited resources available.  He assured Fisk that the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) were aware that it was a 
different world.  Breve wants the HOAF to participate in the 
CFAC counterterrorism unit.  He added that the HOAF mindset 
was changing, noting  that he was reorienting Honduran forces 
to the new missions by reducing the number of bases and 
battalions and deploying forces in the prime drug trafficking 
areas of the North Coast.  The Maduro administration also has 
involved the HOAF in the effort to combat the growing crime 
problem in Honduras and the military itself was more involved 
with the community via civic action, responding to natural 
disasters, and helping to address health programs.  He 
assured Fisk that Honduras was adapting to the new threat 
environment. 
 
7. (C) Fisk responded that the U.S. wanted Honduras to think 
about new missions in exactly this way.  He told Breve that 
CFAC was the right mechanism to pursue this kind of 
regionalization of militaries and informed the Minister that 
the idea of U.S. engagement, through the U.S. Southern 
Command, with CFAC had recently been raised.   Fisk made 
specific reference to the expanded HOAF engagement in the 
counternarcotics effort and expressed Washington\'s 
appreciation. 
 
8. (C) Breve said he saw military regionalization as directly 
linked to greater regional economic integration.  However, he 
said Honduras felt there were still some considerable 
challenges to overcome.  He cited the glacial progress toward 
actual land border demarcation with El Salvador and the 
continuing Nicaraguan tariff as impediments.  He cautioned 
that Presidential-level commitments to integration were not 
being translated into action.  He also voiced concern about 
Salvadoran small arms and military transport acquisitions and 
renewed U.S. interest in military-to-military relations with 
Nicaragua, which he imagined would eventually include new 
U.S. military equipment.  Noting the smaller size of the 
Honduras armed forces, he opined that the Honduran Air Force 
provided equilibrium for the Hondurans, even while he 
acknowledged at the same time that the Air Force\'s F-5s were 
more of a symbolic, rather than an effective, deterrent 
force. 
 
9. (C) Fisk, noting that he had met two days before with the 
Salvadoran MOD, said it is the U.S. conclusion that El 
Salvador\'s military sees its missions being in such areas  as 
humanitarian/disaster response, and also that it wants to 
cooperate with its neighbors.  Its defense modernization is 
designed to help it move troops to respond to these new 
missions.  He said he was impressed with the Salvadoran 
military\'s professionalization and added that he did not see 
any evidence of  expansionist tendencies. After reassuring 
Breve about U.S. views and efforts on the Nicaraguan tariff, 
Fisk agreed that the U.S. has sought a new relationship with 
the Nicaraguan military.  He told Breve that the U.S. effort 
was very respectful of Nicaraguan civilian authority over the 
military and our support would be primarily in logistical 
areas and designed to help transform the Nicaraguan armed 
forces to meet their new missions. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
MOD Views Disarmament Favorably But Asks For U.S. Help 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
10. (S) Fisk called Breve\'s attention to Nicaraguan Foreign 
Minister Norman Caldera\'s statement on weapons  at the OAS 
counterterrorism meeting in El Salvador two weeks earlier. 
He characterized it as very forward learning and stated that 
the U.S. supported Caldera and the GON efforts to control its 
weapon inventories, including surface-to-air missiles.  Breve 
felt that Caldera\'s statement had been made in response to 
OAS pressure regarding Nicaraguan arms smuggling to 
terrorists in Colombia.  Fisk then stated that there was 
interest and enthusiasm in the U.S. for disarmament 
initiatives emanating from the region.  He commented that any 
such effort would have to take into account defense needs to 
protect against  new threats  and the resources needed to 
address them.  He told Breve that the U.S. was looking to the 
region\'s leaders to grasp this opportunity and that 
leadership would be needed on these issues.  Fisk underscored 
that the U.S. was open to Central American ideas on this 
issue and needed the regio 
n to let us know where it wanted to go on this issue so that 
the U.S. could engage.  He noted that all sides had weapons 
that did not meet their needs against the current threats 
that they confront. 
 
11. (C) Breve outlined talks between President Maduro and 
Salvadoran President Francisco Flores on disarmament.  He 
said the two had agreed and presented the issue to their 
fellow Central American presidents.  The two presidents were 
working on how to present such ideas to their militaries. 
Breve said that initial discussions also had identified broad 
regional concern about the need to address the implications 
of the demobilization of forces.  The leaders felt that such 
decommissioned forces would represent a target of opportunity 
for organized crime.  Without some sort of jobs program, 
organized crime could use its resources to recruit 
well-trained military to support their ends. Breve affirmed 
Honduran willingness to start a disarmament process but he 
believed it would be a long process.  As much as he would 
like to see early agreement, Breve\'s honest assessment is 
that it will take some time.  He noted that all sides may 
have the intent but may not be willing to act. 
 
12. (C) Fisk said that he understood the historical 
challenges confronting the region and that demobilization was 
a real concern.  He said the U.S. did not seek to minimize 
the challenges but hoped for a start in the short term.  He 
urged that all sides consider bold steps.  He stressed that 
whomever \"gambled\" first would have the moral high ground and 
could use it to move the others.  He suggested that another 
way to approach the issue was to view it as a rationalization 
of arms inventories rather than disarmament of militaries. 
He highlighted that the U.S. goal was a better framework for 
overall regional security.  Breve thanked Fisk for this 
encouragement and closed by mentioning the need to consider a 
multilateral security guarantee or body with oversight 
authority. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Foreign Minister Concerned About El Salvador and Nicaragua 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
13. (C) In DAS Fisk\'s meeting with Foreign Minister 
Perez-Cadalso later in the day, the FM reiterated Honduran 
concerns and suspicions about its neighbors\' intentions. 
(COMMENT: Interestingly, MOD Breve made a similar comment, 
saying that suspicions would continue to exist in the 
short-term. END COMMENT.)  Two issues stood out:  Honduran 
concern about Nicaragua\'s 35 per cent tariff and deep 
frustration over the slow, practically non-existent pace of 
land border demarcation with El Salvador.  Perez-Cadalso 
stated that both problems were frustrating to the GOH because 
Presidential-level agreements were not being followed through 
on at the working level by its neighbors.  However, in both 
cases, Perez-Cadalso affirmed that these were issues that 
needed to be put behind the countries because the leaders 
shared the same vision of the future. 
 
14. (C) FM Perez-Cadalso stressed that the GOH was prepared 
to accept an ICJ ruling on its maritime border with 
Nicaragua, but that the tariff threatened to start a trade 
war between the two countries.  He noted that the Maduro 
government had been patiently waiting for some action for 
more than a year.  He warned that the Honduran Congress was 
considering taking action because many in Tegucigalpa were 
skeptical that the Nicaraguan Congress really planned to act. 
 
15. (C) Perez-Cadalso was equally frustrated about the land 
border demarcation with El Salvador.  He said that it was now 
more than 10 years since the ICJ ruling and there had been 
very little progress in actually marking the border as called 
for in the ruling.  He commented that many Hondurans believe 
that El Salvador is simply stalling.  He told DAS Fisk that 
Honduras was prepared to accept a technical expert (an 
independent third party, preferably an American engineer) who 
could settle disputes on the spot.  Perez-Cadalso said that 
the GOH was prepared to accept such an arrangement in order 
to make progress. 
 
Palmer 
"
"6345","3/13/2003 19:06","03TEGUCIGALPA652","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MADURO GETS POLITICAL LIFT FROM SUSPENSION OF 
NICARAGUA 35 PERCENT TARIFF 
 
REF: TEGUC 00606 
 
1. (SBU) The news of the Nicaraguan Congress\' vote to 
temporarily suspend the retaliatory 35 percent tariff on 
Honduran goods, after three years, was greeted with relief 
and a bit of triumph in Tegucigalpa.  On March 11, Honduran 
President Maduro immediately announced the news, after 
receiving a call from Nicaraguan President Bolanos.  Maduro 
thanked Bolanos and the Nicaraguan legislature, and 
indicated that the move was a welcome backdrop to the 
Central American Presidents\' planned meetings in Washington 
on April 11, where regional integration was the key topic. 
Maduro also gave significant credit to the patience and 
maturity of the Honduran public and the National Congress. 
Privately, at least one member of the Honduran Cabinet has 
acknowledged that USG discussions with Nicaragua contributed 
greatly. 
 
2. (SBU) The tariff suspension represents a badly-needed 
political success for Maduro.  The Honduran media 
highlighted the fact that Maduro had made this a top 
objective from his first day in office and that he had been 
in constant discussion with Bolanos on the subject for the 
past year.  Hopefully, this recent cooperation between the 
executive branch, Congress and private sector will help 
bolster additional support for the critical tax and 
austerity measures that will soon be introduced in Congress. 
 
3. (SBU) Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza, Trade 
Minister Norman Garcia and key members of the business 
community believe that the Honduran Congress will drop their 
earlier plans to enact (and simultaneously suspend) 
retaliatory tariffs and fees on Nicaragua.  The government 
is arguing that if the Nicaraguan tariff is reinstated at 
any point, the Honduran Congress could easily take moves at 
that time. 
 
Palmer 
"
"6347","3/13/2003 19:47","03TEGUCIGALPA653","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000653 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 
 
 
1. TV TALK SHOW \"FRENTE A FRENTE\" 3/12 - Renato Alvarez 
director and anchor interviewed President of Honduras, 
Ricardo Maduro on different topics related to his 
administration. During this hour long program key issues 
such as Iraq and CAFTA were discussed at length. 
 
\"Question: If the United States unilaterally goes to war, 
will it have the support of Honduras?\" 
 
\"President\'s answer: I would like to make myself clear on 
this, an international terrorist is like a criminal-- we 
have to fight against crimmals, in a firm way, we have to be 
clear that in any issue of terrorism and crime we all have 
to cooperate.  Obviously the United Nations is analyzing the 
case, we all wish that Iraq disarm effectively to avoid this 
potential threat of war - not just the United States 
suffered the tragedy of 9/11 but whole world suffered too. 
The wish of peace is our wish.\" 
 
\"But also I would like to make it clear, here in Honduras we 
do fight crime, and we will also support the international 
fight against terrorism.\" 
 
 
2. \"Weekly supplement of La Prensa\" 3/8 San Pedro Sula-based 
liberal paper, carried an editorial entitled: \"For Peace\": 
 
\" War no, Peace yes - is the slogan of sincere pacifists, 
who perfectly understand that in war the real victims are 
the citizens.  We have to understand that after the attacks 
in New York and Washington U.S. society feels the serious 
threat of the \"evil axis\", 
 
\".The United States has a strong tendency towards 
unilateralist actions. It is difficult for the United States 
to learn and assimilate the rules of the international 
political game.\" 
 
\"It doesn\'t mean that those who call for confrontation to 
eliminate the tyrant, who invaded two neighbors and 
massacred to Kurds, are motivated solely by ideals of 
freedom and democracy; and those who raise their voices for 
peace-- do it with an altruistic spirit. A hidden war exist, 
the mother of all battles-- between European and north- 
American multinationalists, because of the petroleum.\" 
 
\" The petroleum reserves are the framework of this war which 
we hope does not occur. What we hope for a peaceful end to 
the end of the craziness of the tyrant, so that we avoid 
future crisis.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"6348","3/13/2003 20:33","03TEGUCIGALPA654","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SANSALVADOR324","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000654 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, ES, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN REQUEST FOR BORDER MAPPING 
 
REF: A. SAN SALVADOR 324 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 533 
     C. SAN SALVADOR 629 
     D. CUMMINS-PFORZHEIMER DELIVERY OF CD-ROM 
 
1. Per refs A, B, C, and D Honduras and El Salvador are 
looking to move forward on border demarcation via a 
binational border commission but progress has been stymied 
due to outdated maps.  Their joint request, received at both 
Embassy Tegucigalpa and San Salvador, is for maps at scale of 
1:25,000 (ref C). 
 
2. Ref D material has been reviewed by Raul Andino Torres, 
President of the Honduran Special El Salvador-Honduras Border 
Demarcation Commission and a number of technical engineers. 
Mr. Andino Torres informed Poloff March 7 that the 
information in ref D, while informative, was at too large a 
scale to be useful for border demarcation purposes. 
 
3. Post notes that the border demarcation issue has received 
broad press coverage in both El Salvador and Honduras.  The 
process has been stalled for some time and tensions have been 
mounting.  Post concurs with ref C and urges the State 
Department to contact NIMA at the earliest possible moment in 
order to request appropriate assistance. 
 
Palmer 
"
"6386","3/14/2003 17:47","03TEGUCIGALPA663","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA560","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000663 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IPC WILSON 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR ALVAREZ 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, COPYRIGHT FOR TEPP 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USPTO FOR URBAN 
GENEVA PASS USTR 
DOC FOR LASHLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, HO, KIPR 
SUBJECT: 2003 SPECIAL 301 REVIEW: REVISED HONDURAS SUBMISSION 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 560 
 
1. (U) Revised Sensitive But Unclassified Post submission of the 
2003 Special 301 Review for Honduras follows.  Addressees are 
requested to replace reftel with this submission. 
 
2. (SBU) Summary and Comment: Honduras is largely in compliance 
with the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS).  There have been no additional moves in the past year by 
Government of Honduras (GOH) to strengthen or weaken the 
protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) in 2002. 
Embassy recommends that Honduras remain off the Special 301 watch 
list. 
 
OPTICAL MEDIA PIRACY 
-------------------- 
 
3. (U) Although Honduras has yet to experience large-scale in- 
country optical pirating, it is believed that a significant 
amount of pirated goods is imported from neighboring countries 
and that the piracy of books, sound and video recordings, compact 
discs and computer software is still widespread.  Confiscation 
has been erratic and usually involves minor seizures of CDs. 
Success in controlling optical piracy rests on the GOH\'s ability 
to effectively implement current laws. 
 
USE/PROCUREMENT OF GOVERNMENT SOFTWARE 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) The GOH has made progress in its protection of the use and 
procurement of government software.  After a meeting in 2002 
between the new government and Econoff during which he reminded 
them of their responsibilities, Honduras\' IPR Division sent 
letters to all government agencies informing them that all 
government software use must comply with Honduran national law 
and international agreements.  Due to a lack of resources and 
personnel at the IPR division, oversight and enforcement has been 
limited. 
 
TRIPS COMPLIANCE 
---------------- 
 
5. (U) Honduras largely has complied with the WTO Agreement on 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), 
through legal revisions enacted in December 1999.  The Honduran 
Congress still must, for instance, adopt reforms related to 
integrated circuit designs and plant variety protection to be in 
full compliance with TRIPS. Honduras and the U.S. initialed a 
Bilateral Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Agreement in March 
1999, but substantive issues arose during the language conformity 
process.  Embassy expects that the current U.S.-Central America 
free trade negotiations will provide a convenient forum for the 
USG to push for additional IPR commitments. 
 
6. (U) Honduras\' copyright law, updated in 1999, added more than 
20 different criminal offenses related to copyright infringement 
and established fines and suspension of services that can be 
levied against offenders.  U.S. companies are concerned that 
recent attempts to prosecute computer software infringement cases 
have been met with inadequate support by officials in the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade\'s IPR Division and the Attorney 
General\'s office. 
 
7. (U) Honduras ratified the Paris Convention for the Protection 
of Industrial Property in 1994.  The Honduran Congress enacted a 
1999 Law of Industrial Property to provide improved protection 
for both trademarks and patents.  To be protected under Honduran 
law, patents and trademarks must be registered with the Ministry 
of Industry and Trade. 
 
8. (U) Recent modifications to the Patent Law of 1993 include 
patent protection for pharmaceuticals, and extend the term of 
protection for a patent from seventeen to twenty years from the 
date of filing to meet WTO standards.  The term for cancellation 
of a trademark for lack of use has been extended from one year to 
three years.  Trademarks are valid for up to 10 years from the 
registration date.  The illegitimate registration of well-known 
trademarks has, in the past, been a persistent problem in 
Honduras. 
 
9. (U) The protection of data exclusivity by the GOH has been 
raised by the pharmaceutical and pesticide companies.  A U.S. 
pharmaceutical company has complained that the Ministry of 
Health, in approving a competing company\'s pharmaceutical 
product, did not respect their data exclusivity rights as 
guaranteed in article 77 of Honduras\' Industrial Property Law and 
article 39 of the WTO TRIP\'s agreement.  The Ministry of Health 
approved the competing pharmaceutical product, despite 
communication from Honduras\' IPR Division that the U.S. company\'s 
research and data were protected under Honduran law.  The U.S. 
company argues that in order for the competing product to be 
legally registered with the Ministry of Health, the company needs 
to provide the research and data to support their application. 
Honduran law provides five-year exclusive use of data provided in 
support of registering pharmaceutical products.  Further, a 
regional association of pesticide companies met with Econoffs on 
a number of occasions to express concern over the GOH\'s 5-year 
data exclusivity period which from their perspective is 
insufficient to justify product development and testing in 
Honduras. 
 
WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS ORGANIZATION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
10. (U) Honduras became a member of the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) in 1983.  Honduras has not yet 
ratified the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) or the WIPO Performances 
and Phonogram Treaty (WPPT).  The treaties were signed two years 
ago and are still awaiting ratification in the National Congress. 
 
IPR ENFORCEMENT 
--------------- 
 
11. (U) The 1999 Copyright Law specifies three different avenues 
in the prosecution of copyright infringement cases: 
administrative, civil and criminal.  After confiscating pirated 
goods, the GOH can file an administrative case that may result in 
a fine.  However, the law requires companies whose rights have 
been violated to file civil and criminal charges.  Few U.S. 
companies have asserted their right to file either a civil or 
criminal case, leaving the resource strapped prosecutor\'s office 
responsible for the lawsuits.  As a result, few cases are tried 
to the full extent of the law. 
 
12. (U) Enforcement of the law relies largely on periodic sweeps 
in the market and on investigations carried out after an 
accusation has been made.  The GOH Customs and Tax Authority 
(DEI) is responsible for impeding the flow of illegal goods into 
Honduras.  IPR officials have commented in the past that police 
and DEI officials lack the skills and resources to identify and 
control the flow of pirated products. 
 
Palmer 
"
"6435","3/17/2003 18:08","03TEGUCIGALPA670","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03MANAGUA814|03STATE69423","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR, NEA/NGA, NP, AND PM 
STATE FOR WHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PRESIDENT MADURO PROMISES \"FULL SUPPORT\" 
FOR USG VISION FOR IRAQ 
 
REF: A. STATE 69423 
     B. MANAGUA 814 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador spoke to Honduran President Ricardo Maduro 
March 16 to discuss ref A seeking GOH support for a vision 
for Iraq and the Iraqi people.  Maduro promised Ambassador 
the \"full support\" of Honduras for the USG position.  When 
asked, Maduro said that the GOH might make a public statement 
on the issue.  Maduro asked Ambassador for copies of the 
statements from the Atlantic Summit, which Post sent to 
Maduro March 17.  (DCM tried but was unable to reach Acting 
Foreign Minister Anibal Quinonez.) 
 
2. (C) PolOff asked MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario 
Fortin March 17 if the GOH was planning to sign the 
Nicaraguan-organized joint Central American statement on Iraq 
(ref B).  Fortin said he was unsure but would check with 
Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias and provide an 
answer to the Embassy as soon as possible. 
Palmer 
"
"6465","3/18/2003 14:45","03TEGUCIGALPA674","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000674 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, EB, PM, OES, S/CT AND CA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/18/2013 
TAGS: ECON, PGOV, EFIN, EAID, ETRD, KJUS, PREL, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: ECONOMIC TOUR D\'HORIZON WITH HONDURAN MINISTER OF 
THE PRESIDENCY LUIS COSENZA 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR LARRY PALMER; REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (C) In a March 12 call on Honduran Minister of the 
Presidency Luis Cosenza, DCM and Econcouns discussed the top 
economic items on the bilateral agenda.  Cosenza committed to 
campaigning for the repeal of the teacher and nurse 
\"estatutos\" that have caused the rapid increase in government 
expenditures over the past five years (and impeded the 
attainment of an IMF program this year).  He expressed 
interest in the Millenium Challenge Account, and in ways to 
include incentives for new foreign investment in the Central 
America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) negotiations.  DCM urged 
rapid ratification of the ICC Article 98 Agreement and two 
OAS counter-terrorism conventions, and a raft of important 
economic legislation. Both sides agreed on the importance of 
improvement to port security, Honduras\' investment climate 
and the rule of law.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Bilateral and Regional Relationships 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) DCM expressed USG satisfaction with the March 11 
suspension by the Nicaraguan Congress of the 35 percent 
retaliatory tariff and appreciation for Honduran restraint 
over the past three years, indicating that the USG had been 
quietly urging this move in the interest of integration. 
Cosenza attributed much of the credit to Nicaraguan President 
Bolanos.  Asked if he thought that the Honduran Congress 
would proceed with the enactment of sanctions (and immediate 
suspension) as some in the business community were urging, 
Cosenza shook his head no.  He indicated that President 
Maduro was advising against such a move; if the Nicaraguan 
tariff were reinstated, the Honduran Congress could easily 
enact countermeasures at that time. 
 
3. (C) Cosenza indicated that President Maduro will try to 
meet with the IMF, World Bank and IDB on the margins of the 
April 11 meeting of the Central American Presidents with 
President Bush on CAFTA.  He asked for suggestions on other 
meetings. 
 
------------------------- 
Negotiations with the IMF 
------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Asked about the status of fiscal measures needed to 
reach agreement with the IMF on a new Poverty Reduction and 
Growth Facility program, Cosenza replied that the package of 
tax measures was ready and will be submitted in early April, 
between the President\'s trips to Italy (which may now be off) 
and Washington.  Emboffs complimented him on his clear 
presentation on the need to repeal the wage and benefits 
provisions of the special laws (called \"estatutos\") governing 
teacher and medical worker pay.  Cosenza confirmed that the 
GOH had concluded that this was absolutely necessary to 
regain control over government finances and reach agreement 
with the IMF, and had decided to fight as hard as possible to 
attain this goal.  He noted that the move could come within 
the next week; the GOH is currently discussing which estatuto 
will be first.  Comment: The government may be working with 
the Supreme Court to have the estatutos found 
unconstitutional.  This would allow them to avoid the 
difficult task of building 
the needed consensus for repeal of the laws in the Congress. 
End Comment. 
 
5. (C) Econcouns provided Cosenza with a copy of the 
Embassy\'s March 10 notification to the Minister of Finance, 
per instructions from Washington, that lack of payment of USD 
12,000 on July 15 or USD 1.7 million on September 3 for debt 
service on Department of Defense loans could trigger a 
cessation of new USG foreign assistance under the Brooke 
Amendment.  The looming debt service payment deadline was one 
more important driver for reaching an agreement with the IMF 
that would put the GOH back on the road to HIPC debt relief. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
Millennium Challenge Account 
---------------------------- 
 
6. (C) DCM provided Cosenza with a copy of the fact sheet on 
the Millennium Challenge Account program and outlined the 
currently envisaged system of qualifying for MCA eligibility 
and emphasized the importance of paying special attention to 
measures that might help the GOH meet the good governance 
criteria.  Cosenza expressed his appreciation for the 
background on the program and indicated that the eligibility 
criteria are all important issues that the GOH is already 
working to address for the sake of the country\'s own 
well-being.  He requested a list of the countries that are 
likely to be considered for eligibility during the first year 
of the program, in order to start getting an idea of how 
Honduras compares to its low-income peers. 
 
------------------ 
Agriculture Issues 
------------------ 
 
7. (C) DCM noted that there would be a decision on Honduras\'s 
request for wheat under the Food for Progress Program 
shortly.  If Honduras is approved, it will be important for 
the Ministry of Agriculture (SAG) and USDA  to work closely 
on a agreement on the use of the local currency proceeds from 
the sale of the wheat.  Cosenza asked if the funds could be 
used for low-income housing.  Econcouns explained that they 
are more commonly used for agricultural projects.  She took 
the opportunity to emphasize the importance of completion of 
the last major USDA-SAG project, the transfer of the mango 
hot-water treatment plant in Comayagua to an association of 
mango producers.  She explained that the legislation creating 
this association had been stalled in Congress and that 
Emboffs had been talking to the Minister of Agriculture about 
the importance of completion of the transfer.  Cosenza 
promised to look into it. 
 
----- 
CAFTA 
----- 
 
8. (C) Econcouns gave an overview of the current status of 
the Central American Free Trade Agreement negotiations and 
asked about GOH plans to build up the permanent, technical 
trade policy staff.  Cosenza said that the GOH is supporting 
Minister of Industry and Trade Norman Garcia\'s efforts to 
hire and train negotiators and reiterated his strong belief 
that the only way to keep well-trained negotiators after a 
change in administration would be to create a non-political 
public-private institute.  He discounted the possibility that 
Congressional approval of a Civil Service law would prevent 
large-scale turnover in government agencies after the next 
election; Cosenza acknowledged that the law would be an 
important step, but emphasized that it would take time to 
change the political culture. 
 
9. (C) Econcouns noted that there would be sensitivities on 
agriculture on both sides, but that the two countries could 
work together in the WTO toward the goal of reducing trade 
distorting subsidies without affecting the USG\'s ability to 
implement food aid and agricultural credit programs that are 
available to countries like Honduras. She confirmed that the 
Embassy is working closely with the Trade Ministry to 
identify areas in which cooperation in the WTO negotiations 
would be particularly helpful, such as the TRIPS moratorium, 
the agriculture negotiations and the services talks. 
 
10. (C) Econcouns also mentioned that during the course of 
the negotiations, the USG will be warning the Central 
Americans that some issues can not bend because of their 
importance to gaining U.S. congressional ratification for an 
eventual CAFTA, such as compliance with labor and environment 
language in the Trade Promotion Authority legislation.  The 
GOH can expect that some of the trade rule chapters may 
require changes to Honduran legislation. 
 
11. (C) Cosenza asked about the possibility of including in 
the CAFTA a provision allowing U.S. investors to deduct 
income taxes paid in Honduras from their U.S. tax returns 
(thus allowing the GOH to start levying income tax on these 
maquila companies).  Econcouns explained that the Treasury 
Department is the key contact for discussion of a prospective 
Double Taxation treaty.  The GOH could forward a request 
directly to Treasury (and she had provided this information 
to the Ministry of Finance previously).  She also explained 
that in considering these requests, Treasury places priority 
on those countries that the U.S. private sector has 
identified as important.  As far as the elimination of the 
Honduran income tax exemptions for companies located in free 
zones, Econcouns noted that it was generally the 
Honduran-owned maquila companies (comprising about 40-50 
percent of the textile and apparel firms in Honduras) that 
have pushed for maintenance of these tax incentives. 
Investment incentives will be an importa 
nt topic of negotiation in the CAFTA talks.  Cosenza then 
backtracked and expressed the GOH\'s view that continued 
maintenance of the free zones would be important to keeping 
the textile and apparel industry in Central America. 
 
12. (C) Cosenza also asked about the possibility of the 
inclusion of tax incentives by the USG for U.S. companies to 
invest in Honduras and other Central American companies, 
along the lines of incentives provided for Puerto Rico (an 
apparent reference to Section 936 exemptions from federal 
taxes for Puerto Rican based subsidiaries of U.S. companies). 
 He talked at length about the importance of a CAFTA 
agreement that promotes additional investment so that it does 
not just represent at the end another broken dream. 
Econcouns countered that U.S. companies who critique the 
investment climate in Honduras never mention the need for tax 
incentives - instead they point to issues such as the high 
cost telecommunications and energy, the weak judicial system, 
crime, and regulatory and administrative delays.  Cosenza was 
adamant that the GOH will be seeking some type of foreign 
investment incentive program from the USG in the context of 
the CAFTA negotiations. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Investment Climate, Commercial Disputes and Needed Legislation 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
13. (C) Continuing the discussion on needed improvements in 
the investment climate, DCM commented on the impressive 
presentation made by Vice President Vicente Williams on March 
11 during the rollout of the Competitiveness Council\'s 
workplan.  An important element affecting the investment 
climate is the relatively weak judiciary.  The DCM thanked 
Cosenza for the government and Supreme Court\'s help in 
pushing for resolution of outstanding commercial disputes. 
Post saw a number of cases resolved in late 2002, although 
there had been significant backsliding in three of the cases 
in early 2003.  The DCM also emphasized that no progress had 
been made to date in arbitration of outstanding Amcit land 
disputes involving the Honduran government or municipalities. 
 Econcouns reminded Cosenza that the GOH had adopted a law 
allowing the state to engage in arbitration in selected cases 
during a short window of six months.  As the law went into 
effect on January 16, there are only approximately four 
months left to make of 
fers to the Amcit claimants.  Cosenza indicated that he would 
look into the issue. 
 
14. (C) The DCM mentioned pending legislation that we see as 
important.  On the economic side, these include passage of 
the civil service reform law, a civil aviation law, 
restructuring of the telecommunications and power sectors, 
creation of a unified land registry, and the legislation 
creating the mango plant association.  On the political side, 
the DCM emphasized the critical importance of ratification of 
ICC Article 98 Agreement and two pending OAS conventions on 
counter-terrorism. 
 
------------- 
Port Security 
------------- 
 
15. (C) Emboffs also emphasized the importance of vastly 
improved port security, in the post September 11 environment. 
 They urged Cosenza to ensure that the GOH prepares the 
country\'s ports over the next year to meet new legislation 
for maritime traffic to the U.S., even if this requires 
partial or total concession of port operation and security 
functions.  Cosenza responded that the GOH is fully committed 
to doing so, and in fact do hope to concession Puerto Cortes 
during this administration.  The Customs Service is currently 
working on the purchase of container X-ray equipment that 
will be used to scan both incoming and outgoing containers. 
He took on board Emboffs comments about the importance of 
also strengthening port perimeter security and creation of an 
independent security force. 
 
------ 
Roatan 
------ 
 
16. (C) Econcouns summarized the diverse problems that Post 
is seeing on the island of Roatan, including egregious land 
disputes, lack of arrests in Amcit murder cases, drug 
trafficking, flouting of U.S. fishing laws, and lack of 
environmental enforcement.  She acknowledged that the rule of 
law has traditionally been weak in the Bay Islands but 
explained that the treatment of Amcits in Roatan is becoming 
intolerable; Consenza indicated that he concurred. 
She explained that there had been no progress to date in the 
Moore land case and at the same time, she noted, the 
islanders are benefiting from U.S. dollars in a variety of 
ways - tourism, real estate tax revenues, fishery exports to 
the U.S. and dockings by U.S. Navy and Coast Guard vessels. 
 
17. (C) Cosenza, fairly frankly, discussed the wide-ranging 
challenges they faced in improving the rule of law in the 
islands.  He noted that the USG perhaps has the strongest 
leverage of all, such as our ability to deny or revoke visas 
for presumption of illegal activity and capacity to invoke 
sanctions for violations of U.S. laws such as the TEDS/shrimp 
decertification.  Cosenza indicated that the GOH would 
understand if the USG takes targeted moves, and asked only 
that we not harm the reputation of the country or cut off 
U.S. tourism.  DCM noted that we will stay in close touch on 
these issues. 
 
18. (C) Comment: The discussion was cordial and relaxed, and 
provided a good opportunity to ensure that President\'s top 
staff is aware of the top economic issues on the USG\'s 
agenda. Cosenza appeared sincerely intent on tackling the 
estatutos, one of the major reasons for the GOH\'s structural 
and growing budget deficit.  Although he had received 
briefing material on the Millennium Challenge Account from 
the Honduran Ambassador in Washington, he appreciated the 
opportunity to discuss the envisioned process in greater 
detail.  The discussion also gave Emboffs an opportunity to 
focus on the Honduran need to make stronger efforts on good 
governance and anti-corruption.  The GOH, if found eligible, 
can be expected to make MCA proposals for large 
infrastructure projects and funding of low-income housing. 
Cosenza also seemed sincerely interested in improving port 
security in order to assure Puerto Cortes\' continued 
importance for shipping between the U.S. and the isthmus. 
 
19. (C) Comment continued: Cosenza\'s push for USG incentives 
for companies investing in Central America reflects the lack 
of understanding in the Honduran government of U.S. trade 
policy and sensitivities in the U.S. about claims that trade 
agreements lead to an export of jobs.  In the discussions 
about the investment climate and Roatan, he expressed the 
GOH\'s frustration with their inability to make more rapid 
progress in changing the status quo.  Embassy will continue 
to urge the GOH to focus on the details of the CAFTA 
negotiations, including the trade capacity building 
discussions, and to move on reforms that will improve the 
investment climate in Honduras (including moving on long 
standing investment and commercial disputes).  We will also 
continue to encourage the Hondurans to be more active in 
support of our mutual interests in the FTAA and WTO 
negotiations.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"6549","3/19/2003 20:15","03TEGUCIGALPA692","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA361","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000692 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/WHA (CBARONE; GLLOYD); IIP/T/SV; WHA/PDA 
(MBUCKLEY); INL/PC (RTHOMPSON) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: EVALUATION OF U.S. SPEAKER FOR BLACK HISTORY MONTH, 
DENNIS WATLINGTON, TRACKER #18210 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 361 
 
1.  Dennis Watlington, March 1-10, 2003.  Post celebrated 
Black History Month (African-American Heritage Month) 
through film showings, meetings with youth about the 
possibility of a productive life following recovery from 
drug use and gang violence, and discussions of cultural, 
historical and social contributions of African-Americans to 
American society.  Impact was outstanding. The universities 
provided the venues for their programs. 
 
2.  Filmmaker, writer, actor and director Dennis Watlington 
is a tireless speaker who tailored his presentations 
according to the audience, interspersing the showings of his 
Emmy Award-winning documentary, \"The Untold West: The Black 
West,\" with anecdotes from his own life from Harlem to 
Hollywood to deliver the message that \"poverty and drugs are 
not a death sentence, but a lack of education is.\"  He 
presented his audiences in nine different program venues and 
four cities with a new perspective on Black History, 
discussing the role played by slaves and freed Black 
Americans in settling and developing the West, speaking 
along the way with academic and cultural contacts, 
representatives of Garifuna (Afro-Honduran) NGOs, students 
and professors from the English Departments at two 
universities, the media, the general public and local 
filmmakers and reaching thousands during his six-day 
program.  The highlight of his program was meetings with 
hundreds of young people, among them high school students, 
recovering drug addicts and former gang members, and young 
leaders from Garifuna and other North Coast communities who 
are working as mentors with kids at risk in their 
communities.  During these inspiring programs, Mr. 
Watlington talked about his personal story of recovery from 
drug addiction and an early adolescence spent in gangs.  His 
extremely warm personality, openness and good humor made the 
audience frequently interrupt with applause and more than 
made up for his lack of Spanish.  He is an articulate, 
dedicated, engaging and hard-working man, who devoted 
tremendous energy and thought to bringing a message of the 
benefits of diversity and the possibility of hope through 
education to his audiences, commenting more than once that 
this was an \"I\'m proud to be an American\" moment.  The Post 
wholeheartedly recommends him for future programming. 
 
3.  PAS Tegucigalpa thanks CAO David McGuire in PAS Managua 
for suggesting Dennis Watlington as a speaker and appreciate 
the usual excellent work of IIP/G/WHA Camille Barone and 
Gloria Lloyd in facilitating financial arrangements. 
Palmer 
"
"6554","3/19/2003 22:06","03TEGUCIGALPA697","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03GUATEMALA489|03STATE22225|03STATE32314|03TEGUCIGALPA650","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL, DRL, PRM, AND IWI 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, ELAB, ASEC, PREF, KFRD, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS AND PROSPECTS FOR HARMONIZED ANTI-TIP 
LEGISLATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA 
 
REF: A. STATE 32314 
     B. GUATEMALA 489 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 650 
     D. STATE 22225 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Post concurs with Department 
recommendation that a regional harmonization of 
anti-trafficking in persons legislation (ref A) would serve 
U.S. interests in Honduras and the region.  As stated in ref 
C, Honduras could benefit by an overriding law against TIP 
that pieced together aspects of various laws and filled in 
the blanks to cover all possible offenses. 
 
2. (SBU)  The following responses are keyed to questions in 
ref A: 
 
a)  Willingness of key national legislators to introduce and 
promote harmonized anti-TIP legislation, or in the 
alternative, to amend existing statutes where necessary: 
 
-- As stated in ref C, the Maduro Administration is planning 
to introduce to Congress a draft immigration bill that would 
strengthen penalties against trafficking in persons, 
especially the trafficking of children.  Maduro\'s Nationalist 
Party has only a plurality, not a majority, within the 
unicameral body.  While Post believes that members of the 
Nationalist Party, opposition Liberal Party, and smaller 
parties would support ant-TIP legislation, Post will have a 
better sense of the reaction in Congress once the new 
immigration law is introduced.  National and municipal 
elections will not be held until November 2005.  Prospects 
for passage of anti-TIP harmonization legislation will be 
better in 2003/2004 than 2005. 
 
b)  Openness of national legislature and government to work 
with neighboring governments, NGOs, and IOs to maintain 
harmony of essential elements of an anti-TIP bill: 
 
-- Post believes that the GOH is likely to be open to 
regional cooperation with other governments, international 
organizations, and NGOs, although Post notes that Honduras 
does have border disputes with its three Central American 
land neighbors (and its seven maritime neighbors).  The 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his presidential 
counterparts to address these issues but there has not been 
much concrete progress, except for the March 11 vote of the 
Nicaraguan Congress to suspend its 35 percent tariff on 
Honduran imports.  Despite these border disputes, Post 
believes that the GOH would work with neighboring governments 
on this issue, which the GOH recognizes is a regional problem. 
 
c)  Prospects for passage, including length of time needed 
for enactment, of an harmonized anti-TIP bill: 
 
-- Post believes that prospects for passage are reasonably 
good, although Post notes that the Honduran Congress rarely 
acts quickly on legislation.  It is possible that some 
legislators may either portray TIP as a U.S. problem, or be 
afraid to make anti-TIP laws tougher because of the potential 
impact on remittances if fewer Hondurans immigrate to the 
U.S.  Also, endemic corruption in Honduras could potentially 
complicate passage of stricter legislation. 
 
d) Impact of a legislative debate on TIP in Honduras, 
regardless of final passage: 
 
-- Congressional debate would raise awareness not only among 
legislators but also among opinion makers and the general 
public.  It would be a boost to the GOH agencies and NGOs 
that are combating TIP. 
Palmer 
"
"6555","3/19/2003 22:58","03TEGUCIGALPA698","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANSALVADOR749","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR, NEA/NGA, NP, AND PM 
STATE FOR WHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS UNILATERALLY SUPPORTS U.S. ACTION AGAINST 
IRAQ AND URGES SADDAM HUSSEIN TO LEAVE IRAQ 
 
REF: A. SAN SALVADOR 749 
 
     B. USUN NEW YORK 751 
     C. MANAGUA 814 
     D. STATE 70678 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (U)  President Maduro issued a statement on behalf of the 
Government of Honduras on March 18 declaring that Honduras 
supports the U.S. war on terrorism and urging the Government 
of Iraq to accept the U.S. proposal in order to avoid 
additional suffering by the Iraqi people.  The statement also 
lamented that the efforts at the UN had been fruitless in 
reaching a peaceful resolution to the situation in Iraq. 
Acting Foreign Minister Anibal Quinonez told the press that 
Honduras supported U.S. actions and urged Saddam Hussein to 
leave Iraq.  The statement also reiterated Honduras\' 
commitment to finding a peaceful solution to the crisis 
 
2. (C) Post notes in reftel B that Honduras also was prepared 
to speak out against the Non-Aligned Movement effort to call 
for an emergency special session of the UN General Assembly. 
We also delivered reftel D demarche to the MFA. 
 
3. (C) Contrary to reftel A, Honduras MFA officials told the 
press that the Presidents in Roatan had decided that each 
country would issue its own communiques.  High-level GOH 
sources confirmed that President Maduro decided in the end to 
issue his own separate declaration on the situation with 
Iraq.  They stated he felt strongly about Honduras expressing 
its own clear support for U.S. action against Iraq.  The 
comments by Salvadoran FM de Avila reported in reftel B that 
Honduras joined in the Central American declaration appear to 
be in error. 
 
4. (U) Begin informal Embassy translation: 
 
Press Communique 
 
In light of the recent developments and tense urgent 
international situation, The Government of Honduras seeks to 
inform the nation and international community of its points 
of view in the following way: 
 
      1.    It laments the demonstrated efforts at the UN 
body to reach a peaceful solution to a conflict in Iraq has 
proved fruitless. 
 
      2.    It supports the Government of the United States 
of America\'s war against terrorism and calls on the 
Government of Iraq, in order to avoid further suffering by 
the Iraqi people, to accept the demands proposed by the 
United States of America. 
 
      3.    It considers it essential to revitalize the 
mechanisms and urgent requests that have made it possible for 
the majority of democratic countries to act together for the 
preservation of world peace. 
 
      4.    It reiterates its pacifist convictions and in 
this sense believes that all possible efforts should be 
taken, no matter how remote the possibility of success, in 
order to avoid war. 
 
      5.    The Government of Honduras confirms its decisions 
to continue participating in all international fora to help 
build world peace and social justice for all. 
 
Tegucigalpa, March 18, 2003. 
 
End informal Embassy translation 
Palmer 
"
"6646","3/21/2003 21:38","03TEGUCIGALPA725","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA698","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000725 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/PDA 
STATE FOR EB, IIP/G/WHA, AND DS/OP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, EPET, OIIP, ASEC, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PRESIDENT MADURO ADDRESSES NATION ON IRAQ: 
CALLS FOR CALM AND DOES NOT MENTION SUPPORT FOR U.S. POLICY 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 698 
 
1. (U) Summary: Honduran President Ricardo Maduro addressed 
the nation the evening of March 20 on the war in Iraq and 
possible implications for Honduras.  His basic message was 
that the war may cause hardships, but there was no reason to 
panic and that Hondurans should stick together.  He stated 
that oil importers have assured the government that there 
will be no problem with the supply of gasoline.  Maduro also 
announced that he had cancelled his planned trip to Italy 
for the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) meeting due to 
the war.  He did not mention GOH support for U.S. policy on 
Iraq.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Begin text of informal Embassy translation of 
President Maduro\'s speech: 
 
Fellow-citizens, as you all know, the United States, leading 
a coalition of countries, has begun the attack on Iraq, 
which will last until the leader of that country steps 
aside. 
 
These are moments of worldwide uncertainty and even though 
we are far from the war scenario, it is possible that there 
will be some effect on Honduras.  For this reason, I 
cancelled my trip to the meeting with the Governors of the 
Inter-American Development Bank in Milan, because these also 
are moments to be together and united in our country. 
 
I would like to begin by sending a calming message to the 
citizens of Honduras and by discussing the security measures 
that I have taken to guarantee security. 
 
On the issue of energy, I have once again talked with the 
fuel distributors who have guaranteed the supply of all 
petroleum derivatives. 
 
We have initiated at the government level a program of fuel 
savings and I believe it would be a good idea if citizens 
would also voluntarily undertake such measures. 
 
Simple steps such as using public transportation whenever 
possible; avoiding rush hours, making combined trips with 
friends or co-workers - if all citizens would undertake 
these - without doubt the consumption of fuel would go down 
without any noticeable effect on our way of living. 
 
I am also making sure that the important basics such as 
medicine and food continue to be available. 
 
Citizens should keep calm at all times and go to their 
places of work, production and study, so that we can 
maintain the nation\'s progress. 
 
Even though we are not taking an active part in the 
conflict, I have ordered extraordinary measures to guarantee 
the security of airports, power centers, marine ports, 
hydroelectric dams and thermal plants. 
 
Today more than ever, the nation, everyone in Honduras 
should be united because together we can overcome obstacles 
and only together will everything be all right. 
 
Good night. 
 
End text of informal Embassy translation of President 
Maduro\'s speech. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment:  Post is disappointed to note that unlike 
his March 18 statement in support of U.S. policy on Iraq 
(reftel), Maduro made no mention in his speech of the fact 
that the GOH is supporting U.S. policy on Iraq.  Whether 
deliberate or unintentional, the result is that Maduro may 
not be seen as forcefully backing U.S. policy, after several 
GOH statements of support in recent days.  While Post notes 
that Iraq has yet to become a major issue in Honduras, 
several opposition Liberal Party congressmen have spoken out 
against the war, and a sizeable demonstration against U.S. 
policy by various organizations is planned for Monday, March 
24 outside the Embassy.  Post will continue to urge the GOH 
to use public statements to support U.S. policy on Iraq. 
End Comment. 
"
"6648","3/21/2003 22:06","03TEGUCIGALPA726","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA3407|03TEGUCIGALPA288|03TEGUCIGALPA527|03TEGUCIGALPA532|03TEGUCIGALPA546|03TEGUCIGALPA606|03TEGUCIGALPA611","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 000726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE FOR PM, INL, EB, AND CA 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, SNAR, ETRD, PHUM, KJUS, CASC, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: HIGH EXPECTATIONS, DISAPPOINTING RESULTS: 
MADURO\'S FIRST YEAR 
 
REF: A. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 3407 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 532 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 288 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 611 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 527 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 606 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 546 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer for Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: After one year in office, Honduran President 
Ricardo Maduro faces numerous challenges in one of the 
poorest and most corrupt countries in the Western Hemisphere. 
 Maduro began his administration amid high expectations. 
While he remains upbeat about his administration\'s ability to 
increase security, reduce corruption, and deliver economic 
growth, many factors, both external and internal, have 
coalesced to make these tasks more difficult.  Maduro has 
been unable to move his agenda forward and public support for 
the Administration has likewise dwindled.  While Maduro often 
says the right things, many are increasingly impatient with 
his administration\'s lack of progress in key areas. 
Moreover, with the economy growing very slowly, the 
Administration\'s ambitious goals have yet to be fitted to the 
state\'s financial straitjacket.  Maduro has made some 
headway, particularly in the areas of governance, judicial 
reform, and support for the international campaign against 
terrorism, but he faces formidable challenges from entrenched 
economic and political interests in moving his agenda 
forward.  As he enters the second year of his single 
four-year term in office, his administration needs concrete 
results before presidential campaigning begins next year when 
he will inevitably slide toward lame-duck status. END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------------- 
Status of the Maduro Government 
------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) President Maduro is facing increasing criticism from 
both the political opposition, members of his own party in 
Congress, and the public at large over his administration\'s 
policies and his technocratic style of leadership.  Although 
Maduro promised to modernize government processes, there has 
been little movement towards decentralization and 
depoliticalization.  Lack of planning and foresight continue 
to plague the Administration, with Maduro reacting to events 
rather than setting the agenda.  While many feel the 
President\'s heart is in the right place, the political 
fortitude, necessary personnel, and resources are not there 
to move the Administration\'s agenda forward.  Maduro has 
stated on several occasions that his personal popularity is 
not important to him as long as he does the right thing for 
the country.  Rhetoric like this has coincided with polls 
showing that a year after taking office, less than 20 percent 
believe the country is in better shape since Maduro took 
office. 
 
3. (C) Many of Maduro\'s initiatives require congressional 
approval but Maduro\'s National Party has only a plurality, 
not a majority, within the unicameral body.  Relations with 
Congress remain tense and Maduro\'s efforts to use his 
bully-pulpit to advance legislation have met with limited 
success.  He was, despite considerable opposition, able to 
push through a direct energy purchase contract with the 
American firm AES in January.  However, despite a solid 
working relationship with his party\'s President of Congress, 
Pepe Lobo, Maduro\'s biggest obstacle to enacting his 
reformist program has been a recalcitrant wing of his own 
Nationalist Party, known as the \"dark side.\"  This wing of 
the party is more interested in pursuing personal gain 
through traditional political corruption rather than seeking 
to advance a Nationalist party agenda or improve the overall 
social and economic situation in Honduras for the betterment 
of the Honduran People. 
 
4. (C) Since November, fresh rumors have been circulating 
that Maduro would make some cabinet changes in an effort to 
recapture the political momentum (ref A).  Many of Maduro\'s 
ministers are not well known publicly and polling data 
indicate that less than a third of those participating had 
much confidence in the President\'s cabinet.  This issue was 
raised publicly during a press interview in January when 
Maduro was questioned on the subject.  At that time, he 
stated he was in the process of evaluating his minister\'s 
performances but had not made any decisions about possible 
changes.  Although many expected movement in this area, to 
date no changes have been made.  The ministers of education, 
health, and social investment remain the main targets, 
although Foreign Minister Perez-Cadalso may also be removed. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Bilateral Relations and Counterterrorism Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
5. (C) Relations between the U.S. and Honduras have been 
excellent, but disappointing results, particularly in public 
security, narcotics control, and the slow pace of judicial 
reform, are beginning to create stress within the bilateral 
relationship.  U.S. expectations were high when Maduro took 
office that the new Administration would be able to tackle 
some fundamental structural issues that were beyond the reach 
of its predecessors.  Some progress has been made, but 
considering the substantial U.S. investment in good 
governance programs, law enforcement, and development 
assistance, current results are insufficient to meet U.S. 
expectations. 
 
6. (SBU) President Maduro has been a good and reliable 
partner of the U.S. on counterterrorism.  He recently issued 
a statement on behalf of the GOH declaring that Honduras 
supports the U.S. war on Iraq.  Also, The first major piece 
of legislation passed under Maduro was a tough 
money-laundering bill, and his government hosted a major U.S. 
military counterterrorism exercise in March 2002.  The GOH 
has quickly responded with freeze orders to all U.S. requests 
regarding suspect terrorist bank accounts and to date no 
terrorist assets have been found in Honduran financial 
institutions.  Honduras was also the first country in Central 
America (and the second in Latin America) to sign an ICC 
Article 98 Agreement with the United States.  However, the 
GOH has yet to submit the agreement to Congress for approval. 
 Other concrete steps the GOH still needs to take are: 
designate a national coordinator for counterterrorism; file 
its national report in accordance with United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 1373; and most of all, 
sign and/or ratify the five outstanding international 
conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions (1971 and 2002) 
against terrorism.  It is also of vital importance for 
Honduras to improve security at its maritime ports, 
particularly Puerto Cortes.  Despite the right rhetoric, the 
GOH has been slow to follow-through on necessary 
counterterrorism actions. 
 
----------------------- 
Anticorruption Efforts 
----------------------- 
 
7. (C) Fighting Honduras\' endemic corruption was one of the 
mainstays of Maduro\'s campaign to capture the presidency. 
While the President\'s public resolve appears strong, it 
remains to be seen if Maduro and his government, as well as 
the judicial system and Congress, are prepared to press for 
action against major economic and political figures involved 
in, or with a history of, corrupt practices. Since Maduro 
took office, there has not been one significant conviction, 
or even arrest, on corruption charges. It is still taken for 
granted that the rich and politically connected are above the 
law, and it is still very difficult for the GOH to manage any 
sizable government procurement efforts fairly and 
transparently. 
 
8. (SBU) Maduro\'s administration has successfully implemented 
some key reforms in the following areas:  the selection of an 
independent Supreme Court; establishment of a task force to 
capture white collar criminals, such as the fugitive bankers 
involved in fraudulent banking practices; the first-ever 
removal of congressional immunity from a deputy (in a rape 
case); and adoption of the national budget by Congress in an 
open and transparent process (ref B).  Yet many average 
Hondurans still feel that no real change has taken place. 
They are particularly looking for more concrete results 
against individuals involved in corrupt activities, something 
that has not happened to date. 
 
9. (C) In response to these criticisms Maduro has publicly 
directed that his government take action against obvious 
corruption.  However, he has also laid the blame for the poor 
performance in prosecuting corruption cases on the Attorney 
General (AG).  The AG is an independent appointee from the 
Liberal Party with a seven-year term of office, which does 
not expire until next year.  Maduro has expressed that the AG 
is not in sync with the rest of his government team (ref B). 
While very possibly true, lack of action by the AG\'s office 
has thwarted USG interests in a number of areas.  However, a 
possible move in the coming months by the Congress to remove 
the AG before his term expires would set off a political 
donnybrook and paralyze the nation\'s already weak 
prosecutorial function. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
---------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Under Maduro\'s watch, the Supreme Court has been 
developing into an independent branch of power, unlike any of 
its predecessor courts since democracy was restored in 1982. 
This has only been possible due to a new transparent 
nominating procedures put in place to select the current 
court and the imposition of seven-year term limits.  Supreme 
Court President Vilma Morales is pro-reform in orientation 
and has been effectively fighting to increase the Court\'s 
status as a separate branch of power within the federal 
government. The established political order is fighting that 
prospect with all its might.  In fact, the Congress seized 
the political opportunity to introduce legislation that would 
amend the constitution to give itself the power to interpret 
the constitutionality of any laws it passes.  Maduro works 
closely with Morales to support her efforts.  However, he has 
not risen forcefully to the Court\'s defense in public on this 
issue (ref C). 
 
11. (C) While the establishment of the Court as a separate 
branch of federal power is important, the Court continues to 
be under substantial pressure from entrenched political 
interests.  Of great concern has been the weight brought to 
bear by the Nationalists in Congress over judicial 
appointments.  Nominations have been sent forward for 
unqualified and/or corrupt judges that Nationalist members of 
Congress know would do their bidding.  If this process 
continues, whatever political independence the Court has 
established will be in jeopardy.  Moreover, the credibility 
of the Maduro administration, which has touted judicial 
reform as a major accomplishment, is on the line. 
 
12. (SBU) A positive step forward was the introduction in 
2002 of a new Criminal Procedure Code (CPC), replacing a 
version that was still partially based upon Spanish colonial 
law.  Under the old system, cases were resolved based on 
written submissions rather than oral testimony.  The process 
was slow, cumbersome, not transparent, and open to 
corruption.  The new Code provides for oral trials, an 
adversarial trial process, increased protections for 
defendants, and overall changes intended to facilitate the 
growth of a more transparent and effective system.  President 
Maduro has been a strong supporter of judicial reform and 
increased efficiency.  While passed under President Flores, 
implementation of the CPC is something the Maduro 
administration can point to as advancing this agenda (ref D). 
 Similar reforms are desperately needed on civil actions, 
particularly in the commercial and labor sectors. 
 
--------------- 
Public Security 
--------------- 
 
13. (SBU) Public security remains a priority, if not the most 
important, issue for the Maduro administration and the public 
at large.  Upon taking office on January 27, 2002 President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
out-of-control crime situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 
soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The public 
responded enthusiastically.  However, despite the initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides and kidnappings, only fell 
marginally. 
 
14. (C) A year after taking office the campaign to reduce 
violence appears to be faltering.   According to government 
statistics the number of homicides increased in 2002 despite 
the military\'s augmentation of the police force.  The 
homicide closure rate in Honduras is only 1-2 percent.  Thus, 
even if the police are successful in apprehending a suspect, 
the odds of a conviction are small.  Public support is fading 
and the campaign needs some visible victories to restore 
confidence in the government\'s program.  The USG is helping 
the Maduro government establish an anti-kidnapping unit, 
increase intake/training of police recruits, create a model 
tourist police force, boost its counternarcotics efforts, and 
expand the frontier police.  The country\'s geographic 
position makes it an obvious strategic transit point for 
narcotics trafficking, alien smuggling operations and other 
organized crime activities. 
 
15. (SBU) Despite this assistance, drug seizures have 
continued to fall since Maduro took office.  Extrajudicial 
killings, especially of children/young adults since 1998, 
remain a source of serious concern.  The number of child 
homicides continues to grow and there have been no aggressive 
measures by the GOH to solve them.  Maduro\'s administration 
blames increased gang activity, but allegations that rogue 
police officials are responsible for some of the killings 
have not been sufficiently addressed (ref E).  Maduro will 
have to do better or the public will lose what confidence it 
has left in the Administration\'s ability to combat the 
scourge of violence.  The trafficking in persons of 
women/children for prostitution in Central America, Mexico, 
and the U.S. also continues. 
 
16. (SBU) The unsolved murder cases of 30 American citizens 
remains a thorny issue.  The GOH has established a special 
task force, including a special prosecutor, and four 
convictions have occurred within the last six months. This 
represents significant progress.  While Maduro has addressed 
these issues, the police have few resources to work with in 
order to protect Americans and prevent crime.  For example, 
six police officers on bicycles and one pick-up are 
responsible for the entire island of Roatan outside the main 
tourist areas.  Also of concern are the more than 150 land 
and commercial dispute cases involving American citizens. 
Though the GOH has worked to create a mechanism through which 
some of the expropriation cases may be eligible for 
arbitration, it remains unclear if the political will exists 
to follow-though. 
 
---------------- 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
17. (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three Central 
American land neighbors and its seven maritime neighbors. 
The disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most 
heated.  Maduro is personally engaged with his presidential 
counterparts to address these issues but there does not 
appear to have been any concrete progress.  Foot-dragging by 
El Salvador over the land border demarcated by the ICJ in 
1992 has been particularly vexing.  Maduro has tried to move 
the process forward with little success. 
 
18. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.   Honduras provoked Nicaraguan retaliation when it 
signed a maritime treaty with Colombia recognizing the 15th 
parallel as its maritime border in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an 
ICJ case over the maritime border and more importantly in 
1999 slapped a punitive 35 percent tariff on Honduran goods 
that remains in place despite a Central American Court of 
Justice ruling that it is illegal.  With former Nicaraguan 
President Arnoldo Aleman deposed as President of the National 
Assembly, GOH officials were hopeful that Nicaraguan 
President Enrique Bolanos would make good on private 
assurances to lift the tariff, especially given the fact that 
the Central American Court of Justice ruled in favor of the 
GOH\'s petition against the tariff.  Frustrated by the lack of 
progress on the issue, and under pressure from Congress to 
react, Maduro recently announced plans for a retaliatory 
tariff equal to that of Nicaragua plus increased fees for the 
use of Puerto Cortes.  This measure will be popular in 
Honduras and could boost the President\'s lagging popularity 
while at the same time providing the GOH leverage against the 
Nicaraguan tariff (ref F). 
----------------- 
Economic Problems 
----------------- 
 
19. (SBU) President Maduro inherited a stagnating economy and 
seriously deteriorated government finances from the previous 
government.  GDP rose by only two percent in 2002, which was 
lower than economic growth rates in the previous years.  Per 
capita income fell by 0.6 percent during the first year of 
Maduro\'s administration while the Consumer Price Index rose 
by eight percent.  Already one of the poorest countries in 
the hemisphere, Honduras is falling further behind (ref G). 
 
20. (C) The GOH missed all key International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) targets in 2001, and a limited effort in 2002 to enact 
austerity and tax measures sill resulted in a government 
budget deficit of 5.6 percent of GDP.  The GOH failed to 
reach agreement with the IMF mission in November 2002 on 
draft terms of a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth 
Facility Program (PRGF) because of the GOH\'s limited efforts 
to address the budget deficit.  On January 29, GOH\'s economic 
team went to Washington to discuss with the IMF its planned 
measures (elimination of tax exemptions and loopholes, 
freezing of many government salaries, and a draft civil 
service reform law).  The GOH believes it can reduce the 
central government deficit to three percent in 2003 and take 
measures to control the burgeoning wage bill, thereby paving 
a way to an agreement with the IMF.  However, it has yet to 
enact any of these difficult changes. 
 
21. (SBU)  International Financial Institution (IFI) and 
bilateral donor disbursements (USD 140 million) will be held 
up until the new IMF program is in place.  There will also be 
pressure for renewed GOH Paris Club debt service payments 
(USD 100 million per year).  For example, Embassy has just 
received instructions to deliver a demarche on potential 
Brooke amendment sanctions if DOD loan payments are not 
resumed.  In the meantime, the completion point for Highly 
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt reduction (worth USD 900 
million) continues to slip back further.  If unaddressed, the 
country\'s fiscal situation and the lack of a new IMF program 
could also impact Honduras\' eligibility for Millennium 
Challenge Account grants. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
U.S. Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
22. (SBU) Recognizing the benefits of increased trade and 
economic integration between the U.S. and the Central 
America, Maduro has promoted U.S.-CAFTA as the road to 
economic growth.  However, the GOH was slow to prepare for 
the negotiations and the negotiating team remains weak and 
understaffed.  The GOH trade team has been leaning on the 
more sophisticated Costa Rican team for advice and this 
scenario seems likely to continue throughout the 
negotiations.  The main objectives for the GOH in the 
negotiations are to maintain the U.S. market access they 
already have now, protect sensitive agricultural products, 
and hopefully provide an improved investment climate in which 
the vital textile sector can compete with Asia after the 
elimination of quotas in 2005.  U.S.-CAFTA holds the 
prospects of bringing much needed economic growth to Honduras 
and the general attitude toward a free trade agreement is 
positive.  Getting the agreement smoothly though Congress 
though, where protectionist instincts run high, could be 
problematic. 
 
----------------------- 
Storm Clouds Gathering? 
----------------------- 
 
23. (C) COMMENT:  The jury is still out on whether or not 
Maduro will be successful in moving his agenda forward; the 
challenges ahead are imposing.  The government\'s ability to 
fund new programs is extremely limited and little prospect 
exists to raise government revenues in the short-term.  While 
Maduro remains optimistic, progress on his administration\'s 
key goals are stalled:  no major convictions in the 
government\'s crusade against corruption; crime (particularly 
homicide rates) at historic levels, although there has been a 
reduction in areas such as bank robberies, kidnappings, and 
car thefts; and the economy is performing poorly.  The areas 
where the Administration has made progress, such as reform of 
the Supreme Court and the new CPC, will not bear political 
fruit for some time. 
 
24. (C) In order to assuage his lagging popularity, Maduro 
needs to show demonstrable progress soon on topics of major 
concern to the voters.  If not, any mandate the president may 
have had will be squandered and his desire to transform 
Honduras thwarted.  President Maduro faces a very difficult 
political challenge which requires his sustained engagement. 
One major short-coming of his first year has been his 
inconsistent engagement on critical issues and lack of 
decisive leadership at crucial moments.  Just as the 
underachieving talented student, he does respond and produce 
the necessary effort to keep his government from failing. 
But thus far, his efforts fall far short of receiving top 
marks, despite his loquacious policy rhetoric. 
 
25. (C) Next month\'s possible visit to meet President Bush 
will provide Maduro a much needed political lift, but will 
also present the U.S. with an important opportunity to press 
him for more concrete actions rather than just \"nice words.\" 
A strong exhortation from the highest levels of the U.S. 
government could help him realize his administration\'s full 
potential.  END COMMENT 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"6650","3/21/2003 22:23","03TEGUCIGALPA727","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA(MBUCKLEY), IIP/G/WHA (DDIPASQUALE), 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, HO, IZ, PA OIIP 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 3/21 
 
1. For the second day all four dailies had full front page 
coverage and special reports of almost six interior pages 
with a variety of photos of the war. 
 
2. Liberal Party Tegucigalpa-based daily La Tribuna: 
\"Inferno in Iraq;\" moderate daily El Heraldo: \"War, Total 
Offensive;\" San Pedro liberal daily Tiempo: \"Land offensive 
started in the south--without resistance\" and San Pedro Sula- 
based liberal daily La Prensa: \"No price increase on fuel 
because of War: President Maduro.\"  Beginning last night, 
radio and all TV stations and print media have been devoting 
an impressive amount of coverage to the conflict, using as 
sources CNN in Spanish and other international news 
sources.\" 
 
3. The morning news programs repeated the international 
reports several times. Radio and TV stations are running 
spots telling their audiences to stay tuned for complete 
coverage of the war.  Newspaper \"El Heraldo\" has special 
radio spots announcements inviting readers to buy the 
newspaper to keep up on developments in the war\". 
 
4. \"Telenoticias\" showed some Desert Storm footage last 
night to explain events during the first war and featured 
interviews with several Ambassadors to Honduras. 
 
5. Italian Ambassador Stefano Cachaquero: \"We have said very 
clearly since the beginning that we support the United 
States in its efforts. The Italian government is providing 
support to the airfields that are open to U.S. military 
troops, and Italy will contribute Italian peace forces to 
the reconstruction of Iraq. 
 
6. Ambassador of Mexico Walter Astie: - \"Obviously we are in 
favor of Iraq disarming and the elimination of a threat to 
other countries.  We are against terrorism but we still 
continue to believe that the best solution for this problem 
is through negotiations through the United Nations. 
 
7. Ambassador of France Michell Avignon: \"To begin military 
operations is going to be the unilateral decision of 
President Bush who, he remembers perfectly, said that the 
United Nations had failed to carry out its responsibilities, 
but that he would carry out his.  I am sorry to say, but 
that is called `prepotency and the U.S. is the first nation 
of the world, the first force of the world, so in place of 
the force of right, it is the force of might, this is what 
we are going to experience.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"6651","3/21/2003 22:57","03TEGUCIGALPA728","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000728 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/G/WHA(DDISQUALE);WHA/PDA(MBUCKLEY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, HO, IZ, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 3/20 
 
\" Today moderate Tegucigalpa-based daily \"El Heraldo\" 
carried comments and reactions by representatives of 
Honduran political parties to the beginning of hostilities 
in Iraq.  The President of the Liberal Party in the Congress 
stated, \"the Liberal Party opposes war between the US and 
IRAQ... the Honduran government should first get the 
consensus of its citizens before announcing any official 
position or support for anyone in this international 
conflict.  Not a single Honduran is in favor of war because 
poor countries are the ones who will suffer the 
consequences. We have to plead for peace in the world. 
El Heraldo also carried half-page interviews with the German 
and French Ambassadors to Honduras\". 
 
\" A member of the political committee of the \"Partido 
Unificacin Democr tica\" condemned the Honduran government 
position. \"Hondurans should not take sides in this war. The 
UD Party cannot support a military conflict thatwhich does 
not involve the country\'s national interest. A war could 
impact unnecessarily on our economy.\" 
 
\" The Resident Representative of the United Nations, Jeffrey 
Avina, was quoted as denying that the conflict between the 
U.S. and Iraq would have a negative impact in Honduras, 
saying that food aid won\'t suffer any changes.  \"What is 
important is that the country conclude an agreement with the 
IMF in order to have support from the international 
community during the upcoming months\". 
 
Palmer. 
"
"6723","3/24/2003 16:38","03TEGUCIGALPA731","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000731 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA(MBUCKLEY), IIP/G/WHA (DDIPASQUALE), 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, PREL, PA, OIIP, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 3/21 
 
 
1. For the second day all four dailies had full front page 
coverage and special reports of almost six interior pages 
with a variety of photos of the war. 
 
2. Liberal Party Tegucigalpa-based daily La Tribuna: 
\"Inferno in Iraq;\" moderate daily El Heraldo: \"War, Total 
Offensive;\" San Pedro liberal daily Tiempo: \"Land offensive 
started in the south--without resistance\" and San Pedro Sula- 
based liberal daily La Prensa: \"No price increase on fuel 
because of War: President Maduro.\"  Beginning last night, 
radio and all TV stations and print media have been devoting 
an impressive amount of coverage to the conflict, using as 
sources CNN in Spanish and other international news 
sources.\" 
 
2. The morning news programs repeated the international 
reports several times. Radio and TV stations are running 
spots telling their audiences to stay tuned for complete 
coverage of the war.  Newspaper \"El Heraldo\" has special 
radio spots announcements inviting readers to buy the 
newspaper to keep up on developments in the war\". 
 
3. \"Telenoticias\" showed some Desert Storm footage last 
night to explain events during the first war and featured 
interviews with several Ambassadors to Honduras. 
 
4. Italian Ambassador Stefano Cachaquero: \"We have said very 
clearly since the beginning that we support the United 
States in its efforts. The Italian government is providing 
support to the airfields that are open to U.S. military 
troops, and Italy will contribute Italian peace forces to 
the reconstruction of Iraq. 
 
5. Ambassador of Mexico Walter Astie: - \"Obviously we are in 
favor of Iraq disarming and the elimination of a threat to 
other countries.  We are against terrorism but we still 
continue to believe that the best solution for this problem 
is through negotiations through the United Nations. 
 
6. Ambassador of France Michell Avignon: \"To begin military 
operations is going to be the unilateral decision of 
President Bush who, he remembers perfectly, said that the 
United Nations had failed to carry out its responsibilities, 
but that he would carry out his.  I am sorry to say, but 
that is called `prepotency and the U.S. is the first nation 
of the world, the first force of the world, so in place of 
the force of right, it is the force of might, this is what 
we are going to experience.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"6732","3/24/2003 20:33","03TEGUCIGALPA740","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/G/WHA(DDISQUALE);WHA/PDA(MBUCKLEY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PREL, HO, IZ, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 3/20 
 
\" Today moderate Tegucigalpa-based daily \"El Heraldo\" 
carried comments and reactions by representatives of 
Honduran political parties to the beginning of hostilities 
in Iraq.  The President of the Liberal Party in the Congress 
stated, \"the Liberal Party opposes war between the US and 
IRAQ... the Honduran government should first get the 
consensus of its citizens before announcing any official 
position or support for anyone in this international 
conflict.  Not a single Honduran is in favor of war because 
poor countries are the ones who will suffer the 
consequences. We have to plead for peace in the world. 
El Heraldo also carried half-page interviews with the German 
and French Ambassadors to Honduras\". 
 
\" A member of the political committee of the \"Partido 
Unificacin Democr tica\" condemned the Honduran government 
position. \"Hondurans should not take sides in this war. The 
UD Party cannot support a military conflict thatwhich does 
not involve the country\'s national interest. A war could 
impact unnecessarily on our economy.\" 
 
\" The Resident Representative of the United Nations, Jeffrey 
Avina, was quoted as denying that the conflict between the 
U.S. and Iraq would have a negative impact in Honduras, 
saying that food aid won\'t suffer any changes.  \"What is 
important is that the country conclude an agreement with the 
IMF in order to have support from the international 
community during the upcoming months\". 
 
Palmer. 
"
"6787","3/25/2003 18:53","03TEGUCIGALPA748","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000748 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (BUCKLEY), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO, PA 
SUBJECT:  HONDURAN ATMOSPHERICS - IRAQ 
 
1. Moderate Daily El Heraldo 3/22 - Article on a forum for 
students on the conflict in Iraq sponsored by the youth of 
the Democratic Unification Party (a leftist party made up of 
the remnants of the Socialists and Communist parties of the 
1980s).  Among the speakers was Carlos Reyes of the Bloque 
Popular (an NGO representing labor unions and other group 
opposed to globalization) and UD party members.  \"The 
invasion of Iraq is part of a global [U.S.] strategy of 
gaining economic, political and military hegemony over the 
world.  Economically, the main project is FTAA, through 
which the U.S. seeks to challenge the EU and Japan; 
politically, the plan is to get rid of independent regimes 
and opposition movements; and the military is the means that 
will be used to achieve the other goals.\"  According to the 
president of the UD, this is \"a war without humanitarian 
ends, one that \"strengthens imperialism.\"  He also called 
the U.S. \"the number one enemy of the people of the world.\" 
 
Note:  The Bloque Popular organized a small demonstration 
yesterday (250 people) in front of the U.S., Spanish and 
British Embassies and UN Headquarters to protest the war. 
 
2. \"El Heraldo\" 3/22 - Honduran Secretary of State Guillermo 
Perez Cadalzo said, \"Latin America has taken a step 
backwards in the priority list of the United States.  George 
Bush\'s promise that this would be `the century of the 
Americas\' has been put on hold since September 11.. The war 
will create problems in the already fragile relationhip 
between Latin-American countries, especially those that 
opposed the war, and the United States.\" 
 
3.  \"El Heraldo\" 3/22 - ran a page of political comment on 
the war in drawings.  One was entitled Remember Vietnam and 
featured a likeness of the child burned by Napalm who was 
filmed running down the road and a U.S. soldier. Another was 
entitled \"Blood for Oil.\"  A third features the letters UN 
(ONU) decorating a roll of toilet paper. 
 
4. \"El Heraldo\" 3/24 - carried seven pages reporting on the 
war against Iraq. Among the headlines are:  \"Missile Rains 
over Baghdad,\" \"Enraged battles,\" \"Baghdad\'s defense is On,\" 
\"Life Goes On for Iraqi People After the Bombs,\" \"Russia 
Accused of Helping Iraq by Providing Electronic Technology 
to Guide Missiles,\" \"War from different angles\" (this is a 
picture gallery showing U.S. as well as Iraqi soldiers), 
\"More Demonstrations Against the War Around the World.\" 
 
5.  \"El Heraldo\" 3/24 - Political cartoon shows a motorist 
asking a gasoline station attendant to \"fill the tank with 
Iraqi blood, please.\" 
 
6. San Pedro Sula-based liberal party paper \"La Prensa\" 3/22 
- featured an image of the attack last Friday on the cover. 
It also carried seven pages of stories and images on Iraq. 
Cover headlines: \"Devastating;\" other headlines \"Impact and 
Terror;\" \"Day A: Third Day of War;\" \"Like a Movie;\" \"U.S. 
Army Negotiated Before Attacking;\" \"Saddam: alive or dead?\" 
\"Nights of panic for Iraqi people.\" 
 
7. \"La Prensa\" 3/22 - political cartoonist Daro Banegas 
shows President Bush holding three signs, two of them 
against abortion and cloning, and the third one supporting 
war. 
 
8. \"La Prensa\" 3/23 - cover story featured a picture of a 
demonstration in Bangladesh entitled  \"More Protests.\"  The 
newspaper carried nine pages on the war, including the 
following headlines: \"Basra Besieged,\" \"Burning Oil in 
Kuwait,\" \"U.S. Government is Unsure if Iraq Will Use Weapons 
of Mass Destruction,\" \"The Day After in Baghdad,\" There 
might be Difficult Days: General Frank,\" \"ONU Expects More 
than 600,000 Refugees.\" 
 
9. \"La Prensa\" 3/24 - carried 14 pages of coverage on the 
war, focusing on the U.S. POWs as well as the demonstration 
supporting the war in Washington. 
 
10. Liberal \"El Tiempo\" 3/24 - Carried six pages on the war. 
The cover shows a picture of U.S. soldiers in Iraq, with 
\"Honduras has not sent troops to Iraq\" as the headline. 
 
11. \"El Tiempo\" 3/24 - cartoon by political cartoonist 
Dumont entitled, \"The Oscar goes to most stubborn,\" shows 
death announcing the Oscar winners. The candidates are 
Saddam Hussein and George Bush, who are partially covered by 
skulls. 
 
12. \"El Tiempo\" 3/24 - carried a three-page picture gallery 
on Iraq. 
 
PALMER 
"
"6792","3/25/2003 23:16","03TEGUCIGALPA752","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000752 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/TPP/BTA/ANA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
PASS TO USTR FOR SARAH SIPKINS 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/JEFFREY DUTTON 
TREASURY FOR BONNIE RESNICK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: ETRD, KTEX, HO 
SUBJECT: U.S.-CAFTA: Honduran Textile Goals in the U.S.- 
CAFTA Negotiations 
 
REF: A) TEGUC 00546 
     B) TEGUC 01391 
     C) TEGUC 02647 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Honduras can be expected to fight hard in 
the U.S.-CAFTA textile negotiations for rules of origin that 
allow use of fabrics produced in NAFTA, Central American, 
CBI and Andean countries, including allowing the manufacture 
of woven products, short supply provisions and flexible 
rules of origin mechanisms such as accumulation.  The GOH 
will continue to insist on maintaining special import 
regimes after tariffs in the U.S.-CAFTA region are 
eliminated because of their interest in short supply 
provisions and Honduras\' belief that the free trade zones 
are a key reason for Honduras\' success in the sector to 
date.  In addition, many Honduran firms (even those which do 
not export) have come to consider the tax exemptions an 
entitlement.  Unless the government\'s fiscal woes worsen 
significantly, we expect the GOH to insist on maintaining 
its \"WTO right\" to provide these tax incentives to 
investors. End Summary. 
 
-------------------- 
The Maquila Industry 
-------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) The attraction of the apparel assembly and related 
maquila operations has been one of Honduras\' few success 
stories in diversifying from traditional agricultural 
exports such as bananas and coffee.  The sector was expected 
to expand at double-digit rates after the adoption of 
expanded Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act (CBTPA) 
benefits in the U.S. but instead contracted for two years 
due to the downturn in the U.S. economy.  The importance of 
the sector to job creation and export earnings and the need 
to remain competitive after the planned elimination of 
worldwide textile and apparel quotas in 2005 make expanded 
market access for Honduran textiles and apparel its most 
important goal in U.S.-CAFTA negotiations. 
 
3. (U) Accumulated investment in the sector in 2002 totaled 
USD 1.422 billion, with USD 981.12 million in foreign 
investment.  Accumulated U.S. investment in the sector is 
estimated at 568.8 million, or 40 percent of the total 
maquila investment.  Currently, there are approximately 66 
U.S. textile companies in Honduras with the most prominent 
being Fruit of Loom, Sara Lee, Russell, Hugger, Dickies and 
Jockey.  Honduran companies account for some USD 440.8 
million, or 31 percent of total industry investment.  The 
rest of the investment is principally split between Korean, 
Canadian, Taiwanese and Chinese companies. 
 
Origin of Accumulated Investment in 2002 (USD Millions) 
 
U.S.      568.80 
Honduras  440.80 
Korea     213.30 
China     56.88 
Canada    49.20 
Taiwan    28.44 
Singapore 18.80 
Other     45.78 
 
Source: Honduran Maquila Association 
 
4. (U) The downturn in the U.S. economy since 2001 has led 
to maquila closings, net job losses in the sector and lower 
than expected earnings for 2002.  Total employment in the 
sector by December 2002 totaled 107,000 (approximately 26 
percent of the country\'s private sector workforce).  The 
industry had grown to over 125,000 in 2000 and officials 
predicted that maquila employment would double by 2005 to 
250,000 jobs.  However, that estimate has been substantially 
lowered to around 150,000 by 2005. 
 
Industry Employment 
 
1995       65,000 
1996       76,000 
1997       87,000 
1998      110,000 
1999      120,000 
2000      125,000 
2001      110,000 
2002      107,000 
Source: Honduran Maquila Association 
 
5. (U) Maquila sector exports have more than doubled since 
1995 when the industry registered USD 921 million in sales. 
In 2002, exports decreased to USD 2,287.6 billion compared 
to USD 2.344 billion in 2001.  However, Honduras is still 
the third ranked exporter of textiles worldwide, following 
Mexico and China. 
 
Exports (USD millions) 
 
1995        921.1 
1996      1,219.5 
1997      1,659.0 
1998      1,855.1 
1999      2,158.3 
2000      2,361.8 
2001      2,344.2 
2002      2,287.6 
 
Source: Honduran Maquila Association 
 
6. (U) The unilateral preferences provided by the USG to 
Honduran apparel industry through the Caribbean Basin 
Initiative (CBI) and related programs helped launch the 
growth in the industry in Honduras.  According to the GOH, 
Honduras\' exports to the U.S. of textiles and apparel grew 
from 27 percent of total exports to the U.S. in 1990 to 70 
percent of total exports to the U.S. in 2001. 
 
7. (U) GOH officials also emphasize in their discussions on 
the sector that the U.S. and Central American textile 
markets have become more and more interrelated.  They cite 
the figure that U.S. cotton yarn exports to Honduras doubled 
in the period from 2001 to 2002, after passage of the Trade 
Development Act. 
 
----------------------- 
U.S-CAFTA Negotiating Goals 
----------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) In February 4, 2003 written testimony by the 
Embassy of Honduras before the U.S. International Trade 
Commission on investigation 332-338, the Honduran Embassy 
spelled out the GOH\'s negotiating goals on textiles bluntly: 
 
-- Allow for the development of a seamless hemispheric 
textile and apparel industry; 
-- Establish rules of origin that are flexible enough to 
allow the use of fabrics produced in NAFTA, Central America, 
CBI and Andean countries and which will allow the 
manufacture of woven products; 
-- Rules of origin that include provisions such as TPL\'s, 
required percentages of regional and U.S. fabric, or inputs 
(accumulation), or similar mechanisms that will allow the 
integrated U.S.-Central American textile industry to use 
cost competitive fabrics; 
-- Integrate and simplify the custom compliance and security 
programs for Central America so the region\'s industry can be 
competitive; 
-- Establish technical provisions for qualifying textiles 
and apparel that will allow, among other procedures, dyeing, 
finishing and printing of all fabrics in the region; access 
for woven fabrics and commercially reasonable use of short 
supply provisions. 
 
----------------------------- 
Drawback and Free Trade Zones 
----------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Hondurans firmly believe that, in addition to the 
U.S.\'s CBI and CBTPA programs, the country\'s success as the 
number three exporter of textiles to the U.S. is rooted in 
its three free trade zone regimes.  During the negotiations 
leading up to the launch of the Doha Agenda, one of the 
GOH\'s main goals was to secure agreement on its \"right,\" 
under Article 7 of the Subsidies Agreement, to continue to 
operate free trade zones and provide related investment 
incentives, for 10 years.  Note: Honduras still has a per 
capita income under the Article 7 cap of USD 1000 but this 
level should be exceeded in the next couple of years; in 
addition, it should be noted that international financial 
institutions believe the Honduran GDP is generally 
understated. End Note.  The Honduran Finance Ministry and to 
a lesser extent the rest of the GOH is aware that the web of 
tax waivers provided through these programs and many other 
special laws is costing the government dearly in foregone 
tax receipts.  These revenue losses in turn have contributed 
to budget deficits, failure to meet IMF targets and the 
postponement of its HIPC debt relief).  Nonetheless, they 
continue to argue fiercely that the free trade zones are 
indispensable to Central America\'s continued 
competitiveness.  It should also be recognized that in the 
current domestic political environment, a U.S.-CAFTA 
agreement which forced the removal of these tax exemptions 
from so many of the country\'s prominent Honduran investors 
(30-40 percent of the investment is Honduran) would not be 
considered viable, no matter how attractive other benefits 
might be. 
 
10. (SBU) The three principal free trade zone regimes are: 
 
-- Temporary Importation regime (Regimen de importacion 
temporal or RIT).  Benefits are provided to Honduran-owned 
producers of any kind of product or service.  The regime was 
set up in the 1980s in order to provide Honduran national 
non-traditional exporters with tax incentives given in 
previous years to foreign investors (however, over the years 
implementation has been lax and many producers for the local 
market have also been given these RIT exemptions).  Customs 
benefits include: tax-free importation of all raw materials, 
intermediate goods, and capital goods exclusively related to 
production.  These companies were also exempt from income 
tax until 1994.  The beneficiaries are allowed to sell 
inputs, intermediate goods and final goods to other 
companies, free of sales tax.  The beneficiaries can buy 
locally made goods used directly in production process and 
receive either an exemption from sales tax or an income tax 
credit.  Approximately 530 Honduran establishments are 
incorporated under the RIT regime, of which close to 100 
produce raw material, 150 produce food products and 120 
produce textiles and apparel. 
 
-- Free Processing Industrial Zones (Zonas Industriales de 
Libre Procesamiento or ZIP) and Free Zones (Zona Libre or 
ZOLI).  The ZIP industrial parks house only manufacturing 
companies producing for export, which engage in 
transformation of imported imports into final exported 
products.  There are currently eight operating ZIP companies 
which house 48 assembly plants.  Enterprises established 
under the ZOLI regime receive similar benefits, but do not 
have to be located in a special zone or industrial park. 
Companies in ZIPs and ZOLIs are exempt from paying import 
duties on raw materials, intermediate products, and capital 
goods, and these do not need to be linked directly to the 
productive process.  ZIP companies are exempt from the 
national income tax for 20 years, and from municipal taxes 
for 10 years.  ZOLI firms have permanent exemptions from 
income tax and municipal taxes.  The companies are also 
provided unrestricted currency conversion and customs 
clearance is performed on-site (by contracted customs 
officials whose salaries are paid by the company). 
 
11. (SBU) A recent IDB sponsored study of Honduran tax 
policy found that in the year 2000, the special free trade 
zone regimes resulted in 47 million lempiras (USD 3.25 
million) in waived export duties and 553 million (USD 37.9 
million) in waived sales taxes.  Of these amounts, the 
majority of tax exemptions (39 million lempiras in customs 
duties and 467 million lempiras in waived sales taxes) went 
to Honduran companies under the RIT system.  There is no 
estimate of waived duties for companies operating in the ZIP 
and ZOLI regimes.  The study identified a negligible amount 
(around USD 150) in drawback refunded to companies in 2000. 
 
12. (SBU) The study also identified several flaws with the 
current system of investment incentives for exporting firms. 
Of particular note is the fact that foreign firms with 
assembly plants tend to treat their Honduran plants as a 
cost center.  Their profits are therefore not attributable 
to their Honduran activities and they would generally be 
reflected in the company\'s consolidated income statements in 
their home country.  For these foreign firms, the income tax 
exemptions are considered redundant and unnecessary to 
encourage foreign investment.  In other cases, it is 
possible that the signing of a Double Taxation agreement 
with the U.S. and other investor countries could help spur 
additional foreign investment without forfeiting tax 
revenues.  The GOH has recently asked the Embassy for more 
information on requesting that the Department of Treasury 
negotiate a Double Taxation treaty.  Finally, many other 
Honduran laws have been enacted over the years giving a 
variety of sectors and individual companies special import 
duty and other tax exemptions. 
 
13. (SBU) Another reason for the Honduran insistence on the 
maintenance of special import regimes, even after 
negotiating U.S.-CAFTA, lies in their negotiating goal of 
obtaining U.S. market access for woven fabrics and goods and 
use of short supply provisions (that allow duty free 
treatment of Central American products made from non-U.S. or 
regional fabric if that product is not available from 
regional sources).  Honduran trade officials note that the 
NAFTA has such provisions.  If U.S.-CAFTA includes short 
supply provisions, Honduran companies would want to continue 
to import the fabric through special import regimes. 
 
14. (SBU) GOH trade officials reject the argument that 
continued use of duty waivers for non-U.S. or regional 
fabric will provide a platform for circumvention of the 
rules of origin requirements.  Honduras has done fairly well 
over the years in U.S. Customs Service inspections of 
compliance with CBI and CBTPA rules. 
 
------------------------------- 
Customs Compliance and Security 
------------------------------- 
 
15. (SBU) The U.S. Customs Service\'s new rules on 24 hour 
advance manifests and expectations of additional port 
security requirements are of great concern to the Honduran 
textile and apparel industry, which specializes in quick 
deliveries because of its proximity to the U.S. market. 
Puerto Cortes and the Honduran  textile and apparel sector 
would benefit tremendously from cooperation on port 
security, and if possible, initiation of a Container 
Security Initiative program in Puerto Cortes. 
Palmer 
"
"6794","3/25/2003 23:55","03TEGUCIGALPA753","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE16166","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE please pass USAID for CJohnson 
STATE FOR OES/ETC Eskewes and FWS/DMA PThomas 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, ETRD, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH PREPARATION FOR CITES II LISTING OF BIGLEAF 
MAHOGANY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 16166 
 
1. (U) Summary. The scientific authority in Honduras, made 
up of both governmental and private entities, is preparing 
for the Appendix II listing of Bigleaf Mahogany to the 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
(CITES).  While Honduras does have some administrative and 
legal structure already in place, it lacks the additional 
technical training and funding to make their counter 
trafficking efforts and overall forestry management efforts 
fully successful.  Issues Honduras would like raised at the 
next Mahogany Working Group include certification, 
financing, information exchange, management issues and 
attracting private investment for plantations.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The scientific authority in Honduras, comprised of 
the Panamerican Agricultural School, the National Forestry 
Science School, the National Autonomous University of 
Honduras, and the National Forestry Department (COHDEFOR) 
meets monthly to discuss and give technical and scientific 
opinions on use of and exportation of CITES species. In 
previous administrations, the meetings were strictly run by 
the Honduran National Forestry Department, COHDEFOR.  The 
Office of Biodiversity in the Ministry of Natural Resources, 
SERNA, is currently the leading scientific authority for the 
group. 
 
3. (U) COHDEFOR is responsible for management of national 
forests, the land from which the largest portion of mahogany 
is harvested and exported.  COHDEFOR sells the wood by board- 
feet to agro-forestry groups and private businesses.  Agro- 
forestry groups and private businesses do the actual 
industrial transformation; both internal commercialization 
and export of industrialized products. 
 
4. (U) COHDEFOR has provided the following answers to 
specific questions raised in paragraph 4 of Secstate 16166: 
 
a) What is the host country outlook for implementing the 
Apendix II listing? 
 
The AFE-COHDEFOR is creating a special action plan in order 
to implement the requirements for the commerce of mahogany 
in accordance with the proposed Apendix II listing in CITES 
for bigleaf mahogany.  This process includes: 
 
-- Revision of the technical, regulatory and administrative 
norms and control mechanisms in the management plan. 
-- Training in a wide range of related subjects. 
-- Methods of control over illegal cutting in the forests 
and roadways, coordinated with the district attorney\'s 
office for environmental affairs, the Attorney General\'s 
office of environmental affairs, municipalities, organized 
civil society, the National Police, and the army. 
Additionally there is a need for controls in industrial 
centers. 
-- Measures to achieve a certification of forestry 
management. 
-- Continue the implementation of the certification program 
for forestry plantations. 
-- Intensify the efforts of mahogany plantations and other 
valuable species on national lands, community lands and 
private lands. 
 
Measures for the filing, collection and processing of 
documents required by CITES is more problematic. 
 
The GOH has encountered serious difficulties in the 
verification of the place of origin for mahogany, when 
applications for exportation of furniture and \"transformed 
or semi-transformed\" wood are presented. 
 
There are no means or mechanisms in place for export control 
(beside the fact that exports of mahogany are authorized, 
Honduras does not appear on the list of exporters of this 
species.) 
 
Due to the aforementioned and other situations, the 
feasibility of implementation of methods of control for the 
trafficking and sale of mahogany is low without the 
strengthening of the issues pointed out in the following 
responses listed below in numbers 3, 4 and 5. 
 
b) Will implementation fit into an existing system for 
sustainable management of forests and monitoring of trade? 
 
The implementation of CITES requirements falls under the 
current system for sustainable management in accordance with 
criteria and indicators already established. 
 
c) In what areas will the government need to build new 
capacity in order to implement the listing?  Do they appear 
to have the resources (financial, technical) and legislative 
framework to do so? 
 
The Government of Honduras needs to strengthen the 
systematic examination of biological information about the 
wild populations and/or plantations of the species.  This 
can be improved through the strengthening of the 
institutions that make up the scientific authority. 
 
Honduras also needs to improve public awareness and 
promotion of the certification of wood (environmental and 
social) as well as strengthen the mechanisms of 
administration of the Management Plan and control of illegal 
trafficking. 
 
The GOH and the scientific authority realize they need to 
develop a specific educational plan for: 
 
- Public defenders, attorney general\'s offices 
- Technical advisors working on Forestry Management 
- Customs Officials 
- National Police Officials 
- Organized Agro-Forestry groups 
- Private Companies: Forest owners, lumberjacks, wood 
     processors / finishers, exporters 
- Administrative authorities 
 
A national norm pertaining to the implementation of CITES 
(i.e. adaptation of the existing technical norms agreed to 
in the CITES) needs to be created. 
 
The legal instruments at the national level for the 
implementation of CITES is the CITES convention itself which 
Honduras has ratified.  Honduras also has forestry and 
environmental laws which provide institutions with clear 
legal mandates for the implementation of CITES. 
 
The technical capacity for the implementation of CITES 
exists both within and outside of Government agencies, but 
it requires up-to-date training. There is a lack of 
technical training of the management and use of plantations 
and natural forests for peasant groups involved in the 
exploitation of colored wood (such as mahogany) and the 
industrial or institutional technicians who act in 
compliance with scientific and administrative authorities. 
 
There is a lack of financial resources to carry out studies 
of wild populations (inventories, distribution, etc.)  There 
need to be more public awareness campaigns at a national 
level. 
 
d) What specific issues would the host government like to 
see addressed at the meeting of the Mahogany Working Group? 
 
Themes the GOH would like to discuss in the Mahogany working 
group are: 
 
-- Certification of forestry management and forestry 
products 
 
-- Financing for certain aspects of trafficking control, 
such as identification guides for CITES species of wood (for 
customs officials). 
 
-- Exchange of experiences and information between countries 
who have common interests (countries that share natural 
distribution of mahogany) 
 
-- Management and protection projects for natural forests. 
 
-- Programs for the attraction of private investment for 
plantations 
 
PALMER 
"
"6824","3/26/2003 15:04","03TEGUCIGALPA754","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA425","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR TFIZ, WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND DS/OP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, SOCI, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: ANTI-WAR PROTEST OUTSIDE EMBASSY SMALLER 
THAN EXPECTED IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 425 
 
1. On March 24, from about 3:45 p.m. to 5:15 p.m., a 
demonstration against the war in Iraq took place outside the 
Embassy.  The event was organized by Carlos Reyes, President 
of the Popular Block, an anti-U.S. leftist organization. 
Participating in the demonstration were other like-minded 
organizations, all of whom have taken part in past anti-U.S. 
protests (reftel).  Post initially expected up to 1,000 
protesters, but at most only 300 demonstrators participated. 
While Reyes had contacted many other organizations, including 
labor unions, in an effort to expand turn-out, attendance was 
limited to past protest groups. 
 
2. Two protesters threw paint at a USG facility and one 
painted a slogan before police moved in to protect the 
property.  Also, several U.S. flags were burned and three 
other men \"launched\" about ten loud fireworks.  The 
demonstration ended peacefully when the crowd moved on to the 
Spanish Embassy. Police presence was adequate to ensure the 
protection of USG property and personnel. 
 
3. COMMENT: Despite its opposition to the war in Iraq, the 
Liberal Party avoided any involvement in the demonstration. 
One leader said \"we are anti-war, not anti-U.S.\" END COMMENT 
Palmer 
"
"6835","3/26/2003 19:08","03TEGUCIGALPA762","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000762 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA(BUCKLEY), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ MARCH 3/22-24/03 
 
 
1.  \"El Heraldo\" moderate Tegucigalpa-based daily 3/22: 
Apuntes: \"The European Union, the Republic of China and 
Vladimir Putin have discovered that Bush can count on the 
complete support of the Senate, including that of senators 
who were against the Iraq invasion.\" \"The U.S. is the empire 
no matter who is in power, and the `empire\' won\'t stop until 
it consolidates its rule of the planet.unless, of course, a 
bipolar world re-emerges with the Europeans or Chinese on 
one side and the U.S. on the other.\" 
 
2. \"El Heraldo\" \"Shock and Awe\" 3/24: The unpopular invasion 
of Iraq is in its most devastating phase - the  `Shock and 
Awe\' phase, which equals `terrorism\' according to some of 
the posters held by protesters. There are many people who 
lived the terror and lost dear ones on September 11 
participating in the protests against the war. They better 
than anyone understand the pain and damage caused by 
terrorism --the longer this war lasts, the bigger will be 
the number of victims.\"  Now that the U.S. has broken 
international law with the invasion, we have no choice but 
to pray for this nightmare to end sooner than later so that 
the Iraqi people can stop suffering.\" 
 
3. \"El Heraldo\" 3/22, \"Pandora\'s Box\"  by Noe Pineda 
Portillo. 
\"The attempt to force the U.N. Security Counsel to authorize 
military action opened a large breach between the U.S and 
the countries that supported a diplomatic resolution.\" 
Before opening the Pandora\'s box, the U.S. and England 
should have listened and pondered the U.N. role, and 
understood that the world is a system of nations. 
 
\" Bush believes that those who criticize its unilateral war 
against Iraq are opposed the U.S.  That is a false 
assumption.  It is public knowledge that Saddam Hussein is a 
dictator even with his own family.  But it is up to the 
International Court of Justice to look for a resolution 
through a course of action like they did with Milosevic.  A 
one-sided war will not only bring terrible economic 
consequences, it\'ll increase Islam reaction around the 
world, exacerbating fundamentalism to a real terrorist 
threat around the globe.\" 
 
4. El Heraldo 3/24  - in their daily section called \"Today\'s 
villain,\" \"Today\'s Hero,--\"the Villain was \"Fidel Castro: 
For taking advantage of the war against Iraq to send to 
prison those who oppose to his communist regime.\" The Hero 
was Pacifism: \"For bringing hope to people around the world 
and standing against those who love death, pain and 
destruction.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"7061","4/2/2003 21:36","03TEGUCIGALPA824","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03STATE82391","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR TFIZ, IO, PM, S/CT, S/WCI, DRL, NP, AND L 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/CCA, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, PHUM, AORC, KTIA, KAWC, IZ, HO, KICC 
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: AMBASSADOR URGES HONDURAN FM PEREZ-CADALSO 
TO MAKE STRONGER PUBLIC STATEMENTS SUPPORTING U.S. ON IRAQ 
 
REF: A. STATE 82391 
 
     B. OLSEN/KELLY E-MAIL 04/01/03 
     C. STATE 81638 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 789 
     E. KELLY/PALMER E-MAIL 03/21/03 
     F. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 3318 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (S) Summary.  Ambassador met April 1 with Honduran 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Guillermo Perez-Cadalso to 
discuss a wide range of issues, with a focus on Iraq and 
combating terrorism.  Ambassador urged the GOH to make 
stronger public statements on Iraq, including on Iraqi war 
crimes, and criticized the recent statement by the Honduran 
UN PermRep as \"empty.\"  Perez-Cadalso said that the GOH would 
definitely provide troops to support the U.S. in post-war 
Iraq, and pledged to work with the Ministry of Defense to get 
a formal letter offering support to the USG.  Ambassador 
pressed the FM on the need to ratify the ICC Article 98 
Agreement with the U.S., sign/ratify five outstanding UN and 
two OAS counterterrorism conventions/protocols, and support 
the USG candidacy for the UNESCO Executive Board.  The FM 
pledged that the GOH would support the final draft of the 
UNCHR resolution on Cuba, reiterated the GOH\'s desire for an 
18-month extension of TPS, and noted the tougher language in 
the 2002 Human Rights Report on extrajudicial killings and 
corruption in Honduras.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Ambassador and PolOff met April 1 with Honduran 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias at 
the MFA to discuss Iraq and other key issues.  The meeting 
followed the Ambassador\'s March 28 meeting with Honduran 
President Ricardo Maduro (septel). 
 
Iraq: GOH Needs to be Publicly Supportive 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Ambassador thanked FM Perez-Cadalso for the GOH\'s 
support for the U.S. as a member of the Coalition of the 
Willing on Iraq.  The Foreign Minister said that he was the 
highest ranking representative of foreign governments in 
attendance at a recent briefing at the State Department for 
representatives of the coalition, during his recent trip to 
Washington (ref E).  Ambassador told the FM that the USG was 
not happy with Honduran UN PermRep Manuel Acosta Bonilla\'s 
statement during the March 26 United Nations Security Council 
open debate on Iraq.  It was a weak and empty statement that 
did not show support for the USG position on Iraq, said the 
Ambassador.  Ambassador emphasized that he had already 
discussed with President Maduro March 28 the USG\'s 
disappointment with the statement (septel).  Ambassador told 
FM Perez-Cadalso that the USG needed stronger support from 
coalition partners, and urged the GOH to speak out publicly 
in support of U.S. policy on Iraq.  Perez-Cadalso made it 
clear that he had gotten the message, but he neither 
criticized the PermRep nor pledged to make a more forceful 
public statement on Iraq. 
 
4. (C) Ambassador reiterated that the USG was watching 
closely Honduran statements, or lack thereof, on Iraq.  The 
comparison with El Salvador, which has made repeated public 
statements of support on U.S. Iraq policy, already offered 
troops in a post-war Iraq, and has ratified virtually all 
counterterrorism conventions, was not favorable to Honduras. 
Ambassador said he understood that the war was a potentially 
difficult issue for the GOH, but emphasized that the neutral 
UN statement by the Honduran PermRep was seen by the USG as a 
lost opportunity for the GOH to publicly support U.S. policy 
on Iraq. 
 
Iraqi War Crimes - FM Asks for Written Material 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
5. (SBU) Ambassador delivered ref C demarche on Iraqi war 
crimes, which PolOff had delivered March 31 to MFA DG for 
Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin.  The FM asked for a brief 
written report from the U.S. detailing the points raised by 
the Ambassador.  Perez-Cadalso said that the GOH needed this 
before making any statement to the press.  Ambassador said 
that the Embassy would request it from the Department.  Post 
has since asked WHA/CEN to find out when the \"public 
diplomacy package\" on this issue mentioned in the cable will 
be ready to give to Posts to release to host governments and 
the press, and if there was anything in the meantime that the 
Department can provide posts for use as a non-paper or fact 
sheet to the GOH, preferably in Spanish (ref B). 
 
Honduras Will Offer Troops for Post-War Iraq 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (S) Ambassador raised the issue of possible GOH 
participation in post-war \"phase IV\" operations in Iraq, 
saying that both President Maduro (septel) and Minister of 
Defense Fred Breve had previously given the Embassy 
indications of support.  Ambassador emphasized that the USG 
needed a formal written offer of support from the GOH 
detailing the kind of assistance the GOH was prepared to 
provide.  Perez-Cadalso said that the answer was yes, the GOH 
would provide troops, and that he would talk with MOD Breve 
and work on getting a formal offer of support to the USG. 
 
ICC Article 98 Agreement: Congress a Potential Problem 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
7. (C) When asked about the status of ratifying the ICC 
Article 98 Agreement between the U.S. and Honduras, 
Perez-Cadalso confirmed that it had not yet been sent to 
congress for approval.  The FM said it was a difficult time, 
given the ongoing war in Iraq, for the GOH to seek 
congressional approval of this controversial agreement. 
Ambassador underlined that the USG would remember favorably 
countries that stood by the U.S. during the war in Iraq, and 
noted that this support might include taking tough steps such 
as this.  Perez-Cadalso asked Ambassador for USG assistance 
to urge Congress, especially the opposition Liberal Party, to 
support approval of the agreement.  Ambassador said that the 
Embassy would be happy to talk to congressional leaders about 
the importance of approving the agreement.  (Note:  The 
Liberal Party is opposed to U.S. policy on Iraq. 
Perez-Cadalso evidently believes that this may fuel potential 
Liberal Party opposition to an ICC Article 98 Agreement. 
Post notes that the GOH had months since the September 19, 
2002 signing of the agreement in which the GOH could have 
introduced the agreement to congress for approval prior to 
the start of the war in Iraq.  End Note.) 
 
Honduras Moving Slowly on Counterterrorism Conventions 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
8. (SBU) Ambassador gave the FM a Spanish-language copy of 
the IAEA\'s 1980 Convention on the Physical Protection on 
Nuclear Materials (which WHA/CEN had obtained with the 
assistance of NP/NE and U.S. Mission Vienna).  PolOff told 
the FM that the Embassy hoped to soon have Spanish-language 
texts of the two ICAO and two IMO counterterrorism (CT) 
conventions/protocols also outstanding.  (In fact, with the 
assistance of IO and Embassy London, WHA/CEN obtained copies 
of the two IMO CT conventions/protocols which Post sent to 
the FM April 2.  Post now only needs the two ICAO 
conventions/protocols, with the assistance of ConGen 
Montreal.)  This was in addition to the Spanish-language 
texts of the two OAS CT conventions (obtained by WHA/CEN with 
the help of WHA/USOAS and delivered to the FM during WHA DAS 
Fisk\'s February 6 meeting with him.) which the FM claimed 
would soon be sent to congress for approval.  Ambassador made 
clear the USG\'s desire that Honduras sign and/or ratify all 
seven outstanding CT conventions as quickly as possible.  The 
FM told Ambassador that the CT conventions would not be 
controversial in Congress, but blamed the Casa Presidencial 
for some of the delay in forwarding the CT conventions to 
congress.  (Note:  The DCM has raised the issue of the CT 
conventions/protocols with Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza in a March 12 meeting and a March 28 letter.  End 
Note.) 
 
GOH Will Support Final Draft of UNCHR Resolution on Cuba 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
9. (C) In response to Ambassador\'s request for the GOH to 
co-sponsor the United Nations Commission on Human Rights 
(UNCHR) resolution on Cuba (as it had done in 2002), the FM 
said that his understanding was that the Peruvian draft 
resolution was still circulating for comments.  Once the 
draft was finalized, Perez-Cadalso said that the GOH would 
support it.  AMB Fortin told PolOff April 1 that the GOH had 
a copy of a draft resolution sponsored by Peru, Costa Rica, 
and Nicaragua. 
 
UNESCO Executive Board - Noncommittal Response from FM 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
10. (U) Ambassador demarched FM on the upcoming re-entry of 
the U.S. into UNESCO, and urged the GOH to support the USG 
candidacy for the UNESCO Executive Board as requested in a 
dip note.  Perez-Cadalso was noncommittal.  PolOff, who had 
previously demarched AMB Fortin on the issue (ref D), called 
Fortin after the meeting to confirm that the scheduled date 
for the election was October 10, 2003, in response to a 
question from the FM, who mentioned that the Honduran 
Ambassador in Geneva would be changing prior to October. 
 
TPS - GOH Makes Another Plea for 18 Month Extension 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
11. (SBU) Ambassador gave Perez-Cadalso a copy of the letter 
from the Secretary to the FM on the Honduran request for an 
extension of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for Hondurans, 
that thanked Perez-Cadalso for his March 18 letter and 
explained that a decision was pending (ref A).  The FM 
reiterated that the GOH was seeking an 18-month extension of 
TPS.  The Ambassador said that he would relay this request to 
Washington. 
 
FM Notes Criticism in Human Rights Report 
----------------------------------------- 
 
12. (SBU) Ambassador gave FM a copy of the final version of 
the Country Report on Human Rights Practices for Honduras for 
2002.  PolOff had given an embargoed copy to AMB Fortin March 
31, which the FM said he had skimmed that afternoon. 
Perez-Cadalso noted that the criticism on extrajudicial 
killings and corruption was somewhat tougher than the 2001 
report, and said that the timing of the release of the report 
was difficult.  He said that it was difficult for the GOH to 
be criticized by the USG at the same time it was supporting 
the U.S. on Iraq. 
 
MFA Gets the Message on Iraq 
---------------------------- 
 
13. (S) Comment.  FM Perez-Cadalso understood Ambassador\'s 
direct message that the GOH, as a member of the coalition, 
needed to express its public support for U.S. policy on Iraq 
in a more forceful manner.  His definitive answer that the 
GOH would provide troops in some capacity for post-war Iraq 
was positive, but his failure to pledge to make a more 
forceful public statement on Iraq was not.  On most issues 
the MFA is a cautious institution, and Perez-Cadalso is often 
an embodiment of that caution.  He has not taken any bold 
initiatives as Foreign Minister but has conscientiously 
carried out Maduro Administration foreign policies.  It is 
important to note that he is not a member of the tight Maduro 
inner circle.  (In fact, his removal has been the subject of 
ongoing speculation since December 2002.)  Nevertheless, Post 
believes that Perez-Cadalso and President Maduro understand 
that as a member of the coalition on Iraq, the GOH needs to 
make bolder public statements.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"7062","4/2/2003 22:21","03TEGUCIGALPA825","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000825 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA  (BUCKLEY), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, APRIL 2, 2003 
 
 
1. Regular columnist Wilmer Perez Regalado in liberal 
party San Pedro Sula-based daily \"La Prensa,\" 4/2 - 
\"Madness - War machine of war:\" \"In the war of George Bush 
against Saddam Hussein, for both \"axes of evil\".. apparently 
the God they implore and at times manipulate to do what they 
want is a sanguinary, genocidal and blind God that has no 
love for humanity. It is a God called Yahv or Al  brought 
down to the size of their hallucinating minds\". 
 
\"Bush led a unruly adolescent life, the product of his 
father\'s money, which was dedicated to the exploitation of 
U.S. oil. He gave up amphetamines and alcohol when he was 
forty years old; then he turned political and was elected 
governor of Texas and then President.  After giving up 
addiction, he became religious, which now permits him to 
\"talk\" to his God and consult him about personal decisions 
and, more gravely, political plans.\" 
 
On the other hand Saddam, a fanatic Muslim accustomed of 
war, is an orphan who grew up with an uncle with pro-nazi 
ideas who taught him a purified nationalism. His ascent to 
power was fed by the western powers providing him raw 
material to build chemical and biological weapons in the 
fight against the Khomeni of Iran, enemy of the U.S., then 
against Kurds and Shiites. He considers himself as a Jihad 
or \"holy war\" spiritual leader against the infidels.  Saddam 
and Bush are two peas in a pod, or two tears in an 
unredeemed world. 
 
 
2. President of the Honduran Council of Private Enterprise 
Jacobo Regalado was interviewed for \"La Prensa\" daily 
economic section, 4/2 - \"War in Iraq still has not impacted 
national commerce-- we can confirm that there hasn\'t been 
any negative impact that could affect our business in the 
international market.  That is because in the first days of 
the war saw a positive impact in the reduction of oil prices 
to $26.99.  However, some analysts have raised the 
possibility that if the conflict takes a long time, oil 
prices could increase.\" 
 
3. Regular columnist Mario Alvarado in \"El Heraldo\" moderate 
Tegucigalpa-based daily, 4/2 - \"The other Globalization\": 
the garb of the current globalization project depends on the 
system developed by the western social-political forces: 
Democracy. After the collapse of East European socialism, 
societies in a large part of the world have tried to find a 
solution to their economic social, and political problems 
within this system. But it also has served international 
capitalists interests that have shaped the system to its 
service.  In the name of globalization, today proponents of 
globalism attack economically, socially and politically 
small nations or \"peripheral nations\" to take their 
industries and natural resources using the excuse of \"free 
market.\" 
 
\"In this context the rapine war against Iraq is a 
manifestation of the most virulent aspect of globalization. 
But it is also an aspect that has served more to unite 
millions of women and men around the world against this war 
of conquest.  Humanity has already said no to globalization; 
today it has said no to the War.  Certainly, the new Hitler 
could occupy Iraq and steal its oil, but he can\'t stop 
history.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"7063","4/2/2003 23:13","03TEGUCIGALPA826","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","02TEGUCIGALPA3318|03STATE75175|03TEGUCIGALPA674","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000826 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR TFIZ, IO, PM, S/CT, NP, DRL/IL, EB, AND L 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, WHA/CCA AND INL/LP 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, SNAR, EFIN, ETRD, ELAB, KTIA, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PRESIDENT MADURO DISCUSSES UPCOMING 
MEETING WITH PRESIDENT BUSH, IRAQ, CUBA AND THE PENDING IMF 
AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. STATE 75175 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 674 
     C. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 3318 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer for Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (S) SUMMARY:  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro suggested 
that Central American Presidents remain interested in raising 
non-CAFTA topics during their upcoming meeting with President 
Bush.  He also reaffirmed his commitment to provide Honduran 
troops for post-conflict operations in Iraq, even while he 
acknowledged weak public statements of support by the 
Honduran UN Permanent Representative at last week\'s UNSC 
session.  Maduro concurred that the GOH would review any 
actions in Cuba in light of Fidel Castro,s recent crackdown 
on human rights activists.  Finally, he flagged continuing 
political problems in addressing the escalating public wage 
bill, in particular the challenge of breaking a crippling 
doctors\' strike.  He indicated that an IMF agreement remains 
a top priority but said differences remained between the 
Government of Honduras and the IMF. END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) Ambassador met one-on-one with President Maduro at the 
Casa Presidencial March 28.  Ambassador subsequently met with 
Foreign Minister Perez-Cadalso on April 1 to discuss Iraq and 
other key issues (septel). 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
April 10 Central American Presidents Visit 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C) President Maduro opened the discussion by raising the 
upcoming meeting between the five Central American presidents 
and President Bush scheduled for April 10 in Washington. 
Maduro reiterated that each president had been assigned 
specific topics to raise with the President and would take a 
regional rather than bilateral approach.  He emphasized that 
the Central American presidents wanted to present their 
vision for the future of the region to the President. 
Specifically, the Presidents had laid out that vision in the 
Roatan Declaration.  The list follows:  Agriculture and the 
asymmetry which should govern our future commercial relations 
(Costa Rica); Central American security, the fight against 
narcotrafficking, terrorism and organized crime (El 
Salvador); Disarmament and reduction of arms in the region 
(Nicaragua); Consolidation of democracy and regional 
integration (Guatemala); and Promotion of investment in 
Central America and the development of infrastructure 
(Honduras). 
 
4. (C)  While deeply appreciative of the opportunity to meet 
with President Bush given the ongoing war, Maduro suggested 
that, in his view, the Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA) is only part of the process needed to turn the region 
as a whole \"into a success story\" and that the presidents 
wanted to make the most out of this meeting with the 
President to advance the U.S.-Central American agenda.   He 
stated that the Central Americans wanted to point out the key 
areas that had to be addressed in the region in order to 
promote needed political and economic integration for 
long-term economic growth and poverty reduction. Ambassador 
reminded Maduro that in this instance, given the short amount 
of time available before the meeting, that remarks should be 
concise, focused, and limited to CAFTA. 
 
-------------------------- 
Maduro Supportive on Iraq 
-------------------------- 
 
5. (S) Ambassador acknowledged President Maduro\'s supportive 
stance on Iraq and for Honduras joining the coalition.  He 
noted the Government of Honduras\' (GOH) support underscored 
the strong relationship between the two countries and that 
Washington was appreciative.  Ambassador also told Maduro 
that Washington was interested in pursuing his offer of 
troops to assist in post-conflict Iraq and encouraged Maduro 
to make a formal offer in writing to the USG so our 
military-to-military planning could move forward.  However, 
Ambassador called attention to USG disappointment with the 
luke-warm statement delivered by Ambassador Manuel Acosta 
Bonilla, the Honduran Permanent Representative to the United 
Nations, during the March 26 Security Council open session on 
Iraq.  Ambassador urged Maduro and the GOH to play a more 
active public role in support of the coalition\'s goals. 
Maduro reaffirmed Honduras\' support for the coalition and was 
apologetic regarding the statement by Acosta Bonilla.  He 
acknowledged that the remarks were insufficient and that they 
did not reflect the solid support Honduras has for the 
coalition\'s goals.  He went so far as to suggest that he 
would tell the Foreign Minister to remove Bonilla if his 
performance at the UN did not improve.  (COMMENT:  Only the 
President has the legal authority to remove a standing 
ambassador and Maduro is probably aware of this.  In 
addition, given Bonilla\'s status as one of the Nationalist 
Party\'s senior statesmen, only Maduro himself would be able 
to dismiss him.  More than likely Maduro\'s statement was 
intended to deflect criticism of his administration\'s 
relatively meek public support of the coalition\'s efforts to 
date. END COMMENT.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
ICC Article 98 Agreement and Counterterrorism Conventions 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
6. (SBU) Ambassador reiterated the necessity of Honduran 
ratification of the International Criminal Court (ICC) 
Article 98 Agreement and expressed hope the agreement could 
be sent to Congress for action as soon as possible. 
Ambassador also provided President Maduro with a list of five 
outstanding UN and two OAS counterterrorism 
conventions/protocols that the USG would like Honduras to 
sign and/or ratify as soon as possible (ref C).  Maduro did 
not seem fully informed on this subject, confusing the 
Article 98 Agreement with the outstanding counterterrorism 
conventions.  Maduro said he would pass the list to the MFA 
(which Post confirmed he did) but he did not offer any 
time-frame for movement on either the ICC agreement or the 
outstanding counterterrorism conventions/protocols. 
(COMMENT:  The GOH is unlikely to forward the Article 98 
Agreement, or seek congressional action on it, until after it 
secures congressional authorization for the deployment of 
Honduran troops to Iraq. END COMMENT.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
AMB Urges Continued Delay on Honduran Ambassador to Cuba 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
7. (S) Ambassador called Maduro\'s attention to the fact that 
Fidel Castro was taking advantage of the conflict in the 
Middle East to crack down on human rights/pro-democracy 
activists in Cuba (ref A).  He directly asked Maduro to 
further delay the appointment of a Honduran ambassador to 
Cuba.  If an appointment is forthcoming in the future, 
Ambassador reminded Maduro that the GOH had agreed to consult 
Post prior to any type of announcement.  Maduro acknowledged 
that he is not very comfortable with Cuba or the Cuban 
doctors in Honduras, referring to concerns that the Cuban 
doctors practice \"more than medicine.\"  However, Maduro once 
again repeated that his administration was not responsible 
for the opening to Cuba and that he had inherited the 
situation from his predecessor.  He promised to keep USG 
concerns in mind in any dealings with Cuba. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Disappointing Results on Honduran Counternarcotics Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
8. (S) The Ambassador underscored USG disappointment over the 
lack of effective Honduran interdiction efforts against the 
large amount of illegal narcotics that transit Honduras 
annually.  He pointed out that drug seizures in Honduras are 
at a three-year low.   Ambassador spelled out how corruption 
within the Honduran military and police is undermining law 
enforcement efforts.  He explained that whenever the USG 
passes counternarcotics information to GOH sources it is 
invariably leaked to the traffickers.  Maduro expressed 
dismay and asked if the USG knew who was responsible. 
Ambassador told Maduro the USG was investigating but to date 
had no firm suspects.  However, when the culprits are 
discovered, Ambassador insisted that they be \"summarily 
dismissed.\"  Maduro promised full support on the issue but 
also cited a lack of resources as a major impediment to GOH 
efforts to improve counternarcotics results. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Maduro Very Concerned Over Continued Doctors\' Strike 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
9. (C)  Maduro then raised his deep concern over the 
continued doctors\' strike which began in Tegucigalpa March 18 
and spread nationwide March 24, raising his fears that it 
could cause general instability and that the doctors may try 
to take over hospitals as had been done in the past.  He said 
he was considering dispatching police units to the hospitals 
to prevent this from occurring and that he might be forced to 
declare a \"state of emergency,\" if the situation deteriorated 
further.  (NOTE:  Maduro was scheduled to meet with his 
cabinet later that same day regarding the strike.  Since this 
meeting, the doctors have suspended their strike and have met 
with the GOH to discuss their differences.  The GOH has 
agreed not to fire any of the doctors that were on strike for 
the time being.  END NOTE.) 
 
10. (C)  Negotiations are ongoing. While the proximate cause 
of the strike was a dispute with the Minister of Health Elias 
Lizardi over appointments of doctors in public hospitals, the 
deeper issue is the impending revision of a law which 
guarantees that the basic doctor\'s salary is 14 times the 
minimum wage which leads to relatively exorbitant salaries 
compared with other public sector employees.  Doctors earn 
anywhere from USD 14,000 - 50,000 a year from just one public 
salary, and many hold two government jobs or have a private 
practice which greatly increases their income.  The 
government must reduce its public wage bill in order to reach 
an agreement with the IMF.  (See para 12 for additional 
detail on IMF negotiations.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Increased Foreign Direct Investment and an IMF Package 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
11. (C) Maduro highlighted that increasing foreign direct 
investment (FDI) remains a high priority for his 
administration.  Maduro referred to a conversation he had 
with Ian Walker (a British economic consultant on the Casa 
Presidencial payroll) who claimed that Honduras would need to 
attract between USD 2.5 to 3 billion annually in order to 
increase GDP by two percent.  Maduro said he was considering 
tax credits, tax forgiveness, duty free status, and other 
measures to accomplish this goal.  Maduro expressed optimism 
that with increased FDI, GDP could rise to the level of 
between five and six percent annually.  Ambassador 
complimented Maduro on his desire to attract increased FDI, 
but noted that the main obstacle to accomplishing this goal 
is deeper reform of the dysfunctional judicial system. 
Ambassador added that \"the lack of judicial security,\" is the 
most serious concern for any prospective investor. 
 
12. (S) During the conversation on FDI Maduro segued into his 
desire to complete an IMF agreement as soon as possible (ref 
B).  Maduro stressed that his administration had been making 
real progress on constraining the budget deficit and that the 
IMF should take that into account.  He also stated he thought 
the IMF was being too dogmatic on the civil service salary 
issue.  The possible revision of laws guaranteeing doctors 
and teachers salaries in multiples of the minimum wage, 
meaning that every raise in the minimum wage leads to large 
raises for doctors and teachers, is a hot button political 
issue.  (COMMENT:  Interestingly, Maduro refrained from 
asking for any type of USG assistance to move the IMF process 
forward.  It appears that he understands the parameters of 
what the USG is willing to do with the IMF. END COMMENT) 
 
Palmer 
"
"7082","4/3/2003 15:02","03TEGUCIGALPA828","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA652","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000828 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, IO, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: 04/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ETRD, AORC, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: BUDGET CUTS HARM ALREADY STRUGGLING HONDURAN 
FOREIGN MINISTRY 
 
REF:  A.  TEGUCIGALPA 652 
 
B.  02 TEGUCIGALPA 3407 
 
Classified by Ambassador Larry Palmer; reasons 1.5(b) and 
(d). 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: Severe budget cuts at the Honduran Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs threaten to incapacitate its ability to 
execute a coherent foreign policy strategy.  The cuts, 
amounting to 31 percent since President Ricardo Maduro came 
into office early last year, mean new layoffs and embassy 
closings, plus more work for the already overloaded staff 
who remain.  Several items on the Ministry\'s agenda affect 
the U.S., including support for the Coalition of the 
Willing, the current CAFTA negotiation and the country\'s 
request to extend Temporary Protected Status for Honduran 
immigrants.  The present understaffed and overworked status 
of MFA functionaries limits their ability to respond in a 
timely manner to U.S. initiatives and demarches.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) The Honduran Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) 
supports approximately 160 employees spread throughout 36 
embassies, 13 consulates and 31 consular sections. 
Honduras also has 45 honorary consulates whose consuls do 
not earn formal salaries.  However, the Ministry is in the 
midst of significant budget cuts.  Sources vary on the 
exact amount of the cuts (see ref B for previous reporting 
on MFA budget cuts).  Post received the following figures 
from Ambassador Mario Fortin and the Honduran press.  In 
2002, the MFA\'s allowance was cut 17 percent, leaving it at 
272 million lempiras, or approximately USD 16 million.  For 
calendar year 2003, the budget was cut yet again, this time 
by 14 percent. As a result, the MFA in 2003 has less than 
USD 14 million with which to support both its domestic and 
foreign operations--only 69 percent of the Ministry\'s 2001 
budget. 
 
3. (U) The MFA\'s diminishing finances are a growing 
impediment to the country\'s ability to effectively supply 
and manage its domestic and international posts and carry 
out a coherent foreign policy.  Primarily, these budget 
cuts mean a reduction in personnel and embassy closings 
and/or consolidations.  According to Honduran foreign 
service officers, however, conditions at overseas posts are 
already spartan.  Posts have minimal support staff, even in 
comparison to other Central American embassies.  Most 
Honduran ambassadors earn between USD 4,000 and 6,000 per 
month, plus an equivalent stipend for expenses.  Salaries 
and expense allowances for ambassadors to the U.S. and some 
other countries, including Japan, are higher due to cost of 
living allowances.  In December 2002 the salary for the 
ambassador to Japan was USD 10,000 monthly plus a USD 
20,000 monthly expense allowance  (Note:  These figures 
were reported in U.S. dollars in the Honduran press.  End 
Note.)  According to the Honduran paper \"El Heraldo,\" the 
ambassadorship to Japan has often stayed vacant for 
extended periods of time because no one has been willing to 
accept the position, presumably due to lack of sufficient 
funding.  Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias 
was recently quoted in the Honduran press acknowledging 
that ambassadorial salaries were too low and blaming the 
two recent budget cuts. 
 
4. (U) Despite these financial concerns, the MFA recently 
unveiled an ambitious agenda for 2003.  The agenda 
includes: 
--Restructuring of personnel in the Ministry, mainly due to 
budget cuts (i.e., dismissals and embassy 
closures/consolidations) 
--CAFTA signing, 
--Working with USG to extend Temporary Protected Status 
(TPS) for Honduran migrants to the U.S., 
--Presentation of observations on the Solicitation of 
Revision presented by El Salvador to the International 
Court of Justice (concerning the El Salvador/Honduras 
border dispute), 
--Making progress on maritime border demarcation with 
Nicaragua through the International Court of Justice, 
--Overcoming technical problems in the demarcation of the 
Honduras-El Salvador border, 
--Continuation of negotiations of maritime boundaries with 
Mexico, Cuba, and the OAS agreement on the Gulf of Honduras 
(on the Caribbean coast), 
--Suspension of the 35 percent tariff imposed by Nicaragua 
(this was already accomplished through the temporary 
suspension of the tariff on March 11 - see ref A), 
--Consolidation of the Customs Union for Central America, 
and 
--Continuation of the Plan Puebla Panama. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT:  Post is concerned that the 31 percent 
total cut in the MFA\'s budget over the last year and a half 
is significantly detrimental to the Ministry\'s ability to 
achieve its agenda goals.  For Example, Director General 
for Foreign Policy, Ambassador Mario Fortin, has been an 
excellent contact within the MFA for Post.  However, due to 
limited staffing, he is forced to cover a wide range of 
countries and issues. 
 
6. (SBU) COMMENT CONTINUED:  Proposed restructuring in the 
MFA has had a very negative impact on morale.  At times, it 
appears that Ambassador Fortin is a one-man shop.  He has 
no substantive staff to whom he can delegate.  Other 
diplomats have told us that they believe he is completely 
overburdened by the range of issues he covers.  Post is 
also concerned that cuts and or elimination of GOH posts 
abroad could be highly problematic in the case of a natural 
disaster, as Honduran embassies abroad were instrumental in 
gathering vital international aid after the 1998 tragedy of 
Hurricane Mitch. 
 
7. (C) Comment CONTINUTED:  There are a limited number of 
subject experts on technical issues in the MFA, leaving the 
GOH with little or no input on many complex international 
issues.  Post notes that the MFA\'s lack of technical 
experts allows the U.S. to play an influential advisory 
role in Honduran foreign affairs.  However, the MFA\'s bare- 
bones staff and lack of administrative support means that 
it cannot easily form or implement a coherent foreign 
policy strategy.  A good example:  last week in his visit 
to D.C. Foreign Minister Perez-Cadalso assured U.S. 
interlocutors that Honduras would be supportive of the U.S. 
at the U.N.  It appears that such forward-leaning 
instructions were never sent to New York, as the Honduran 
PermRep to the U.N. delivered a weaker statement at UNSC 
open session on Iraq March 27 than he had before the war. 
END COMMENT. 
 
PALMER 
"
"7240","4/8/2003 18:03","03TEGUCIGALPA856","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA763|03TEGUCIGALPA826","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000856 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, DRL, AND INR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2008 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PGOV, ETTC, PINR, CU, HO, UNHCR-1 
SUBJECT: POSSIBLE CANDIDATES TO SERVE AS FIRST HONDURAN 
AMBASSADOR TO CUBA 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 826 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 763 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) The Honduran Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) has not 
yet named a Honduran ambassador to Cuba.  Several names have 
been circulating as potential candidates.  As noted in reftel 
B, first among these is Rene Arturo Bendana, former 
Ambassador to Spain and to the U.S. under past President 
Rafael Callejas.  Bendana, who owns an agribusiness, went to 
college in Mississippi and is pro-U.S.  Bendana is considered 
the \"dark side\" candidate from the Nationalist Party.  He was 
reportedly offered the Cuba ambassadorship by Nationalist 
Party officials, but has not received an official offer from 
the MFA.  It appears that Bendana will accept the post should 
he receive an official offer. 
 
2. (C) Two other candidate names have been circulating among 
political sources: Fernando MARTINEZ Jimenez, an architect by 
profession, was Foreign Minister during the Carlos Flores 
government.  Born in 1944 in Comayaguela, Martinez graduated 
from the University of Kansas and is married to an American 
whom he met there, Karen Mary Casey.  Martinez\'s tenure as 
Foreign Minister was notable for its philosophy that Honduran 
foreign policy should reflect domestic policy, thus \"serving 
the entire country\": an idea that boosted Martinez\'s 
popularity greatly.  Martinez pruned the Foreign Service 
staff from 252 people to 120, firing those whom he considered 
unnecessary or corrupt.  Martinez left the office of Foreign 
Minister in January 1999 after a tumultuous tenure. 
Then-President Flores asked him to resign following a 
newspaper editorial scandal.  The scandal apparently served 
as a convenient catalyst for a long-awaited dismissal by the 
President. 
 
3. (C) Victor Meza, a former unofficial advisor to former 
President Flores, has also received mention as a possible 
candidate.  Meza studied in the Soviet Union at Patrice 
Lumumba University in Moscow from 1965-1968 and is a former 
member of the Communist Party.  Due to his leftist ties, Meza 
was off limits to embassy employees during the 1980\'s.  He 
has since become a contact of the Embassy.  Meza was an 
advocate of diminished power for the Honduran Armed Forces 
during the 1990\'s; he believed that the military\'s power 
undermined the country\'s democratic development.  Meza also 
served as a valuable source of information for the embassy on 
human rights and other issues.  He is seen by many observers 
as a very capable political analyst with good insights into 
the political scene in Honduras.  He currently heads the 
Honduran Documentation Center (CEDOH), and is a leader of the 
NGO Citizens Forum.   Meza speaks Russian but no English.  He 
has not received any official notice of his candidacy for the 
ambassadorship, though he has told the Embassy he has heard 
numerous rumors that he may be called upon for the position. 
 
 
4. (C) COMMENT:  Ambassador urged President Ricardo Maduro on 
March 28 to further delay the naming of an ambassador in the 
wake of Fidel Castro\'s recent crackdown on human 
rights/democracy advocates (ref A).  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"7243","4/8/2003 22:08","03TEGUCIGALPA859","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

082208Z Apr 03
","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000859 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, APRIL 5-8, 2003 
 
 
1. Four dailies, TV and radio continue carrying numerous 
photos and reports of the war, taken from international 
reports.  On Saturday April 5th, four dailies dedicated 
special sections to the war. 
 
2. Sample coverage front-page of liberal \"Tiempo\" has a 
special extra 8 pages called \"Tiempo Magazine\" with a 
headline - \"16 days of war\" - with a chronology of the war in 
a two-column capsule. The photos show citizens of Diwaniya, 
Iraq watching a U.S. convoy, also a Red Cross car arriving in 
Basra to supply one of the local hospitals. The section 
includes a half page photo of a British soldier chatting with 
an Iraqi child. 
 
3. Liberal daily \"La Prensa\" had front page headline \"airport 
controlled\" with five inside pages of reports and photos of 
the war, on page four appeared Secretary of State Colin 
Powell\'s remarks after he met with President Bush last 
Friday, entitled  \"Powell: exiles will have a very important 
role post-war Iraq.\"  Page five: Iraq used \"mustard gas\" 
against Iran troops during the 1980-1988 conflict 1980. 
 
4. Moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" had ten pages of coverage 
including front-page photo showing soldiers taking Baghdad 
airport - \"Close to take down of Iraqi power-- Baghdad 
isolated\" 
 
5. Liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" also had front page coverage 
with a headliner \"the final assault\" with seven inside pages 
of coverage-some of the pages show coalition soldiers when 
arriving at Baghdad airport with a headline \"Iraqi chain of 
command is debilitated\", \"U.S. ready to take Baghdad\", 
\"Possible chemical weapons found in Baghdad\", \"Victory in 
Iraq does not depend on Saddam Hussein\'s destiny\" 
 
6. On Sunday and Monday media had a couple of pages on the 
war because leading news was the death of 66 people in a jail 
riot in northern Honduras. 
 
7. Even though, there were just a few reports on Iraq, four 
dailies carried op-eds during the weekend and Monday.  \"La 
Tribuna\" carried piece called -\"Balance\"; \"El Heraldo\" - \"The 
reengineering of United Nations\"; Is United Nations 
agonizing?\" \"La Prensa\" - \"The cost of  war\"; \"Tiempo\" - \"The 
progress of war\", reports of these op-ed pieces will follow. 
 
Palmer 
"
"7244","4/8/2003 22:58","03TEGUCIGALPA861","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, CA/OCS/ACS/WHA, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, CASC, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: LA CEIBA PRISON RIOT LEAVES 69 DEAD AND MANY 
OTHERS WOUNDED 
 
REF: 02 TEGUCIGALPA 1755 
 
1. SUMMARY: On April 5 a riot in El Porvenir prison, located 
just outside the Caribbean port city of La Ceiba, Honduras, 
left 69 dead and 39 wounded.  Many of the dead were gang 
members from Mara 18, one of Central America\'s largest gangs. 
 According to press reports, the riot broke out when a 
scuffle between inmates turned deadly after Mara 18 gangs 
members with weapons attacked non-gang member prisoners, who 
retaliated with weapons.  The non-gang inmates then 
reportedly proceeded to lock the gang members in their cell 
block and start a fire in the cell block, which killed over 
thirty gang members.  Prison authorities had previously 
confiscated some weapons in what was apparently not an 
effective search of the prison.  No AmCits were reported 
among the victims.  Post notes that Honduran prisons are 
known for their poor conditions and lax security.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. On April 5 a riot in El Porvenir (The Future) prison, 
located just outside the Caribbean port city of La Ceiba, 
Honduras, left 69 dead (66 men and three women) and 39 
wounded. According to press reports, the riot broke out 
around 10 a.m. shortly after visiting hours, when a scuffle 
between inmates turned deadly after Mara 18 gangs members 
produced four pistols and a number of machetes and attacked 
non-gang member prisoners.  (Prison authorities had 
previously confiscated some weapons in what was apparently 
not an effective search of the prison.)  Hundreds of regular 
prisoners then reportedly brandished weapons of their own, 
including smuggled grenades, and proceeded to attack Mara 18 
members.  The facility, which holds 1,600 inmates is a 
low-security prison farm where suspects facing drugs, 
weapons, rape, and assault charges are held while they await 
trial. 
 
3. Of the 69 killed during the riot, 61 were Mara 18 gang 
members.  According to press reports, at least half of those 
died from smoke inhalation after the cell block where they 
were trying to take refuge was locked and then set ablaze by 
other non-gang inmates.  The fire department was reportedly 
unable to enter the prison to put out the fire due to 
gunfire.  The press has reported allegations that some of the 
inmates were shot and killed by prison guards during the 
riot.  Also included among the victims were three women 
visiting the prison at the time of the uprising and five 
regular prisoners.  In the past some AmCits awaiting trial 
have been temporarily detained at El Porvenir but none were 
present when the riot broke out on April 5. 
 
4. Comment:  Security at El Porvenir is notoriously lax. 
Weapons and drugs are common, and in many instances interned 
gang members control whole cell blocks.  Reftel and the Human 
Rights Report both describe the poor conditions in Honduran 
prisons.  The GOH is currently investigating the incident, 
including allegations that prison guards, with the collusion 
of a privately run prison store, helped smuggle weapons into 
the prison.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"7245","4/8/2003 23:11","03TEGUCIGALPA862","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE59891|03STATE88308|03TEGUCIGALPA824|03TEGUCIGALPA826|03TEGUCIGALPA827|03TEGUCIGALPA835|03USUNNEWYORK915","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000862 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR TFIZ, PM, IO, S/CT, S/WCI, DRL, NP, EB, AND L 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/PPC 
PARIS FOR POL AND UNESCO OBSERVER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, MOPS, PHUM, AORC, KTIA, KAWC, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: HONDURAN FM PEREZ-CADALSO GIVES AMB LETTER 
OFFERING TROOPS FOR POST-WAR IRAQ 
 
REF: A. USUN NEW YORK 915 
     B. STATE 88308 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 835 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 827 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 826 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 824 
     G. STATE 59891 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Ambassador met April 7 with Honduran 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Guillermo Perez-Cadalso at the 
FM\'s request.  Perez-Cadalso gave Ambassador a letter 
offering to provide Honduran troops for post-war humanitarian 
needs in Iraq, contingent on congressional approval of such a 
deployment, which he said should not be a problem.  The FM 
reiterated that the GOH had given instructions to oppose any 
UNGA debate on Iraq and that the Honduran UN PermRep\'s 
instructions were to \"follow\" AMB Negroponte.  Perez-Cadalso 
told Ambassador that, thanks to the USG\'s assistance in 
providing Spanish-language texts, the GOH now had all that it 
needed to proceed with signing and/or ratifying the five UN 
and two OAS counterterrorism conventions/protocols still 
outstanding.  The FM gave Ambassador a copy of draft remarks 
that President Maduro plans to give during the Central 
American presidents meeting with the President April 10. 
Perez-Cadalso also said that Maduro was hoping to have a 
30-minute meeting with the President on the margins of the 
Council of the Americas meetings April 28-29 in Washington. 
The FM said the GOH hoped there would be a final decision on 
Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for Hondurans prior to the 
April 10 meeting.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Ambassador and PolOff met April 7 with Honduran 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias at 
the MFA to discuss Iraq and other key issues.  The meeting 
was a follow-up to the Ambassador\'s April 1 meeting with the 
FM (ref F) and the Ambassador\'s March 28 meeting with 
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro (ref E). 
 
UN PermRep Instructions are \"Follow Negroponte\" 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
3. (C) FM Perez-Cadalso started the meeting by telling 
Ambassador that he had spoken with Honduran UN PermRep Manuel 
Acosta Bonilla about Acosta Bonilla\'s March 26 statement 
during the United Nations Security Council open debate on 
Iraq.  The FM said that Acosta Bonilla told him that he was 
trying to speak to the future of post-war Iraq. 
Perez-Cadalso said that Acosta Bonilla had attended USUN\'s 
meeting with the members of the Coalition of the Willing and 
made his remarks in keeping with what he thought USUN wanted 
Coalition members to focus on in their statements.  The FM 
said that Acosta Bonilla was friends with U.S. PermRep 
Negroponte and had been working closely with him in NY. 
Perez-Cadalso said that Acosta Bonilla\'s instructions were to 
\"follow Negroponte.\" 
 
Honduras Will Oppose Iraq Debate in UNGA and UNESCO 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
4. (C) As previously reported, the MFA has instructed its 
missions at the UN and UNESCO to oppose UNGA debate on Iraq 
(ref D) as proposed by the Arab League via the Non-Aligned 
Movement (ref A), and at the UNESCO Executive Board (ref C) 
as proposed by some countries (ref B).  The FM reiterated to 
the Ambassador that the GOH will vote against any proposed 
UNGA debate on Iraq. 
 
FM Presents Letter Offering Post-War Troops 
------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C)  As promised (ref F), the FM gave Ambassador a letter 
formally offering Honduran participation in post-war \"phase 
IV\" operations in Iraq, saying that both President Maduro and 
Minister of Defense Frederico Breve had approved the offer. 
The letter details the GOH offer to participate in the 
humanitarian aspects of the reconstruction of Iraq, including 
sending troops who specialize in demining and peacekeeping 
troops.  Ambassador thanked Perez-Cadalso for the support of 
the GOH.  The letter notes that any foreign deployment of 
Honduran troops must be approved by congress according to the 
Honduran Constitution.  Perez-Cadalso said he did not think 
that congressional approval would be a problem.  Note:  Post 
does expect the GOH to seek congressional approval until 
after the war is over and the USG had made a more specific 
request for Honduran troops.  End Note.  Post has faxed this 
letter to WHA/CEN and CENTCOM.  An informal translation of 
the letter is in paragraph 12. 
 
Embassy Gives MFA Material on Iraqi War Crimes 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
6. (SBU) Ambassador gave the FM a copy of the video on the 
1988 massacre of Kurds in Halabja with chemical weapons. 
PolOff had previously given MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB 
Mario Fortin written material on Iraqi human rights abuses 
and war crimes April 3.  The Ambassador emphasized that the 
President\'s \"bold move\" in Iraq was bringing the liberation 
of the people of Iraq.  Ambassador noted that he and other 
top EmbOffs would be meeting with key figures in the Honduran 
media April 8 to discuss the war in Iraq. 
 
FM: GOH Has All it Needs on Counterterrorism Conventions 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
7. (SBU) Perez-Cadalso told Ambassador that the GOH now had 
all it needed on the counterterrorism conventions/protocols 
and thanked the USG for its assistance in providing 
Spanish-language texts of the two OAS and five UN CT 
conventions/protocols that the GOH has yet to sign and/or 
ratify.  PolOff noted that he had accompanied the French DCM 
April 3 to give a joint G-8 demarche to AMB Fortin on the 
importance of signing and/or ratifying these 
conventions/protocols (ref G).  Both Fortin and the FM noted 
the symbolism of the USG and GOF doing a joint demarche.  The 
FM told Ambassador that the MFA would now begin the 
signature/ratification process and was working with Casa 
Presidencial to forward for congressional approval the CT 
conventions pending with the President\'s office.  Note: 
Since the Ambassador\'s April meeting with the FM (ref F), 
Post has provided the MFA with Spanish-language texts of the 
two ICAO and two IMO outstanding CT conventions/protocols. 
Post thanks the Department, Embassy London, U.S. Mission 
Vienna, and the U.S. Mission to ICAO for their assistance in 
obtaining these texts.  End Note. 
 
FM Gives AMB Draft Text of Maduro\'s CAFTA Meeting Remarks 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
8. (SBU) The FM gave Ambassador a copy of the April 7 version 
of President Maduro\'s draft remarks for the Central American 
presidents meeting with the President April 10.  The text 
appears to be very similar to what WHA/CEN faxed Post 
earlier.  Post has faxed these draft remarks to WHA/CEN.  The 
FM said that he and President Maduro are traveling to 
Washington April 9. 
 
Maduro Hopes to Meet With the President in Late April 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
9. (SBU) Perez-Cadalso said that the GOH was working to set 
up a half-hour meeting between President Maduro and the 
President on the margins of the April 28-29 Council of the 
Americas 33rd Washington Conference at the State Department, 
where Maduro is scheduled to be a speaker and the President 
is tentatively scheduled to give the keynote address.  The FM 
said that such a meeting would allow Maduro to raise 
bilateral issues that will not be raised in the CAFTA meeting 
with the President. 
 
TPS - FM Asks if Decision Will be Made Prior to April 10 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
10. (SBU) Perez-Cadalso asked Ambassador if the USG will have 
a decision on the GOH\'s request for an extension of Temporary 
Protected Status (TPS) for Hondurans prior to the April 10 
meeting between the President and the Central American 
presidents.  Ambassador said that he would ask Washington. 
 
GOH Becoming More Active Coalition Participant 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
11. (C) Comment.  Post is pleased that the GOH seems to be 
taking a more active role as a member of the Coalition of the 
Willing, both with the formal offer of troops for post-war 
Iraq, and with the strong instructions to their missions at 
the UN and UNESCO to oppose debate on Iraq.  This was also 
the first time in recent memory that a senior GOH official 
raised the issue of the outstanding counterterrorism 
conventions/protocols.  In the past it has always been USG 
officials demarching GOH officials to take action.  Post 
intends to hold the GOH to its word that it now has all that 
it needs as far as Spanish-language texts and will move to 
sign and/or ratify the outstanding conventions/protocols. 
End Comment. 
 
Text of Letter Offering Troops for Post-War Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
12. (SBU) Begin text of informal translation of FM 
Perez-Cadalso letter to Ambassador: 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C. 
April 3, 2003 
 
Mr. Ambassador: 
 
I have the honor to address Your Excellency and request your 
good offices to convey to your government the disposition of 
the Government of Honduras to make the following offer: 
 
1. Once the war against Iraq is over, with the expected 
triumph of the coalition forces, Honduras could participate 
in the humanitarian efforts tending to the reconstruction of 
that country in two specific areas, providing: a) personnel 
trained in demining work, and b) personnel trained in 
peacekeeping operations. 
 
2. It is understood that, in the event this offer were to be 
accepted, the deployment of the mentioned military personnel, 
by constitutional mandate, has to be authorized by the 
National Congress acting upon a request from the Executive 
Power. 
 
I take this opportunity to reiterate to Your Excellency the 
assurances of my highest esteem and consideration. 
 
/s/ 
 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
 
Excellent Mr. 
Larry Palmer 
Ambassador of the United States of America 
Tegucigalpa 
 
End text of informal translation of FM Perez-Cadalso letter 
to Ambassador. 
Palmer 
"
"7283","4/9/2003 15:46","03TEGUCIGALPA865","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03Tegucigalpa826","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000865 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, DRL/IL, AND EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduran Congress Adopts New Fiscal Package; 
Emphasis on Eliminating Corporate Exemptions and Loopholes 
 
Ref: (A) Tegucigalpa 826 
 
     (B) Tegucigalpa 494 and previous 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  On April 2, the Honduran Congress 
considered and adopted in one reading a second fiscal 
package (the first was adopted in May 2002) designed to 
broaden the tax base, help reduce chronic budget deficits 
and move the government on the road to an IMF agreement. 
Congress modified several of the government-proposed 
provisions in order to lessen the impact on low and medium 
income Hondurans (the majority) and to avoid political 
backfire from influential unionized public sector workers 
(particularly teachers).  Increased taxes on tobacco and 
alcohol were added in order to compensate for lost revenues. 
The government and the IMF are working together to develop 
projections of the effect of the final tax proposals on the 
government\'s annual revenues.  The target had been an annual 
increase of 3.5 billion lempiras, (USD 200 million) - of 
which about 2 billion lempiras (USD 118 million) would be 
collected in the remaining months of 2003 - but IMF sources 
are concerned that the final result will be lower.  The GOH 
has continued with its planned austerity measures and work 
to strengthen the financial sector.  The most problematic 
issue remains: getting the public sector wage bill under 
control for the medium and long term.  The GOH is engaged in 
negotiations with striking doctors on a needed change to the 
law on mandated salaries for medical personnel (if 
successful, the \"estatuto\" for teachers will be tackled 
next).  The GOH also continues to promise to introduce a new 
civil service framework law that provides the GOH with 
control over wage policy for the majority of public sector 
workers.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) After two months of negotiation and fine-tuning, 
the Honduran government submitted to Congress a package of 
tax measures (called the Law of Tax Equity) designed to 
broaden the tax base and eliminate a number of special tax 
exemptions.  To ease its quick passage, the bill had already 
been watered down from an initial proposal discussed with 
the IMF, but Congress modified it further during the 
marathon legislative session on April 2.  The key measures 
include: 
 
-- Reduction of the income tax exemption for bonuses and 
representation expenses for individuals with income above 
600,000 lempiras (USD 35,294) annually.  Taxation of 
insurance premiums paid by companies and executives. 
Application of the income tax to capital gains from the sale 
of securities and property.  Application of the income tax 
to rental income (for executives and professionals).  The 
first 90,000 lempiras (USD 5,294) will be exempt from income 
tax. 
 
-- Application of the income tax to the \"14th month\" salary 
(a bonus paid to employees in June of each year) and other 
benefits such as vacation, for taxpayers with annual income 
greater than 225,000 lempiras (USD 13,235).   The \"13th 
month\" Christmas bonus remains exempt from income tax. 
 
-- Corporate income tax was unified at a rate of 25 percent 
of net taxable income. 
 
-- A \"temporary solidarity tax\" of five percent was 
established for corporate taxpayers with taxable income 
greater than one million lempiras (USD 58,824).  It will be 
applied to tax bills for the 2002, 2003 and 2004 tax years. 
Hotels and companies working under special export regimes 
are exempted from this measure. 
 
-- Tobacco products and alcoholic beverages will be subject 
to a 15 percent sales tax.  An internal tax on cigarettes 
was increased from 32.25 percent to 45 percent, aligning  it 
with practice in the rest of Central America.  The 
calculation of sales tax on beer, soft drinks and alcoholic 
beverages was modified. 
 
-- Establishment of withholding taxes to ensure more 
corporate taxpayer compliance.  The law requires a payment 
of 12.5 percent of wholesale transactions that will be 
applied against corporate income tax bills.  Similarly, 
companies and self-employed individuals will pay withholding 
taxes of 2.5 percent of net taxable income. 
 
-- Elimination of tax exemptions for nongovernmental 
organizations, cooperatives, churches and nonprofit 
organizations.  Exemptions remain for activities by NGOs 
related to health, education and charity.  Rules on the 
exemptions from customs duties on automobiles imported by 
NGOs are also tightened up.  These provisions are designed 
to stop tax avoidance by Honduran companies.  USAID is in 
discussions with the GOH on the need to avoid taxing U.S. 
assistance provided through NGOs. 
 
-- The number of products exempt from sales tax was reduced 
from 800 to about 200 (mostly foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, 
books and publications and school supplies). 
 
-- Creation of a one percent tax on the value of net assets 
for companies involved in wholesale or retail trade. 
 
-- Elimination of the tax exemption for fuels used in the 
generation of electricity.  Power generation firms may 
present their invoices to the state-owned electricity 
company ENEE for reimbursement of these taxes and customs 
duties.  (Note: this measure was taken to control widespread 
abuses of the tax exemption, in which bunker and diesel fuel 
were imported supposedly for power generation but in fact 
sold on the market.  End Note.) 
 
-- Reinstatement of the ten percent consumption tax on cars 
including \"luxury pickups\". 
 
-- Tightening up of the rules on free trade zones and 
special warehouses.  Only true export operations will be 
eligible for related tax breaks. 
 
-- Tightening up of methods to measure inventory and 
corporate expenses routinely deducted to calculate net 
taxable corporate income. 
 
-- Procedural changes to improve sales and income tax 
compliance, including the control of receipts, electronic 
filing and channeling payments through credit card 
companies. 
 
3. (SBU) The fiscal package also contained the following 
expenditure measures: 
 
-- Cancellation of 60 percent of government positions that 
were vacant on December 31, except in education, health and 
security.  Overtime pay is limited. 
 
-- Wage freeze for public employees not covered by 
collective bargaining agreements. 
 
-- Instruction to proceed with retirement for all employees 
not meeting legal requirements (generally age). 
 
-- Austerity measures such as limitation of monthly use of 
cellular phones by public officials and establishment of 
caps on overtime hours. 
 
4. (SBU) The IMF is working with the GOH to develop 
projections of the effect of the final tax proposals on the 
government\'s annual revenues.  The target had been an annual 
increase of 3.5 billion lempiras (USD 200 million) - of 
which about 2 billion lempiras (USD 118 million) would be 
collected in the remaining months of 2003 - but IMF sources 
are concerned that the final result could be significantly 
lower.  The Congress rejected three important tax measures 
in the original government proposal: taxation of the 
Christmas and June bonuses for a much larger group of 
taxpayers; elimination of the exemption from income tax for 
secondary school teachers and university professors (primary 
teachers have a tax exemption written into the 
Constitution), and taxation of electricity for the largest 
residential users and for commercial users.  The increase in 
the sales tax for tobacco and alcohol was added to 
compensate for these cutbacks. 
 
5. (SBU) The GOH has continued with its planned austerity 
measures and work to strengthen the financial sector.  The 
most problematic issue remains: getting the public sector 
wage bill under control.  The GOH is currently in 
negotiations with the doctors over changes to the special 
law, or estatuto, which governs pay for medical personnel. 
GOH negotiators have distributed results of their analysis 
of the Honduran medical establishment\'s comparability with 
other countries in the region.  By any measure, Honduran 
doctors are the highest paid in the region, while medical 
indicators for the country are some of the worst in Latin 
America.  The result of the negotiation (which has the 
possibility of turning into a labor confrontation and a 
doctor\'s strike) will set the stage for attacking the 
bigger, although not quite as egregious, problem of the 
growth in the wage bill for teachers.  (See ref A for more 
on the GOH\'s dispute with the doctors.) 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: From the IMF\'s point of view, the fiscal 
package was watered down from the original proposal, bowing 
unduly to political pressure.  The Fund is concerned that 
(1) teachers and other unionized public sector workers will 
continue as privileged groups, and (2) widespread tax 
exemptions distorting the economy and reducing potential tax 
income will continue.  To the GOH\'s credit, however, the 
fiscal measures do attack some notable tax loopholes that 
have allowed Honduran companies and wealthy individuals to 
pay very little in taxes over the years.  The question 
remains to be answered if the measures will deliver the 
hoped-for tax revenues.  President Maduro has requested a 
meeting with the Managing Director of the IMF  during his 
April 9-11 visit to Washington to review the progress made 
to date.  Embassy is tracking the progress of GOH-IMF 
negotiations closely.  If no agreement is reached, Honduras 
will need to pay certain overdue payments on DOD loans by 
July and September of this year or risk triggering Brooke 
Amendment sanctions.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"7341","4/10/2003 23:18","03TEGUCIGALPA881","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA862","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000881 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR PALMER TO CENTCOM J5 
STATE FOR TFIZ, PM, WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
JCS FOR J5 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA BELIEVES HONDURAN 
CONGRESS WILL APPROVE GOH OFFER OF POST-WAR TROOPS FOR IRAQ 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 862 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) On April 7 Honduran Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias gave me a letter offering to 
provide Honduran troops for post-war humanitarian needs in 
Iraq (see reftel).  FM Perez-Cadalso told me that that both 
President Ricardo Maduro and Minister of Defense Federico 
Breve had approved the offer.  The letter specifically offers 
to participate in the humanitarian aspects of the 
reconstruction of Iraq, including sending troops who 
specialize in demining and peacekeeping troops (see paragraph 
2 for an informal translation of the letter, which was faxed 
to CENTCOM and the State Department April 7).  While the 
letter notes that this deployment offer is contingent on 
congressional approval, as required by the Honduran 
constitution, FM Perez-Cadalso said he does not think that 
such an approval will be a problem.  I fully concur with this 
assessment.  While such a request will be somewhat 
controversial and there will be opponents in congress, the 
Embassy believes that congress will approve a request to 
deploy troops for peacekeeping and/or demining in post-war 
Iraq.  I do not expect the GOH to seek congressional approval 
until after the war is over and the USG had made a more 
specific request for Honduran troops.  However, I recommend 
that CENTCOM proceed immediately with \"reading-in\" the 
Honduran military liaison, COL Carlos Andino Cobos, so that 
he can work with CENTCOM to determine the most appropriate 
contribution of Honduran troops for post-war Iraq. 
 
Text of Letter Offering Troops for Post-War Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (SBU) Begin text of informal translation of FM 
Perez-Cadalso letter to Ambassador: 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C. 
April 3, 2003 
 
Mr. Ambassador: 
 
I have the honor to address Your Excellency and request your 
good offices to convey to your government the disposition of 
the Government of Honduras to make the following offer: 
 
1. Once the war against Iraq is over, with the expected 
triumph of the coalition forces, Honduras could participate 
in the humanitarian efforts tending to the reconstruction of 
that country in two specific areas, providing: a) personnel 
trained in demining work, and b) personnel trained in 
peacekeeping operations. 
 
2. It is understood that, in the event this offer were to be 
accepted, the deployment of the mentioned military personnel, 
by constitutional mandate, has to be authorized by the 
National Congress acting upon a request from the Executive 
Power. 
 
I take this opportunity to reiterate to Your Excellency the 
assurances of my highest esteem and consideration. 
 
/s/ 
 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
 
Excellent Mr. 
Larry Palmer 
Ambassador of the United States of America 
Tegucigalpa 
 
End text of informal translation of FM Perez-Cadalso letter 
to Ambassador. 
Palmer 
"
"7342","4/11/2003 0:30","03TEGUCIGALPA882","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000882 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, DS/OP/WHA, CA, INL, AND DRL 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, SNAR, KCRM, CASC, ASEC, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: GUNMEN SHOOT ADVANCE CAR OF HONDURAN FIRST LADY 
AGUAS DE MADURO; GOH SAYS ATTEMPTED ROBBERY LIKELY REASON 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U)  According to Honduran Minister of Public Security 
Oscar Alvarez, an advance car for Honduran First Lady Aguas 
Santas Ocana de Maduro was shot by unknown gunmen near the 
town of Los Limones on the road from Olanchito to the 
Caribbean coastal city of Trujillo in the Department of Yoro, 
at approximately 11:30 a.m. Honduran time on April 10.  Note: 
 A separate GOH source gave the location as near the town of 
Los Encuentros (near La Union) in the Department of Olancho. 
End Note.  The driver of the advance car was wounded in the 
leg by the gunfire; the other two occupants of the car were 
apparently not injured.  No suspects have been caught.  The 
GOH does not believe that the gunmen knew that the car was an 
advance car for the First Lady, who was in Tegucigalpa at the 
time of the incident. 
 
2. (U) Alvarez told the DCM that the car was advancing a 
planned trip via helicopter by the First Lady to Trujillo. 
He emphasized that the First Lady was never scheduled to 
travel by car and that her helicopter flight had been 
canceled due to bad weather.  The First Lady told ConGen that 
she was ok, but shaken by the incident. 
 
3. (U) Whether it was on highway 41 in the Department of 
Olancho, known as the \"corridor of death,\" or highway 23 in 
the Department of Yoro, both have been the scene of violent 
robberies in the past in which gunmen have shot at cars and 
buses to disable the vehicles or force the vehicles to stop. 
Gunmen then have robbed the drivers/passengers of the 
vehicles. 
 
4. (U) Post notes that President Ricardo Maduro has been in 
Washington, DC since April 9 for the Central American 
presidents meeting with the President to discuss CAFTA.  The 
two have been married since October 2002.  The First Lady is 
a Spaniard. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  Given the fact that the First Lady never 
intended to travel by car, Post has no reason to believe that 
this was anything other than an attempted robbery, but 
EmbOffs will follow-up with GOH contacts as the incident is 
investigated further.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"7361","4/11/2003 13:18","03TEGUCIGALPA885","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA3428","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000885 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTC, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC 
COMMERCE FOR 532/OEA 
COMMERCE FOR BUREAU OF INDUSTRY AND SECURITY: BNILSSON AND 
DHOOKER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC, PREL, PHUM, PARM, ETTC, ETRD, BEXP, HO 
SUBJECT: DEFENSE TRADE CONTROLS IN HONDURAS; PROBLEMS WITH 
LA ARMERIA 
 
REF: A. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 3428 
 
     B. 02 SECSTATE 113261 
     C. LYNN-CUMMINS EMAIL 03APR2003 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: La Armeria (The Armory), the only certified 
firearms distributor in Honduras, continues to exhibit 
difficulties in complying with State Department guidance 
regarding the importation of commercial firearms.  In 
December 2002 Post recommended that State deny La Armeria\'s 
request to import pistols, revolvers, rifles, and the 
corresponding ammunition.  This recommendation was supported 
by a variety of factors, including the inordinately high rate 
of violent crime in Honduras, the lack of any meaningful arms 
control or regulation by the government, and because La 
Armeria continues to do business without firm purchase 
orders, sales contracts, or import licenses.  Recently, La 
Armeria contacted Post expressing an interest in once again 
importing firearms and ammunition for commercial use.  Post 
reiterated the legal requirements with which La Armeria must 
comply before any import license can be approved.  Post also 
notes its concurrence with PM/DTC that all Honduran 
applications must have a specific import certificate and that 
verification of end use is an important aspect of defense 
trade controls that continues to be problematic in Honduras. 
END SUMMARY 
 
--------------------- 
OAS Model Regulations 
--------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) The Government of Honduras (GOH) is a signator of 
the OAS Model Regulations for the Control of the 
International Movement of Firearms, although it has yet to 
ratify the agreement.  Nevertheless, the MFA has informed 
Post that it considers the OAS regulations legally binding 
and that the GOH will comply with its regulations.  The 
agreement requires that the GOH establish an effective import 
regime and that all firearms import requests be accompanied 
by a GOH import certificate. To date, it appears that the GOH 
has yet to establish such a regime.  Also, Post is not aware 
that the GOH has ever issued an import certificate. 
 
3. (SBU) PM/DTC has indicated that it will not consider 
Honduran firearm and ammunition license applications which 
are not accompanied by a GOH import certificate.  La Armeria 
has been made aware of this requirement (ref C). 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Purchase Orders and/or Sales Contracts 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Post understands that in order to obtain a license 
from the Department of State, a U.S. firm or individual 
seeking an export license must have a firm purchase order or 
sales contract from the buyer (ref B).  Letters of intent, 
invoices, unconfirmed statements of purchase projections, or 
likely purchases are not sufficient to meet the requirements 
for issuance of such a license.  It has been the standard 
operating procedure of La Armeria not to enter into firm 
contracts of sale or purchase orders, but rather to routinely 
make projections of arms and munitions that they might or 
might not purchase.  Past investigations at Post have 
indicated that many times La Armeria obtains \"quotes\" or 
\"bids\" from more than one arms manufacturer for exactly the 
same product.  Thereafter, they might or might not purchase 
the arms from one of more of the companies that gave them 
quotes (ref A).  Post has informed La Armeria that future 
applications must contain firm purchase orders and/or sales 
contracts.  La Armeria acknowledges that past applications 
have lacked firm purchase orders or sales contracts and has 
indicated that all future orders will comply with this 
requirement. 
 
--------------------- 
La Armeria\'s Position 
--------------------- 
 
5. (U) Article 292 of the Honduran Constitution grants the 
Honduran Armed Forces the exclusive right of \"fabrication, 
importation, distribution, and sale of firearms, ammunition, 
and similar items.\"  The constitutional powers of the armed 
forces in the specific cases of commercial and sporting 
activities have been delegated to the Institute of Military 
Provision through a dependency called La Armeria.  This makes 
La Armeria the sole distributor of commercial and sporting 
firearms in Honduras.  La Armeria (run by active-duty 
military officers) has stated that its special relationship 
granted under the Honduran constitution exempts the 
organization from the requirement to have import certificates 
issued by the GOH. Post notes that in the past, La Armeria 
has been hampered by corruption. 
 
----------------------------------- 
End Use and Security Considerations 
----------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Post understands that verification of end use is an 
important aspect of defense trade controls and that Post 
plays a critical role in this effort.  Post carefully 
analyzes all applications whereby sales are being proposed 
for \"uncontrolled\" sales for public use.  Recent applications 
for export licenses to Honduras have indicated that firearms 
and ammunition were intended for commercial resale to retail 
customers or governmental agencies.  Post understands that 
the appropriate standard to apply in situations such as this 
is whether or not the conditions in the country warrant the 
described sale. 
 
7. (SBU) Honduras has no effective arms control or 
regulation.  Honduran armed forces continue to be deployed to 
augment police units throughout Honduras in an effort to 
combat crime and provide a modicum of security.  Honduras has 
one of the highest homicide rates in the Western Hemisphere 
and gang violence continues to be a serious issue.  There is 
also a high rate of extrajudicial killings, especially of 
adolescents and young adults, mostly by firearms.  Finally, 
President Maduro has publicly raised concerns about the 
proliferation of weapons in Honduras and illicit arms 
trafficking remains a problem.  La Armeria has been informed 
that Post must take local considerations into account when 
considering whether or not to recommend a particular export 
license, regardless of whether the proper documentation has 
been submitted to State for consideration. 
 
8. (U) PolOff and A/DATT are attempting to arrange a meeting 
with La Armeria representatives at the earliest possible 
convenience in order to convey once again the legal and 
procedural requirements necessary to import firearms and 
ammunition from the United States. 
 
Palmer 
"
"7385","4/11/2003 21:53","03TEGUCIGALPA896","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE76257","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000896 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, DRL/IL, AND EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
TREASURY FOR JOHN JENKINS 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINR, EFIN, ETRD, ECON, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: C-AL3-00272: IMPORT DUTIES HAVE DECLINING 
IMPORTANCE IN HONDURAN CENTRAL GOVERNMENT BUDGET 
 
REF: (a) STATE 76257 
 
     (b) TEGUCIGALPA 546     (c) TEGUCIGALPA 865 
     (d) TEGUCIGALPA 494 
     (e) TEGUCIGALPA 225 
     (f) TEGUCIGALPA 010 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Honduran trade liberalization over the 
past 13 years has resulted in a declining dependence on 
import duties and other taxes on international trade.  In 
2002, revenue from import duties had dropped to only 2.2 
percent of GDP and an estimated 12.2 percent of total tax 
revenue (excluding taxes on oil products).  The gap has been 
made up, primarily, by an increase in the sales tax rate. 
Given that about 55 percent of Honduran imports come from 
the United States, a CAFTA-related reduction in import 
duties would be significant but manageable for the 
government.  There has been no discussion to date on the 
likely way of compensating for the revenue from CAFTA (or 
eventual FTAA) tariff reductions; measures are likely to 
involve elimination of remaining tax exemptions or a small 
increase in the sales tax rate.  End Summary. 
 
2.(SBU) Ref a requested reporting on the effect that a loss 
of tariff revenue would have on government budgets following 
the implementation of the U.S.-Central American free trade 
agreement (CAFTA).  Reftels b through f provide extensive 
reporting on the 2003 budget (currently under substantial 
revision), the government\'s fiscal difficulties and efforts 
to confront them.  In addition, a recent report by an IDB- 
funded team on Honduran tax policy provides useful 
historical data on the trends in customs duties receipts 
over the past 13 years that can be used to project the 
direct impact of tariff revenue losses, once the basic 
parameters of the CAFTA agreement are agreed.  These data 
are provided below. 
 
3. (SBU) Since the early 1990s, Honduras has transformed the 
structure of its taxation of trade.  Export taxes have been 
eliminated, and substituted with export promotion policies 
(including the granting of extensive investment incentives 
such as tax exemptions).  High tariff barriers to imports 
have been progressively dismantled in conjunction with other 
countries in the region and the Central American Common 
Market.  As of 2002, Honduras had 5,982 eight-digit tariff 
schedule line items, of which 5,169 registered some imports. 
There were 13 tariff levels in the tariff schedule, with an 
average nominal rate of 6.5 percent (and a trade weighted 
average of 8.4 percent in 2000).  Most tariffs are now 
between 0 and 15 percent.  As of 2001, 73 percent of 
Honduras\'s tariff schedule was harmonized with the rest of 
Central America (and further harmonization was achieved in 
2002).  Tariff dispersion in 2002 was a relatively healthy 
7.4 percent. 
 
4. (SBU) Accordingly, customs duties in Honduras have 
dropped progressively since 1990 as a percentage of both GDP 
and total tax revenue.  Import and export duties fell from 
5.6 percent of GDP in 1990 to 2.5 percent of GDP in 2001 and 
an estimated 2.2 percent of GDP in 2002.  Similarly, import 
and export taxes fell from 37.5 percent of total tax revenue 
in 1990 to only 15.2 percent in 2001 (and 12.2 percent of 
total tax revenue if oil import taxes are excluded).  The 
lowering of customs duties in Honduras in the 1990s was 
accompanied by an increase in the sales tax rate to 12 
percent for most products.  As can be seen by the chart 
below, by 2000, sales tax revenues had replaced import 
duties as the most important source of government revenues. 
 
                         Table 1 
             International Trade Tax Revenues 
 
             1990       1995      2000      2001      2002 
 
                (millions of nominal Lempira) 
Total trade 707.2     1607.2    2088.2     2448.1   2437.7 
Imports     493.2     1429.5    2082.8     2448.1   2437.7 
  Oil        58.4      323.5     297.0      598.4    708.0 
  Other     434.8     1106.0    1785.8     1849.7   1729.7 
Exports     214.0      177.7       5.4        0.0      0.0 
 
                      (percent of GDP) 
Total Trade   5.6        4.3       2.4        2.5      2.2 
Imports       3.9        2.8       2.4        2.5      2.2 
  Oil         0.5        0.9       0.3        0.6      0.6 
  Other       3.5        2.9       2.0        1.9      1.6 
Exports       1.7        0.5       0.0        0.0      0.0 
 
                  (percent of tax revenue) 
Total Taxes  100.0     100.0     100.0      100.0    100.0 
 Income       22.8      28.5      19.9       22.0     22.7 
 Property      0.8       0.8       1.3        1.1      1.0 
 Cap.Gains     0.0       0.6       0.5        0.3      0.0 
 Sales        18.2      20.6      35.2       33.2     35.2 
 Selective    13.4      15.1      11.2       12.0     10.9 
 Services      4.8       3.8      17.6       16.2     17.6 
 Trade        37.5      24.8      14.3       15.2     12.5 
 Other         2.4       5.8       0.0        0.0      0.0 
 
5. (SBU) Revenue projections from the GOH\'s 2003 Central 
Government budget are shown below.  These numbers are 
expected to change significantly as a result of the adoption 
of new tax measures on April 2 (see ref b).  The GOH hopes 
that these measures will add as much as 2 billion lempiras 
(usd 118 million) to the budget in 2003 and 3.5 billion 
lempiras (usd 206 million) in 2004 and thereafter. 
 
                           Table 2 
           Central Government Revenue Projections 
                         2003 Budget 
 
                        Millions         Pct of 
                        lempira          Total 
Total Revenue            32944.0          100.0 
 Tax Revenue             19803.0           60.0 
   Income Tax             4315.0           13.0 
   Property Tax            212.0             .6 
   Sales and Consumption  9267.0           28.0 
   Services               3357.7           10.0 
   Import Duties          2608.0            8.0 
   Other                    44.0            0.0 
 Non-Tax Revenue          1163.0            3.5 
 Goods and Services         16.0            0.0 
 Property Income            79.0            0.2 
 Aid and Donations        1447.0            4.5 
 Capital Revenues         3445.0           10.5 
 Financing                6988.0           21.0 
 
6. (SBU) Approximately 55 percent of Honduran imports come 
from the United States.  Thus, the reduction in import 
duties on imports from the United States expected after 
CAFTA would be a significant revenue reduction during this 
period of high deficits; however, it would be manageable.  A 
very rough estimate would indicate a revenue loss of about 
usd 80 million per year if all tariffs were eliminated 
immediately.  During 2002 and 2003, the government has 
attempted to offset the continued reduction in customs 
duties receipts with measures aimed at broadening the tax 
base (reducing exemptions from income and sales tax).  There 
has been no discussion to date on the likely way of 
compensating for CAFTA (or eventual FTAA) tariff reductions. 
It is possible that the GOH would propose an increase in the 
sales tax rate. 
 
7. (SBU) Comment: The IDB consultants, in a February 
briefing for Econcouns and USAID economist, also noted their 
belief that in addition to the reduction in customs duty 
revenue, the trade liberalization in the CAFTA agreement 
will provoke additional GOH spending or tax breaks as 
\"compensation\" to sectors negatively affected by increased 
competition.  This is a possibility, as the Honduran 
Congress has consistently shown its willingness to enact 
special legislation for individual sectors.  However, the 
current critical fiscal problems and the likelihood of 
fairly strict fiscal targets in a future IMF agreement will 
probably limit the GOH\'s ability to provide trade adjustment 
assistance to companies or individuals.  On the plus side, 
the positive impacts from a free trade agreement -- 
increased investment, faster growth, and increased 
efficiency -- are expected to result in increased (non- 
tariff) government revenues as well.  As noted above, the 
GOH also traditionally has provided significant export 
promotion incentives in the form of exemptions from a range 
of taxes.  To the extent that the GOH agrees in the course 
of the CAFTA negotiations to reduce some of these investment 
incentives, this would also have a positive effect on the 
government\'s tax revenues.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"7470","4/15/2003 23:16","03TEGUCIGALPA912","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","03STATE53528","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000912 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/ITA AND DS/OP/WHA FROM EAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 4/14/13 
TAGS: ASEC, HO, PTER 
SUBJECT: SECURITY ENVIRONMENT PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE (SEPQ) 
 
REF: A. 03 STATE 53528 
     B. 02 TEGUC 02934 (SEPQ 10/23/02) 
     C. 02 TEGUC 0989 
 
Classified By: (U) Classified by: Deputy Chief of Mission, 
Roger Pierce, Reason 1.5 (C) and (D). 
 
(U) The following responses are keyed to the Security 
Environment Profile Questionnaire contained in Reftel (A). 
 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
 
1. (SBU) Demonstrations:  Responses to reftel (A). 
 
(1-A.)  Yes.  Additionally, there are a number of 
organizations and groups under the loose collective 
leadership of (and affiliated with) the Bloque Popular that 
have been carrying out anti-American demonstrations, as well 
as demonstrations targeting local issues.  The following 
organizations have been involved in anti-American political 
activities to varying degrees.  They are listed in 
alphabetical order, utilizing Spanish acronyms where 
applicable: 
 
- ARTISTA DE LAS UNAH 
  Official Artists of The National Autonomous University of 
  Honduras (UNAH) 
 
- BLOQUE POPULAR 
  Popular Block 
 
- COCOHS 
  Farmer\'s Cooperatives Union 
 
- CODECOH 
  Honduran Consumer Protection Committee 
 
- COFADEH 
  Honduran Committee of the Family Members of the 
  Detained and Disappeared 
 
- COHAPAZ 
  Honduran Action Committee for Peace 
 
- COLPROHSUMA 
  A small Teachers\' Union 
 
- COMPA-H 
  People of the Americas Convergence Movement 
  (COMPA)Honduras 
 
- COPEMH 
  Honduran Association of Secondary School Teachers 
 
- COPINH 
  Civic Council of Popular Organizations and 
  Indigenous Groups of Honduras (Also appears as COPIN) 
 
- COPRUMH 
  Professional Association Teachers\' Union 
 
- CTH 
  Confederation of Honduran Workers 
 
- FSM 
  Feminist Movement (details needed) 
 
- FUR 
  University Revolutionary Front 
 
- FUT-H 
  United Federation of Honduran Workers (Sometimes FUTH) 
 
- GRUPO LOS NECIOS DE LA UNAH 
  UNAH Fools Group - Activist group in UNAH that \"cheerleads\" 
  and motivates demos 
 
- MEH 
  Honduran People\'s Student Movement 
 
- PARTIDO DE LOS TRABAJADORES DE LA FACULTAD DE PEDAGOGIA 
  DE LA UNAH 
  Teaching Faculty Workers\' Party of UNAH 
 
- RADIO GUALCHO 
  Leftist/Activist radio station (1510Mhz), that works closely 
  with Bloque Popular and is actively involved in most 
anti-U.S. 
  demonstrations 
 
- REPRESENTANTE DE FRENTE Y REFORMA DE LA UNAH 
  Reform Front Representative of UNAH 
 
- SERUNAH 
  New group, UNAH Coalition like Popular Bloque 
 
- SETROINFOP 
  Details Needed 
- SITRAINA 
  National Agrarian Institute Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAIHSS 
  Institute of Social Security Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAUNAH 
  UNAH Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAUPEN 
  A Workers\' Union (details needed) 
 
- STIBYS 
  Beverage and Associated Industries Workers\' Union 
  (Plays a key organizing and logistics roll for many demos) 
 
- SITRAPANI 
  Child Welfare Association Workers\' Union 
 
- UD 
  Democratic Unification Party 
  (represented in The National Congress) 
 
- UNAH 
  National Autonomous University of Honduras 
 
- URP 
  Revolutionary People\'s Union 
 
NOTE: The most anti-U.S. groups are: MEH, URP, UD, Bloque 
Popular, STIBYS, COPINH and COMPA-H. 
 
(1-B.) Yes.  There have been more than seven demonstrations 
in Tegucigalpa since December 2002, either at the Embassy or 
nearby locations.  Demo dates:  12/5/02, 01/25/03, 01/30/03, 
02/15/03, 03/8/03 and 03/27/03. 
 
(1-C.)  Over half of the demonstrations have taken place at 
or near the Embassy. 
 
(1-D.)  The size of anti-American demonstrations at the 
Embassy varies from twenty to over three hundred 
participants.  The larger demos usually consist of supporters 
from six to more than twelve different organizations, which 
operate as a loosely structured coalition under the guidance 
of Bloque Popular. 
 
(1-E.)  While there are demonstrations based on local issues, 
such as civil service salaries, privatization, IMF 
requirements, etc.  U.S. actions in Afghanistan and Iraq have 
become the current focus.  The following statements/demands 
have been made repeatedly during recent demos at the Embassy: 
 No to war in Iraq, No to war, Stop plan Colombia, Pro-Human 
rights, World Peace, Stop Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA), U.S. Forces out of Honduras (Soto Cano 
AB), Burning US flags, U.S. Military out of Cuba, U.S. 
destroy your WMD, Stop intervention in Venezuela, Stop 
Standard Fruit exploiting the indigenous people, No to CAFTA, 
No to privatization. 
 
(1-F.)  Generally peaceful, but demonstrators have burned 
U.S. flags, painted slogans on Mission outer perimeter walls 
and utilized homemade mortars to detonate large fireworks 
charges that are propelled high into the air before exploding. 
 
 
(1-G.)  N/A. 
 
(1-H.)  N/A. 
 
(1-I.)  Yes. 
 
(1-J.)  Yes.  Occasionally they will pass by the Embassy. 
(1-K.)  The size varies from a few hundred to 5-10 thousand 
people. 
(1-L.)  Generally peaceful, but fences and grillwork has been 
destroyed near the National Congress and many tires burned. 
At times suspected plain clothes police have been held and 
beaten by hard-core protestors within the demonstrations. 
 
(1-M.)  N/A. 
 
2. (SBU)  Macro Conflict Conditions: 
 
(2-A.)  NO. 
 
(2-B.)  N/A. 
 
(2-C.)  N/A. 
 
(2-D.)  N/A. 
 
 
3.  (SBU)  Host Country Capabilities: 
 
(3-A.)  No. 
 
(3-B.)  Yes.  Training by US Border Patrol(BorTac) Teams 
good, but GOH security infrastructure needs major 
improvements. 
 
(3-C.)  Yes. 
 
(3-D.)  No.  However, GOH intelligence units have an 
institutional awareness of and a modest capability of 
penetrating indigenous radical groups. 
 
(3-E.)  Yes. 
 
(3-F.)  No. 
 
 
(3-G.)  Yes. 
 
(3-H.)  Average/Below Average. 
 
(3-I.)  Average/Ineffective. 
 
(3-J.)  Ineffective.  A new unit within the Ministry of 
Security has been established to handle border patrol duties 
but has yet to come fully on-line. 
 
 
4.  (SBU)  Indigenous Terrorism-Anti American Terrorist 
Groups: 
 
(4-A.)  No. 
 
(4-B.)  N/A. 
 
(4-C.)  N/A. 
 
(4-D.)  N/A. 
 
(4-E.)  N/A. 
 
(4-F.)  N/A. 
 
(4-G.)  N/A. 
 
(4-H.)  N/A. 
 
 
5. (SBU)  Other Indigenous Terrorist Groups: 
 
(5-A.)  No. 
 
(5-B.)  N/A. 
 
(5-C.)  N/A. 
 
(5-D.)  N/A. 
 
(5-E.)  N/A. 
 
6.  (C)  Transnational Terrorism-Transnational Terrorist 
Indicators: 
(6-A.)  No.  However, there are rumors that there are Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty (ETA), IRA, and Chiapas(Zapatistas) 
sympathizers in Honduras who could be involved in advising 
indigenous groups.  Some Hondurans are studying in Cuba and 
also conceivably could be receiving training in subversion 
and terrorism, although it is more likely they are being 
indoctrinated as agents of influence.   As this Cuban program 
for Hondurans is in its infancy, there have been no 
indications that such training is taking place. 
 
(6-B.)  N/A. 
 
(6-C.)  N/A. 
 
(6-D.)  N/A and NO. 
 
(6-E.)  N/A. 
 
(6-F.)  The only known hostile intelligence presence of note 
is Cuban.  While the Cuban mission appears to have extensive 
contacts with leftists and indigenous groups, there is no 
indication they are planning or supporting terrorism. 
 
(6-H.)  There is no shortage of weapons in Honduras.  It 
would also not be difficult for hostile terrorist elements to 
import weapons and/or explosives from neighboring countries. 
 
7.  Information is being updated regarding 
groups/organizations listed in para 1-A.  Future list will 
contain the full Spanish names for the groups.  The POC for 
additions/corrections to the list is RSO Tegucigalpa. 
Palmer 
"
"7674","4/25/2003 20:37","03TEGUCIGALPA980","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE85946","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, ECON, ETRD, HO 
SUBJECT:  WIRELESS INTERNET SURVEY: HONDURAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 85946 
 
1. In response to reftel request, Post provides the 
following information regarding the use of Wireless 
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) technologies in Honduras. 
 
2. According to the National Telecommunications 
Commission (Conatel), Honduras has not yet allocated 
any unlicensed radio-frequency spectrum for use by Wi- 
Fi and similar wireless technologies.  Equipment 
utilizing broadband spectrum technologies, such as Wi- 
Fi, are subject to a general license granted through 
Conatel\'s resolution NR016/00.  Honduran telecom norm 
does not make any distinction between indoor and 
outdoor use for radio-frequency allocations.  Effective 
radiated power radio-frequency devices, with a rate 
equal or less than 10 milliwatts, are subject to a 
general license allowing them to operate freely. 
 
3. In Honduras, Wi-Fi systems can be used without a 
license, as equipment utilizing broadband spectrum 
technologies are only subject to a general license, 
granted through Conatel\'s resolution NR016/00. 
 
4. Wi-Fi systems can be used for commercial purposes as 
long as the operator has an exploitation permit for 
public use. 
 
5. At present, there are no commercial Wi-Fi networks 
that provide service to the public operating in 
Honduras.  In the event that Wi Fi systems are used, 
these would only be allowed for data transmission 
operations connected via satellite or cable TV 
networks. 
 
Pierce 
"
"7676","4/25/2003 21:01","03TEGUCIGALPA981","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA862|03TEGUCIGALPA881","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
CENTCOM FOR J5 
JCS FOR J5 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/25/2013 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN MINISTER OF DEFENSE NEEDS INFORMATION 
FROM CENTCOM PRIOR TO REQUESTING CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL FOR 
DEPLOYMENT OF HONDURAN TROOPS TO POST-WAR IRAQ 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 881 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 862 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i. Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
(C) DCM, DATT, MILGP Commander, and PolMilOff met with 
Honduran Minister of Defense (MOD) Federico Breve on April 23 
and discussed, among other issues, the GOH\'s offer to 
provide Honduran troops for post-war humanitarian needs 
(demining or peacekeeping) in Iraq (refs A and B).  MOD Breve 
told EmbOffs that he had a number of operational questions 
before the GOH was ready to ask for congressional approval of 
such a deployment.  Post understands that the Honduran 
military liaison to CENTCOM, COL Carlos Andino Cobos, is 
working with CENTCOM to determine the most appropriate 
contribution of Honduran troops for post-war Iraq.  In 
addition, Post\'s MILGP Commander will work with CENTCOM to 
seek answers to MOD Breve\'s specific questions to facilitate 
the fulfillment of the Honduran troop offer. 
Pierce 
"
"7846","5/5/2003 23:05","03TEGUCIGALPA1041","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE100294","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, AND EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EAID, ELAB, PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN FISCAL TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
 
REF: STATE 100294 
 
1. The following are responses, requested in reftel, reporting on 
the GOH\'s fiscal transparency and accountability. 
 
A. Does host government publish the national budget in a timely 
manner? 
 
Level 3 - Yes, with minimum delay (under one year) 
 
B. Where substantial levels of government are significant, are 
their combined fiscal position published? 
 
N/A - Subnational governments do not represent significant levels 
of spending. 
 
C. In what form is national budget published?  Government 
publication or newspaper?  Private media?  Internet? Other? 
Please indicate. 
 
The Ministry of Finance published the 2002 national budget on 
their website  and they have also made 
it available on CD-ROM.  The national budget is also published in 
the governmental publication La Gaceta (akin to the Federal 
Register), as required by the Constitution. 
 
D. Please rate the quality and comprehensiveness of fiscal data 
published. 
 
Level 2 - Limited system of budget reporting and monitoring with 
limited classification system.  Some payments arrears and 
deviations between actual expenditures and amounts budgeted. 
 
The fiscal data published shows little if any expenditure 
spending. 
 
E. List up to 5 key laws and/or regulations governing public 
disclosure of revenues and expenditures in the national budget, 
if applicable and such laws exist. 
 
Honduras commenced the implementation of the Integrated Financial 
Management System (SIAFI).  The SIAFI will work to improve 
governmental accountability through improvements in the execution 
and control of expenditures.  The system will be comprised of 
four main subsystems: budget, treasury, accounting and public 
credit.  At full implementation the system will include 15 
ministries, 20 dependencies of the ministries, and 36 
decentralized entities, as well as 298 municipalities.  At 
present, eight ministries are connected to the SIAFI via 
electronic data transmission, covering about 85 percent of the 
central government budgetary transactions.  Implementation of the 
SIAFI has not yet begun at the municipal level. 
 
The National Statistics Institute of (INE) was recently 
established, through Legislative Decree No. 86/2000 and will 
report fiscal statistics for the budgets collection of Government 
Finance Statistics (GFS). 
 
According to the 2002 Legislative Decree No. 10/2002 establishing 
a national auditing body (the Tribunal of Accounts), the Tribunal 
must present reports to Congress. 
 
F. Assess adequacy of those laws and regulations establishing 
fiscal transparency and accountability requirements. 
 
Level 1 - Inadequate 
 
G. Assess extent to which laws and regulations on fiscal 
transparency and accountability are implemented and enforced. 
 
Level 2 - Sporadically/unevenly enforced 
 
H. How would distribution of tax powers and expenditure 
responsibilities of central government be described? 
 
Level 1 - Unclear 
 
The Customs and Tax Division (DEI) is responsible for tax powers 
and the Ministry of Finance handles expenditures. 
 
I. Does a national audit body or equivalent organization, 
independent of the executive, provide reports for the legislature 
and the public on the financial integrity of government accounts? 
 
Yes, but the reports are not published. 
 
J. How would the link between nonfinancial public/state-owned 
(e.g. extractive industries) enterprises and general government 
be described? 
 
Level 3 - Clear control under central government budget process 
The government has clear control over state-owned enterprises 
(the largest ones include the port authority, the electric power 
company, and the telephone company).  In the past the central 
government has used the revenues of state-owned enterprises to 
finance other governmental offices and projects. 
 
K. Are privatization processes transparent and published? 
Level 2 - Moderately transparent 
 
The bidding documents are published, and tenders are opened 
publicly, but the decision process is not totally transparent. 
 
L. How would the reliability of budget revenue and expenditure 
estimates best be described? 
 
Level 2 - Moderately reliable 
 
M. Please provide a short evaluative narrative of host government 
commitment to fiscal transparency and accountability. 
 
Honduras has taken several steps in recent years to improve 
fiscal transparency and accountability.  The GOH has improved its 
budget documentation by offering more complete information on the 
governments fiscal activity.   The gradual implementation of the 
SIAFI can be accredited for improving the quality and consistency 
of budget documentation.  The presentation and publishing of the 
central government\'s budget including revenues and expenditures 
has significantly improved.  Quarterly and monthly reports by the 
Ministry of Finance to Congress report the central government\'s 
fiscal position and budget execution.  The GOH has also improved 
the quality of internal consistency of fiscal data. 
 
However, there are many areas in which the GOH is deficient, such 
as implementing measures designed to create better fiscal 
transparency and accountability.  Although the gradual 
implementation of the SIAFI has lead to improvements, the slow 
pace of implementation has prevented other changes.  These 
changes include enhanced budget formulation, control procedures, 
and improvements in the quality and timely budget execution 
reports and final accounts.  The reliability of budget data has 
increased in recent years, but deviations between approved and 
executed budgets are still significant.  Budget documents and 
final accounts do not include a statement of the accounting 
policies and standards used. 
 
N. Please list U.S. government-sponsored programs and activities 
that promote accurate disclosure of revenues and expenditures in 
the national budgets of your host country.  Please also summarize 
the results of those programs and activities. 
 
In an effort to facilitate greater transparency in the 
development and implementation of the GOH\'s budget, and with 
the conviction that civil society has the responsibility to act 
as an independent agent, overseeing the appropriate use of public 
funds, USAID/Honduras under its Hurricane Mitch funded a 
Transparency and Anti-Corruption Activity, working in conjunction 
with a local NGO (the Center for the Investigation and Promotion 
of Human Rights) to sponsor workshops on the GOH\'s general 
budget.  The objective of these events is threefold: a) increase 
civil society\'s understanding of current budget legislation and 
its shortfalls; b) formulate solutions to solve the lack of 
transparency in the budget formulation, approval, execution and 
control systems, and c) increase civil society\'s participation 
and understanding of the Honduran national budget process. 
 
Conclusions and recommendations resulting from these workshops 
were developed by a group of civil society organizations and 
presented to the Transparency and Good Governance Group 
(mechanism of dialogue which includes the government, civil 
society and international donors) for inclusion in the table of 
indicators.  Events also received extensive press coverage.  In 
addition, these events helped place the national budget\'s process 
and its transparency high on the agenda of civil society and 
political leaders (e.g. articles were published in local 
newspapers on the need for fiscal transparency). 
 
Palmer 
"
"7902","5/7/2003 21:38","03TEGUCIGALPA1069","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

072138Z May 03
","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 001069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR CA/VO/L/A AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/07/2013 
TAGS: CVIS, KFRD, EFIN, HO 
SUBJECT: ADVISORY OPINION REQUEST 212(A)(2)(I) -- 
INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED IN BANHCRESER SCHEME IN HONDURAS 
 
 
Classified By: Acting Consul General Victoria Coffineau for reasons 1.5 
 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  See paragraphs 6 and 17. 
 
-------------------------- 
SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST 
-------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) In July 2001, the Attorney General of Honduras 
initiated an investigation of certain activities of the 
principal officers of Banco Hondureno de Creditos y Servicios 
S.A. (Banhcreser).  Previously, the National Banking and 
Insurance Commission intervened due to the insolvency of the 
bank, and determined that three (3) related businesses 
(Creditos y Servicios S.A., a.k.a. Creser Visa, Arrendadora 
Hondurena de Creditos, S.A., a.k.a. Ahcreser, and Ancres 
Ltd.) were created to convert public funds to personal use 
without authorization from the Honduran Central Bank. 
Pursuant to Honduran law (Article 72 of the Financial 
Institutions Law), this is a criminal act.  There are at 
least twenty-four (24) individuals that post has identified 
as possibly being involved in these schemes, and who possibly 
engaged in money laundering and other financial crimes by 
converting more than USD 5.9 million of Banhcreser funds to 
personal use.  Post requests permission to permanently revoke 
the visas of these individuals pursuant to 212(a)(2)(I).  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------- 
BANHCRESER BACKGROUND 
--------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) In July 2001, the Attorney General of Honduras 
initiated an investigation of certain activities of the 
principal officers of Banco Hondureno de Creditos y Servicios 
S.A. (Banhcreser).  Previously, the National Banking and 
Insurance Commission intervened due to the insolvency of the 
bank, and determined that three (3) related businesses 
(Creditos y Servicios S.A., a.k.a. Creser Visa, Arrendadora 
Hondurena de Creditos, S.A., a.k.a. Ahcreser, and Ancres 
Ltd.) were created to convert public funds to personal use 
without authorization from the Honduran Central Bank. 
Pursuant to Honduran law (Article 72 of the Financial 
Institutions Law), this is a criminal act. 
 
4. (SBU) Information at post obtained from several 
well-placed sources, in and outside the government of 
Honduras, indicates that the Banhcreser officials have 
engaged in money laundering as well as other fraudulent 
financial transactions and have entered the U.S. to engage in 
the same. 
 
5. (S) Reftel discussed a detailed report dated February 6, 
2002 provided to post by the Financial Crimes Unit of the 
Honduran Attorney General,s Office (Ministerio Publico). 
Additionally, the Chief of the Anticorruption Unit of the 
Attorney General,s Office (comparable to an Assistant 
Attorney General in the United States Attorney,s Office), 
Soraya Morales, has provided ConOffs with further information 
regarding the criminal charges pending against all of the 
individuals named in this cable.  One of the attorneys 
(comparable to a Deputy Attorney General in the United States 
Attorney,s Office) working on the cases for the Attorney 
General, Susy G. Coello, has also provided information.  Post 
emphasizes that the identity of these two (2) individuals 
should be kept strictly confidential, due to grave concerns 
for their safety. 
 
6. (C) The individuals named in this cable have been charged 
with crimes by the Honduran Attorney General.  While there 
are other people that post believes to be involved in these 
money laundering schemes, at this time we are only requesting 
that the individuals against whom the Honduran authorities 
have taken legal action be added to the list of money 
launderers and be entered into the Department,s Lookout 
system as 2-I. 
 
7. (C) The fact that the individuals involved have not yet 
been convicted of criminal offenses under Honduran law is not 
dispositive of these cases.  These are wealthy Honduran 
citizens with strong political connections.  Embassy sources 
(including those within the Honduran Attorney General,s 
Office) indicate a strong possibility of bribery or other 
improper behavior on the part of various defendants in 
connection with pending legal proceedings.  Institutional 
corruption is endemic in Honduras, and judicial corruption is 
common. 
 
-------------------- 
THE CRESER VISA SCAM 
-------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Through an entity known as Creditos y Servicios S.A 
(Creser Visa) the eleven (11) board members absconded with 
approximately USD 1,217,647.  Members of the Board of 
Directors Afif Dieck, Antonio (Jack) Afif Kattan, Carlos 
Chahin Chahin, Rene Francisco Kattan Fernandez, Omar Abufele 
Salomon, Roberto Constantino Larach Chahin, Constantino 
Papadakys, Omar Isaac Monterroso Andonie, Luis Felipe 
Aguilar, Luis Felipe Mendieta y Leonel Sosa converted 
207,000,000 Lempiras (approximately USD 1,217,647). 
 
9. (C) On February 19, 2002, the Attorney General initiated 
criminal proceedings and sought \"orders of capture\" for 
Creser Visa directors Emin Abufele Salomon (President), Omar 
Abufele Salomon, Georgette Chahin Chahin, Santos Reynaldo 
Casco Gomez, Zacarias Papadakys, Constantino Papadakys, Afif 
Dieck, Daniel Shucry Kaffati Canahuati, Omar Isaac Monterroso 
Andonie, Miguel Felipe Canahuati Yacaman (Directors), Antonio 
Teodoro Sansur Dacarett (Secretary), and Luis Felipe Mendieta 
(General Manager), and Christianne Elizabeth Arias Fernandez, 
General Manager of Banhcreser.  Afif Dieck and Christianne 
Elizabeth Arias Fernandez appeared before the court 
voluntarily, but the court declined to issue orders of 
capture on the other board members.  The Attorney General 
opined that Judge Bolivar Castellanos abused his judicial 
authority in so denying the request for orders of capture. 
However, the judge did see fit to issue orders forbidding 
Afif Dieck, Antonio (Jack) Afif Kattan, Carlos Chahin Chahin, 
Rene Francisco Kattan Fernandez, Omar Abufele Salomon, 
Roberto Constantino Larach Chahin, Constantino Papadakys, 
Omar Isaac Monterroso Andonie, Luis Felipe Aguilar, Luis 
Felipe Mendieta, Leonel Sosa, Lorena Sanchez, Chritianne 
Elizabeth Arias Fernandez and Luis Menieta from leaving 
Honduras, and ordered that the Honduran Office of Migration 
be alerted not to allow these individuals to travel to the 
United States. 
 
----------------- 
THE AHCRESER SCAM 
----------------- 
 
10. (C) The Honduran Banking Commission determined that 
Ahcreser was an entity used to divert Banhcreser funds in the 
sum of 169,000,000 Lempiras (approximately USD 994,117). 
Both the Banking Commission and the Attorney General accused 
Nicolas Chahin Chahin, Antonio Teodoro Sansur Dacarett, 
Antonio (Jack) Afif Kattan Kattan, Daniel Shucry Kafati 
Canahuati, Omar Abufele Salomon and Constantino Papadakys of 
criminal activity related to the transfer of the Banhcreser 
funds to Ahcreser.  According to the Attorney General, Judge 
Mildra Castillo abused her authority and violated principles 
of due process when she summarily ruled in favor of the 
defendants and against the Attorney General.  The Attorney 
General appealed the decision, and on March 19, 2003 the 
Supreme Court of Honduras overruled the lower court,s 
decision and reinstated the criminal charges. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
BANHCRESER AND THE PHANTOM COMPANY ANCRES LTD 
--------------------------------------------- 
11. (SBU) On February 19, 2002, the Attorney General 
initiated criminal proceedings against Carlos Chahin Chahin 
(President), Santos Reynaldo Casco Gomez (Vice President), 
Nicolas Chahin Chahin (Treasurer), Antonio Teodoro Sansur 
Dacarett (Secretary), Antonio (Jack) Afif Kattan Kattan 
(Director), Emin Jorge Abufele Salomon (Director), Leonel 
Osbaldo Medrano Irias (Director) -- all on the Board of 
Directors of Banhcreser -- and Caupolican Zuniga Maradiaga 
(General Manager) and German Licona Vega (Assistant Manager). 
 
 
12. (SBU) The above-referenced criminal charges focused on 
the misappropriation of USD 3,700,000 deposited in HSBC 
Republic National Bank in Miami, Florida on June 5, 1998 
(account number 2027549F).  When the defendants deposited the 
funds in a foreign banking institution, they improperly 
rendered the funds unavailable for their intended purpose -- 
to directly and indirectly guaranty credit, pay \"creditos\" to 
other institutions and caused Banhcreser to be 
undercapitalized and ultimately insolvent.  All of this took 
place without the knowledge and consent of investors, many of 
whom lost their life savings. 
 
13. (C) According to the Anticorruption Unit of the Honduran 
Attorney General,s Office, the Banhcreser officials set up a 
Bahamas-based phantom financial institution called Ancres 
Ltd., and covertly deposited the USD 3.7 million in HSBC to 
establish a line of credit.  The money was used as 
collateral, and they eventually borrowed more than USD 3 
million through the shell company.  This entire scheme was 
set into motion by the Directors of Banhcreser from 1998 to 
2001.  Under Honduran law, these transactions were illegal 
and violated banking regulations and laws, including laws 
that prohibit the use of such funds as collateral for 
Ancres, line of credit. 
 
14. (SBU) Additionally, The Attorney General believes that 
the evidence proves that the covert activities were 
intentional -- done by the Banhcreser directors and 
principals for the express purpose of hiding the true 
financial condition of the institution.  Once the Banking 
Commission intervened, it asked HSBC to return the reserves, 
but HSBC declined since Ancres had defaulted on the loans. 
 
 
--------------- 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
--------------- 
 
15. (SBU) The information delineated in this cable more than 
meets the \"reason to believe\" standard set forth in INA 
Section 212(a)(2)(I). 
 
16. (S) It is important to reiterate that the fact that the 
individuals involved have not yet been convicted of criminal 
offenses under Honduran law is not dispositive of these 
cases.  These are wealthy Honduran citizens with strong 
political connections.  Embassy sources (including those 
within the Honduran Attorney General,s Office) indicate a 
strong possibility of bribery or other improper behavior on 
the part of various defendants in connection with pending 
legal proceedings.  Institutional corruption is endemic in 
Honduras, and judicial corruption is common.  Nevertheless, 
on March 19, 2003, the Supreme Court of Honduras overruled a 
lower court,s decision and reinstated the criminal 
proceedings against the Banhcreser officials.  Investors 
(including American investors) in Banhcreser, Creser Visa and 
Ahcreser have suffered significant financial losses as a 
result of the criminal behavior of these individuals. 
 
17. (C) A number of the persons involved in these three (3) 
schemes are reputed to have engaged in a pattern and practice 
of fraudulent financial practices in Honduras for several 
years -- including Emin Jorge Abufele Salomon, Omar Abufele 
Salomon, Carlos Chahin Chahin, Nicolas Chahin Chahin, Daniel 
Shucry Kafati Canahuati, Antonio Afif Kattan Kattan, Rene 
Franciso Kattan Fernandez, Roberto Constantino Larach Chahin 
and Miguel Felipe Canahuati Yacaman.  Post requests that the 
names of these twenty-four Honduran nationals be added to the 
list of money launderers and that their names be entered into 
the Department,s Lookout system as 2-I visa ineligibilities. 
 
------------------------------- 
INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED IN SCHEMES 
------------------------------- 
 
18. (SBU) Below is the information for the individuals 
involved in these schemes: 
 
a. Name: Abufele Salomon, Emin Jorge 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 25 AUG 1943 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: 004437 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
b. Name: Abufele Salomon, Omar 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 04 OCT 1941 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: 097998 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
c. Name: Chahin Chahin, Carlos 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 19 OCT 1941 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Believe B1B2 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
d. Name: Chahin Chahin, Georgette 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: F 
   VLO: None 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
e. Name: Chahin Chahin, Nicolas 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 07 NOV 1954 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: 354773 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
f. Name: Dieck, Afif 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: Unknown 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
g. Name: Kafati Canahuati, Daniel Shucry 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 23 JUL 1955 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: 033013 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
h. Name: Kattan Kattan, Antonio Afif (a/k/a Kattan, Jack 
 
   Afif) 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 02 SEP 1948 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: 414818 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
i. Name: Kattan Fernandez, Rene Francisco 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 04 JUL 1945 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Believe B1/B2 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
j. Name: Larach Chahin, Roberto Constantino 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 03 SEP 1958 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: 739500 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
k. Name: Papadakys Marinakis, Constantino 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 12 JAN 1948 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
l. Name: Papadakys, Zacarias 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
m. Name: Monterroso Andonie, Omar Isaac 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 08 DEC 1960 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: A149170 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
n. Name: Aguilar, Luis Felipe 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
o. Name: Mendieta, Luis Felipe 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
p. Name: Sosa, Leonel 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: Unknown 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
q. Name: Casco Gomez, Santos Reynaldo 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: Unknown 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
r. Name: Canahuati Yacaman, Miguel Felipe 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 06 OCT 1954 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: 793452 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
s. Name: Sansur Dacarett, Antonio Teodoro 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 15 JUL 1945 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Regular 
   Visa: B1/B2 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Multiple Entries 
 
t. Name: Arias Fernandez, Christianne Elizabeth 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 29 MAR 1964 
   Sex: F 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
u. Name: Sanchez, Lorena 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: Unknown 
   Sex: F 
   VLO: Unknown 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
v. Name: Medrano Irias, Leonel Osbaldo 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 02 OCT 1946 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: Unknown 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
w. Name: Zuniga Maradiago, Caupolican 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 19 DEC 1948 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
 
x. Name: Licona Vega, German 
   Nat: Honduran 
   DOB: 05 SEP 1954 
   Sex: M 
   VLO: P2I 
   COB: Honduras 
   Ppt: Unknown 
   Visa: Unknown 
   PPN: Unknown 
   NOE: Unknown 
Palmer 
"
"7931","5/8/2003 22:58","03TEGUCIGALPA1085","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03Tegucigalpa558","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
LA PAZ - PLEASE PASS USAID FOR TODD SLOAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EAID, PREL, SOCI, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT:  CHANGING THE POLITICAL PARADIGM-MUNICIPAL 
ASSOCIATION DEFEATS EFFORT TO IMPOSE A PARTISAN DIRECTOR 
 
REF:  Tegucigalpa 558 
 
1. SUMMARY:  The Honduran Municipal Association (AMHON) 
preserved its political independence and nonpartisan 
character by selecting a municipal development professional 
as Executive Director despite a six month effort by the 
Minister of Government and dark-side members of Congress to 
impose a politically beholden Nationalist party member as 
Executive Director.  This come-from-behind victory for the 
maturing municipal government forces, who were aided by the 
USG and other international donors, represents an important 
political counterbalance to the Maduro Administration\'s now- 
revealed efforts to reap maximum partisan advantage out of 
its political decentralization program.  It is also a huge 
step for the good government and anti-corruption forces 
because the AMHON Board of Directors broke from established 
political tradition, where decisions are made behind closed 
doors based on partisan preferences, by using a professional 
and transparent selection process.  This highly atypical 
selection process for a Honduran institution could serve as 
a model for other entities, furthering the development of 
democracy and decentralization in Honduras.  END SUMMARY 
 
2.  On April 29 the Honduran Municipal Association (AMHON) 
Board of Directors (composed of 12 Nationalist Party Mayors, 
11 Liberal Party Mayors, and one Christian Democrat Mayor,) 
held a regularly scheduled meeting in Tela where they 
selected a new Executive Director, Miguel Angel Munguia, to 
replace the embattled Guadalupe Lopez (reftel).  AMHON 
extended an invitation to international donors to attend the 
meeting as observers in order to continue to provide 
independent guarantees of transparency in the finalization 
of the selection process.  A USAID Municipal Development 
Officer attended, and was accompanied by Alfredo Stein 
(Swedish aid agency) and Jose Antonio Samperi (Spanish aid 
agency). 
 
3.  The reasoned debate that transpired during the meeting 
was in stark contrast to previous gatherings during the last 
four months where emotional partisan squabbles dominated the 
discussion.  Particularly disruptive were the previous 
provocations by Nationalist Mayors in AHMON to remove the 
Executive Director (reftel).  It appears that this time, the 
Board\'s decisions were based on genuine consensus and truly 
reflected the will of the organization as a whole.  (Note: 
Donors\' continued interest and follow-up on this issue, not 
to mention their presence during the deliberations, were an 
influence in this outcome.  Ambassador Palmer met on a 
number of occasions separately with the Minister of 
Government and select groups of mayors to help push this 
process to its successful resolution. End Note.) 
 
4. Four finalists for the position of Executive Director 
were presented to the Board of Directors for their decision. 
Although AHMON\'s by-laws state that a simple majority can 
select an Executive Director, the board decided to reach a 
consensus on the new candidate.  (Comment:  Throughout the 
meeting, there were constant mentions of the need for the 
board to get beyond the partisan positions that had been 
dividing them in the past; almost a plea to get back to real 
business.  End Comment.) 
 
5. Members of the selection committee reported to the Board 
of Directors on the interviews that were conducted and all 
reaffirmed the transparent and professional nature of the 
selection process, indicating that they learned a great deal 
by going through this process.  Of the four finalists, 
Miguel Angel Munguia was selected by consensus.  Mr. Munguia 
currently works as a regional coordinator for the Honduran 
Foundation for Municipal Development (FUNDEMUN).  Munguia 
has a long history of working with municipalities in 
technical positions and does not have an overt political 
affiliation.  He has a reputation as a solid professional 
and is well known to Post. 
 
6. COMMENT:  In a significant setback for Jorge Ramon 
Hernandez Alcerro, the Minister of Government, many of the 
Nationalist Party mayors who had towed the party line in 
previous meetings have now distanced themselves from him and 
the other Nationalist Party members of Congress who sought 
to influence the selection of the new Executive Director. 
In conversations both before and after the meeting, it 
appears a number of Nationalist mayors decided to reject the 
external partisan manipulation that was being applied to 
them.  Further, it appears that this hiring decision could 
prove to be an important moment for AMHON\'s growing 
political independence in that Nationalist mayors, annoyed 
by continued pressure from their party, are now willing to 
stake out positions that are critical, yet constructive, on 
real issues that are effecting their municipalities. 
7. COMMENT CONTINUED:  The transparent selection of a new 
AHMON Executive Director has been a highly atypical process 
for a Honduran institution.  Normally, high-level 
managerial/ministerial positions are essentially chosen 
behind closed doors based on partisan preferences by the 
party holding the majority.  AMHON\'s example may well serve 
as a model for other Honduran entities to emulate, 
especially in lieu of the relevance AMHON has for the 
further development of democracy and decentralization in 
Honduras.  U.S. mission support from the Ambassador to USAID 
Municipal Development officer provided the critical measure 
of support needed to overcome the intense political pressure 
being exerted by Maduro Administration officials and 
National Congress Members, including the Majority Leader of 
the Congress and Party Whip.  END COMMENT 
 
PALMER 
"
"8018","5/12/2003 23:14","03TEGUCIGALPA1108","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/ENT, DRL/PHD, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/12/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, KJUS, KCRM, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN SUPREME COURT RULES IT HAS AUTHORITY TO 
INTERPRET CONSTITUTION; CONGRESS VOWS A FIGHT 
 
REF: 02 TEGUCIGALPA 3349 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer 
Reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On May 7, in a unanimous 15-0 decision, the 
Honduran Supreme Court declared its authority to interpret 
the Constitution by ruling on a controversial constitutional 
amendment passed by Congress in 1999.  The Court\'s decision 
struck down as unconstitutional Article 218(9) which provides 
that interpretations of the Constitution by Congress are not 
subject to presidential veto or presidential approval.  By 
exercising its constitutional prerogative of judicial review, 
the court\'s decision firmly established the body as final 
arbiter to interpret the Constitution.  However, Congress has 
exercised its political supremacy historically to interpret 
the Constitution.  The court\'s decision has put the body 
squarely on a collision course with Congress, which may act, 
possibly as early as tomorrow, to thwart the court\'s ruling. 
END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) On May 7, in a unanimous 15-0 decision, the Honduran 
Supreme Court declared its authority to interpret the 
Constitution by ruling on a controversial constitutional 
amendment passed in 1999.  The Court\'s decision struck down 
as unconstitutional Article 218(9) which provides that 
interpretations of the Constitution by Congress are not 
subject to presidential veto or presidential approval. 
 
3. (U) On November 13, 2002 Human Rights Commissioner Dr. 
Ramon Custodio, with the support of civil society, filed a 
lawsuit alleging that the Congressional amendment violated 
the separation of powers provision on the Constitution and 
was thus unconstitutional (reftel).  (Note:  Historically, 
Congress has exercised its political supremacy to interpret 
the Constitution.  End Note.)  On January 10, 2003, the 
Public Ministry issued an ambiguous opinion that ultimately 
concluded that the claims of the Human Rights Commissioner 
were incorrect and that Article 218(9) was not 
unconstitutional.  The Court\'s May 7 ruling, however, 
affirmed the position of the Human Rights Commissioner, 
putting the body squarely on a collision course with Congress 
over which body has the ultimate authority to interpret the 
Constitution. 
 
4. (U)  The issue has received significant press coverage 
over the last few days as speculation mounts over what move 
Congress will make next.  Many Honduran NGO\'s are mobilizing 
over the issue, with most favoring the Court\'s decision and 
opposing any congressional action.  Post notes that neither 
President Ricardo Maduro or any other senior GOH official has 
issued any statements on either the Supreme Court\'s ruling or 
possible congressional action in response to the ruling. 
 
5. (SBU) Pepe Lobo, President of the Congress, told the 
Political Section May 12 that he believed the press was 
over-blowing the issue.  He confirmed that he would be 
meeting with other congressional leaders later in the day to 
discuss possible congressional action, but indicated he 
believed that nothing \"drastic\" was in the works.  However, 
some observers feel Congress might act to pass proposed 
legislation authorizing the body to remove any sitting 
government official it had confirmed, including Supreme Court 
Justices, thus giving Congress the ability to manipulate 
further court proceedings.  Some press articles have 
speculated that Congress might act to impeach the five 
members of the constitutional chamber of the Supreme Court. 
 
6. (C) Ambassador met May 12 with Custodio at Custodio\'s 
request to discuss the issue.  Custodio termed the situation 
\"an unnecessary scandal.\"  He noted that of the five judges 
on the constitutional chamber, three are considered to be 
Nationalists and two are considered to be Liberals.  Custodio 
said that Congress does not currently have the power to 
remove judges merely for displeasure over a ruling.  However, 
if Congress passes the proposed legislation authorizing the 
body to remove any sitting government official it had 
confirmed, it will have the power to do exactly that. 
Custodio said he does not think that Congress will remove the 
five judges.  He noted that the Supreme Court\'s ruling on 
Article 218(9) in turn also invalidates Article 205(10), 
which Congress passed August 8, 2002 but has yet to ratify. 
Article 205(10) would explicitly grant congress the power to 
interpret the Constitution through a single two-thirds 
majority vote in one session (reftel).  Custodio urged the 
G-15 to discreetly raise its views with Congress and the 
public to make it clear that international donors were 
watching the situation closely. 
 
7. (C)  COMMENT:  The Supreme Court\'s ruling marks a 
watershed in Honduran jurisprudence.  By exercising its 
constitutional right to interpret the Constitution, the Court 
has established itself as an essential check-and-balance on 
congressional excesses.  Congress, however, is unlikely to 
simply accept the Court\'s ruling.  Post is wary that Congress 
may act rashly and retaliate with actions that could greatly 
harm the rule of law and separation of powers in Honduras. 
EmbOffs are quietly raising Post\'s concerns with NGOs, the 
GOH, and Congress.  Post is also pushing the G-15 to make a 
joint statement supporting the Supreme Court\'s ruling and 
urging the Congress not to try to overturn the ruling or take 
other misguided steps.  END COMMENT 
Palmer 
"
"8019","5/12/2003 23:19","03TEGUCIGALPA1109","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR INL/LP, DRL/PHD, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: TROUBLE IN PARADISE:  HONDURAN BAY ISLAND OF 
GUANAJA A HOT-SPOT FOR NARCOTRAFFICKING 
 
 
1. (U)  SUMMARY: The Honduran Bay Islands of Roatan, Utila, 
and Guanaja are well known narcotrafficking transit points 
and home to countless other illicit activities.  Due to the 
large tourism industry on Roatan and Utila, the GOH has 
chosen to focus its limited counternarcotics resources 
primarily on these two islands.  Guanaja, however, has not 
received the much needed resources to combat its ever-growing 
narcotics problem.  The least developed of the Bay Islands, 
Guanaja\'s limited infrastructure and services have served to 
be a deterrent to tourism.  Additionally, unemployment is 
widespread, creating a safehaven on Guanaja for 
narcotraffickers and organized crime families.  Drug abuse 
among the 6,000 islanders has greatly increased and all 
indications suggest that this trend will continue. END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U)  The Honduran Bay Islands of Roatan, Utila, and 
Guanaja are well known narcotrafficking transit points and 
home to countless other illicit activities.  Roughly 85 
percent of Guanaja\'s adult population uses crack, cocaine, or 
marijuana according to a recent El Heraldo newspaper report. 
Casual drug use can be observed openly in public, and even 
children as young as 8 years old are known to be regular drug 
users.  The widespread usage of illegal substances may be due 
to the high unemployment rate on the island.  Tourism also 
remains depressed and the fishing industry is not at a 
sustainable level for many families to subsist on.  Thus, 
some people have found employment with the narcotraffickers 
and are often paid in the form of drugs rather than cash, 
creating a cycle of drug abuse. 
 
3. (U)  Honduras is not usually the ultimate destination for 
narcotrafficking transactions, but rather a transit point. 
Much of the product that transits through Guanaja originates 
in South America and is destined for the Cayman Islands and 
the United States.  The most common means of transportation 
in the area of Guanaja is maritime, although planes are also 
used.  Drug runners use 200 horsepower boats that easily 
surpass the 100 horsepower boats used by the Honduran police 
and Navy.  It is common for abandoned packages and boats to 
be found near Guanaja when the traffickers are alerted of the 
presence of authorities.  This in turn makes prosecution 
highly difficult and unlikely. 
 
4. (U)  The narcotraffickers are protected by the inhabitants 
of Guanaja through methods of terror and assault.  Also, the 
undersupported police authorities of the island do not have 
the manpower to patrol, capture, and prosecute known 
traffickers.  According to the Director of National Police, 
Coralia Rivera, the effectiveness of the police force is 
minimized because they need boats, planes, and helicopters to 
enforce narcotrafficking laws, and these resources are just 
not available. 
 
5. (SBU)  COMMENT:  In a recent letter to the Ambassador, the 
Mayor of Guanaja pleaded for some form of direct U.S. 
counternarcotics assistance to combat the presence of drug 
traffickers.  There are recent reports that a fed-up local 
population, acting in a vigilante-style campaign, attacked 
and destroyed the house of a well known drug trafficker. 
Until more resources become available to law enforcement 
agencies in Guanaja, the island will remain very vulnerable 
to the corruption of crime bosses and influential 
narcotraffickers.  Furthermore, much of its population will 
continue to support such activities both through the use of 
narcotics and the protection they provide to the traffickers. 
 This problem is not just that of a small island of 6,000 
inhabitants, but indicative of the larger problem Honduras 
faces as more and more of its territory is compromised by the 
drug trade.  Post believes that additional USG 
counternarcotics resources should be directed at areas like 
Guanaja in order to fight the larger war on drugs.  END 
COMMENT 
 
Palmer 
"
"8045","5/13/2003 22:47","03TEGUCIGALPA1122","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA913|03TEGUCIGALPA924|03TEGUCIGALPA962|03TEGUCIGALPA986","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001122 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, DRL/PHD, EB/TRA, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, EAIR, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: ONE IF BY AIR, TWO IF BY SEA: HONDURAN 
NARCOTRAFFICKING TIMELINE MARCH 2002-APRIL 2003 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 986 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 962 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 924 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 913 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) The following is a listing of important 
narcotrafficking activities occurring in Honduras within the 
past year.  It should be noted that there has been a sizable 
increase in the use of aircraft as a delivery platform for 
drug shipments.  The occurrence of illicit aircraft tracks 
crossing into Honduras averages three incidents per day. 
 
----------------- 
AIRCRAFT ACTIVITY 
----------------- 
 
-March 31, 2002:  A Beechcraft Queen Air crashed in the 
remote Mosquitia region of Honduras.  Ninety-five AK-47s were 
recovered at this site (ref B). 
 
-August 31, 2002:  Police responded to a crash site in Santa 
Rita of a Piper Seneca (model PA-34-200T) bearing Colombian 
tail number HK-2083P.  This particular aircraft also had an 
Operation Gemini Clipper sticker on its tail (ref B). 
 
-October 16, 2002:  A white Cessna made an emergency landing 
in Southern Honduras.  The two pilots were arrested and three 
kilos of cocaine were recovered from the burned wreckage (ref 
B). 
 
-Between December 31, 2002 and January 4, 2003:  A Piper 
Seneca (model PA-34-200T) crashed in the vicinity of Santa 
Rita.  No drugs were seized but arrests were made.  An 
Operation Gemini Clipper sticker was located on the aircraft 
that bore the tail number N237H (ref B). 
 
-March 5, 2003:  A twin engine Air Commander believed to be 
transporting 500 to 1,000 kilos of cocaine crashed in the 
area of Kum, Nicaragua; Kum is located just south of the 
Honduran border in the remote region of La Mosquitia.  Local 
villagers are believed to have taken most of the load across 
the Rio Coco into Honduras (ref B). 
 
-March 19, 2003:  A Beechcraft King Air entered southern 
Honduras and continued northwest straddling the Honduran/El 
Salvadoran border before it entered Guatemala where it was 
ultimately forced down.  Two Colombians were arrested and 
1,020 kilos of cocaine were seized (ref B). 
 
-April 2, 2003:  A Colombian-registered (HK-2862P) Piper 
Seneca loaded with cocaine was captured by police after 
landing on a Honduran highway near Arenal, in the Yolo 
department.  The pilots fled the scene leaving Colombian 
flight plans aboard.  Although only 397 kilos of cocaine were 
recovered at the site, it is believed that the plane 
originated with 1,000 kilos onboard (ref B). 
 
-April 8, 2003:  A Beechcraft Queen Air violated Honduran air 
space in the south of the country, but was not intercepted. 
The aircraft was believed to have approximately 1,000 kilos 
of cocaine onboard (ref B). 
 
-April 14, 2003:  The Honduran Air Force forced down an Aero 
Commander over southern Honduras.  The two Colombian pilots 
were killed.  Honduran police collected approximately 942 
kilos of cocaine from the crash site (refs A, C, and D). 
 
----------------- 
MARITIME ACTIVITY 
----------------- 
 
-November 29, 2002:  Honduran authorities seized 2.2 kilos of 
cocaine from a go-fast boat on a beach in La Mosquitia. 
During the operation two traffickers were killed, two 
captured, and the remaining two escaped. 
 
-December 11, 2002:  USD 460,000 was seized from F/U \"Captain 
Ryan\" in La Ceiba, Honduras.  Six people were arrested, 
including 1 Panamanian. 
 
-January 21, 2003:  USD 380,000 was seized from a go-fast 
boat at Roatan Island, Honduras.  Several arrests were made 
in the seizure. 
-March 6, 2003:  Four go-fast boats escaped capture off the 
northern coast of Honduras during Operation Rio Coco. 
 
-March 18, 2003:  Honduran police disrupted a maritime drug 
transfer operation.  The twelve subjects arrested were in 
possession of 12 hand guns, two AK-47s, one M-16, one GPS and 
13 cell phones.  Some of the individuals arrested in the 
event are known traffickers.  Subsequent investigation 
revealed that they are connected to a prominent 
narcotrafficking family. 
-April 13, 2003:  An abandoned go-fast boat was found in the 
vicinity of Puerto Castilla equipped with three 250 
horsepower engines and 10 barrels of fuel. 
2. (SBU) Comment:  The events listed above offer only a 
glimpse into the narcotrafficking operations that transit 
Honduras.  Post, through the Political Section\'s INL 
programs, DEA, and TAT, work closely with the GOH on 
combating narcotrafficking.  It is clear to Post that the GOH 
cannot fight this battle without the support of the USG.  End 
Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"8091","5/15/2003 21:39","03TEGUCIGALPA1141","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA865","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 001141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB, DRL/IL, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCD/IOI/WH/RD/DLUTTER 
USDOC FOR 4320/IEF/WH/OMCB 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/EJAFFEE 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON AND AGAH FCOOLIDGE 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, ENRG, EINV, EAIR, ELAB, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ECON HIGHLIGHTS: MARCH AND APRIL 2003 
 
REFS: A) TEGUCIGALPA 00865 
 
      B) TEGUCIGALPA 00606 
      C) TEGUCIGALPA 00652 
 
TOPICS: 
 
MACROECONOMIC ISSUES 
  -    GDP Growth in 2003 
-    Lempira Devaluation 
-    Rise in Inflation 
-    Honduran Congress Approves New Agricultural Law 
-    Honduran Congress Adopts New Fiscal Package 
-    GOH Increases Minimum Wage Base 
 
TRADE 
  -    Coffee Woes in Exports and Prices 
-    Nicaraguan National Assembly Temporarily Suspends Tariff 
 
INVESTMENT 
  -    Honduran Bid of Mobile Telephone Service 
-    Sol Air to Commence Daily Service to El Salvador 
 
FOREIGN AID 
  -    IDB and Central American Bank of Economic Integration Loans 
 
MACROECONOMIC ISSUES 
 
------------------ 
GDP Growth in 2003 
------------------ 
 
1.   The Central Bank of Honduras expects the GDP to increase by 
3.0 to 3.5 percent in 2003. It grew by 2.0 percent in 2002, which 
was lower than the increases of 2.7 and 4.8 percent in 2001 and 
2000, respectively. The Bank expects the GDP to reach more than 
121 billion lempiras (USD 7.03 billion), a 21 billion lempira 
(USD 1.2 billion) increase from the 2002 GDP of 100 billion 
lempiras (USD 5.89 billion).  The expected GDP growth is being 
attributed to a recuperation of traditional exports and the 
anticipation of increased profits from the telecommunication, 
electricity, housing, agriculture and livestock sectors. 
 
------------------- 
Lempira Devaluation 
------------------- 
 
2.   From January to March, the lempira devalued by 1.3 percent, 
less than the trimester of the previous years devaluation of 1.7 
percent.  In nominal terms this year\'s devaluation equals 22 
centavos, while the past year registered 28 centavos. 
 
----------------- 
Rise in Inflation 
----------------- 
 
3.   The Central Bank of Honduras registered a 1.3 percent 
increase for the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in February, which is 
higher than the 1.1 percent increase from February 2002. 
January\'s CPI registered a .8 percent increase, which is higher 
than the .3 percent increase from January 2003.  The rising 
inflation has been attributed to the increase in the price of 
electricity, water, and fuel, which contributed .3 points to the 
percentage of the February CPI.  Higher educational cost was the 
most influential factor in February\'s CPI increase and 
contributed .4 points to the percentage. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Honduran Congress Approves New Agricultural Law 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
4. (SBU) The Honduran National Congress approved on April 23 an 
agricultural debt relief program (called the Agricultural Sector 
Financial Strengthening Law).  This law replaced the agricultural 
credit laws enacted in previous years that were deemed to be 
ineffective in dealing with the debt arrears of the agricultural 
sector and too costly for the government if they were to be 
implemented.  The stated purpose of the new law, proposed by the 
Executive Branch, is to resolve the agricultural debt crisis for 
some 13,600 Honduran farmers by providing debt forgiveness, 
rescheduling of the existing debt, and providing new credit. The 
law will also help the private banking system because it pays off 
much of the bad agricultural debt held by the banks (although in 
the form of low-yielding long-term government bonds), and 
attempts to protect banks against future financial agricultural 
losses by requiring farmers to pay for crop insurance. 
5.   (SBU) This law creates a trust fund of up to 4.0 billion 
lempiras (USD 235.3 million) in FONAPROVI (the government\'s 
second tier development bank) to finance this agricultural debt- 
relief program over ten years.  The law legislates that the 
government will forgive the entire debt of farmers who owe banks 
less than 50,000 lempiras (USD 2,941). In addition, the 
government will forgive 50 percent of the debt of farmers who owe 
banks more than this amount, up to a maximum of 4.0 million 
lempiras (USD 235.3 million). These farmers\' debts will be paid 
by having the government provide 1.7 billion lempiras (USD 100 
millon) in low-yield long-term government bonds to the creditor 
banks over a period of ten years. The yearly government payment 
to the banks, including interest payments, is a declining amount, 
starting with an initial payment of 347 million lempiras (USD 
20.4 million) in 2003, which has already been included in this 
year\'s national budget. The remaining 2.3 billion lempiras (USD 
133 million) to be allocated to the trust fund will be used to 
reschedule the remaining 50 percent of the farmers\' debt arrears 
so that the banks can issue discounted new loans to these farmers 
at interest rates of 8.725 percent for a maximum ten year term. 
The GOH has estimated the total fiscal cost of the consolidated 
package of assistance at USD 133 million over 10 years (0.15 
percent of the yearly GDP). 
 
6.   (SBU) In addition, this new law set off a firestorm of 
criticism in the press, because the President of Congress and a 
number of other politically influential individuals were listed 
as potential beneficiaries of this law.  These individuals\' 
interests include ownership and/or business partnerships in 
agricultural enterprises that are highly indebted to banks. 
Several of these individuals are also shareholders in banking 
institutions that will be compensated for bad agricultural loans 
made to agricultural producers.  The law will become effective 
upon President Maduro\'s signature and its publication in the 
Gaceta. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Honduran Congress Adopts New Fiscal Package 
------------------------------------------- 
 
7.   (SBU) On April 2, the Honduran National Congress adopted its 
second fiscal package of tax measures (called the Law of Tax 
Equity).  The stated purpose of this package is to expand the tax 
base, reduce chronic budget deficits, move the GOH towards an IMF 
agreement, and eliminate a number of special tax exemptions.  The 
GOH\'s target had been an annual revenue increase of 3.5 billion 
lempiras (USD 200 million)- of which 2 billion lempiras (USD 118 
million) would be collected from the remaining months of 2003. 
 
8.   (SBU) Key provisions in the fiscal package include reducing 
income tax exemptions for bonuses and representation expenses for 
individuals with an annual income above 600,000 lempiras (USD 
35,294), unifying the corporate tax at a rate of 25 percent of 
net taxable income and reducing the number of products exempt 
from sales tax (from 800 to about 200 mostly foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals, books and publications and school supplies).  On 
the expenditure side, provisions include freezing wages for 
public employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements 
and canceling 60 percent of government positions that were vacant 
on December 31, except in education, health and security.  The 
Congress discarded three important tax measures from the original 
government proposal and increased the sales tax on tobacco 
products and alcoholic beverages (to 15 percent) to compensate 
for this lost revenue.  IMF sources are skeptical that the total 
revenue from the measures will be as high as the GOH\'s 
projections.  (See ref A for further information on the tax 
measures). 
 
------------------------------- 
GOH Increases Minimum Wage Base 
------------------------------- 
 
9.   On March 21, the GOH officially increased the minimum wage 
base by nine percent for most workers with retroactive payments 
starting from January 1.  Only a small number of workers, mostly 
in companies with fewer than 15 employees received the 12 percent 
increase that the press was reporting.  The minimum wage decision 
was devolved to President Maduro after bilateral negotiations 
between the three labor confederations and the business 
associations ended without an agreement.  Congress is also 
examining possible legislation for the creation of a USD 88 
million workers fund that will provide money to the unemployed 
for living expenses and other necessities. 
10.  The nine percent increase has garnered discontentment from 
representatives of the business community.  The National 
Association of Industries (ANDI) has been one of the most vocal 
groups.  They have stated that the increase in the minimum wage 
will force businesses to increase the prices of their products, 
which will lead to a rise in inflation.  The increase will occur 
because businesses have already set the prices of their products 
based on a minimum wage increase of no more than 8 percent.  ANDI 
has also stated that the decision of the GOH was not based on the 
needs of the nation, but on the need to gain the political 
support of labor confederations and their members. 
 
TRADE 
 
--------------------------------- 
Coffee Woes in Exports and Prices 
--------------------------------- 
 
11.  According to the Honduran Institute of Coffee, coffee 
exports in 2003 will amount to 2.8 million sacks, a decrease of 
18 percent from last year\'s 3.4 million.  From the period of 
October 2002 to April 2003, exports amounted to 2,007,578 sacks 
that represented an income of USD 115 million.  The increase in 
international coffee prices of USD 8.16 from USD 49.54 to USD 
57.70 was being looked upon as a possible savior for the coffee 
industry whose production and revenues have been declining. 
Industry analysts are expecting the numbers to continue their 
descent as the year moves ahead. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Nicaraguan National Assembly Temporarily Suspends Tariff 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
12.  The Nicaraguan National Assembly\'s March 11, temporary 
suspension of its 35 percent tariff on Honduran goods put an end 
to the long-standing dispute between the two nations.  The 
Nicaraguan National Assembly implemented the tariff, called the 
\"Patriotic Tax\" in December of 1999, after Honduras ratified a 
treaty with Colombia recognizing a Nicaraguan-Colombian maritime 
dispute as a Colombian possession.  In March, after waiting three 
years for Nicaraguan legislators to repeal the tariff, the 
Honduran National Congress decided it was time to implement 
retaliatory tariffs on Nicaragua.  With the National Assembly\'s 
temporary suspension of the tariff the Honduran National Congress 
cut short their efforts to enact retaliatory tariffs. Under the 
direction of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, Honduran 
companies are now in the process of restoring Honduran exports to 
Nicaragua.  If all goes well Honduran exports to Nicaragua can 
accumulate between USD 60 to 70 million and should continue to 
increase in the future. (Full report in ref B and additional 
background information in ref C). 
 
INVESTMENT 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Honduran Bid of Mobile Telephone Service 
---------------------------------------- 
 
13.  On April 25, CONATEL (Honduras\' equivalence of the FCC) 
announced the awarding of a 25-year PCS contract to the Honduran- 
Swedish consortium Megatel-EMCE.  Megatel-EMCE\'s bid of USD 7.1 
million won it the contract over two other bidding companies 
Entel of Chile and Bellsouth Honduras.  Working under band b, 
Megatel-EMCE plans to install more than 50,000 lines within the 
next year to provide nationwide and international cellular 
service.  Megatel-EMCE will also provide transmission of video, 
data, and photos through its lines.  Megatel-EMCE plans to 
commence service towards the end of this year and is stating that 
it will offer competitive prices (relative to existing wireless 
operator, Celtel) to consumers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Sol Air to Commence Daily Service to El Salvador 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
14.  Starting June 11, the Honduran air carrier Sol Air will 
begin daily flights (except for Saturday) to San Salvador.  Sol 
Air had originally applied for a five-year contract to operate in 
El Salvador, but instead Salvadoran aviation officials granted 
them a contract for one-year (until March 31, 2004).  Sol Air has 
been applying for access to the Salvadorian market since 2002, 
but had been consistently denied by Salvadorian officials.  In 
March, this became a highly contentious issue when, after meeting 
with Salvadoran aviation officials for almost two years, the 
president of Sol Air, Ricardo Martinez, requested that the GOH 
cancel Salvadoran commercial airlines entrance privileges into 
Honduras.  It is widely believed that officials of TACA, an El 
Salvadoran air carrier, were highly influential in convincing 
Salvadoran officials to deny Sol Air access. 
FOREIGN AID 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
IDB and Central American Bank of Economic Integration Loans 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
15.  The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) approved a USD 20 
million loan to the GOH for its peace and coexistence project. 
The project\'s objective is to reduce crime and violence among 
youth in the Valle de Sula region, a region that has some of the 
highest crime statistics in the nation.  The program will provide 
social services to youth such as educational assistance, 
training, outreach and counseling services, prevention campaigns, 
and the reformation of gang members. 
 
16.  The Central American Bank of Economic Integration (CABEI) 
approved a USD 22.5 loan to the GOH to complete the last portion 
of the highway, which will link Puerto Cortes to the Guatemalan 
border.  The latest loan will bring the CABEI\'s total 
contribution to this project to USD 45.3 million. 
 
Palmer 
"
"8092","5/16/2003 1:59","03TEGUCIGALPA1144","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET//NOFORN","03TEGUCIGALPA912","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR DS/IP/WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, S/CT, INR, EUR/WE 
DIA FOR CSR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/15/2013 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER, PINR, PREL, CASC, HO 
SUBJECT: POPULAR REVOLUTIONARY FORCES ISSUE COMMINIQUE: 
THREATEN AMERICAN,UK AND SPANISH DIPLOMATS IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 912 
 
Classified By: Regional Security Officer John B. McKennan, 
Reasons 1.5 C and D. 
 
 1. (SBU)  SUMMARY:  On the evening of May 14 post received a 
communique from a group calling itself the \"Popular 
Revolutionary Forces\" announcing the beginning of a campaign 
to overthrow the Maduro government and vowing to evict 
\"Yankees\" and other foreign occupiers.  The communique\'s 
rhetoric follows traditional Latino revolutionary style.  It 
also identifies United States, United Kingdom and Spanish 
diplomats accredited to Honduras as legitimate military 
targets.  Based on information available at this time Post 
concurs with the initial Honduran police assessment (assuming 
the document is valid) that the communique represents an 
attempt to gain political support and is not a realistic 
threat.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (SBU)  On the evening of May 14 post received a communique 
from a group calling itself the \"Popular Revolutionary 
Forces\" FPR announcing the beginning of a campaign to 
overthrow the Maduro government and vowing to evict \"Yankees\" 
and other foreign occupiers from Iraq (and presumably 
Honduras).  The communique\'s rhetoric follows traditional 
Latino revolutionary style.  It also identifies United 
States, United Kingdom and Spanish diplomats accredited to 
Honduras as legitimate military targets.  RSO has checked 
with a number of sources and determined that FPR cells were 
created in El Salvador in the 1970s-1980s and clandestinely 
charged with agitating within unions and popular 
organizations. The FPR was supported by the Salvadorian 
guerrillas.  Four of the group\'s most powerful Honduran 
leaders were exiled and then circa 1991 allowed to return to 
Honduras. They subsequently violated an agreement not to 
continue revolutionary activities. Two of those exiled were, 
Gustavo Garcia Espana and Rigoberto Padilla Russell. 
Clementina Garcia Espana, (Gustavo\'s sister) was also a 
senior member, but not exiled.  Reftel, para 1 describes 
thirty organizations involved in political demonstrations and 
the eight groups that are the most anti-U.S. including the 
Democratic Union (UD). 
 
3. (S)  The FPR is believed to have been involved in the 
burning of the AID building in Tegucigalpa in 1988.  Last 
month there was an attempt by several anti-U.S. groups to 
commemorate the 15 year anniversary of the attack with a 
demonstration in front of the AID mission building.  While 
the demonstration did not take place,  RSO sources with 
access to activist planners, indicated that some leaders were 
attempting to bring back former Leftists responsible for the 
attack to help with training and to motivate current group 
members.  The FPR, or persons using that name, have been 
known to release communiques over the years since 1991 
against government policies and to call people to street 
protests.  It is not possible at this time, given the 
available information, to determine the \"validity\" of this 
document.  Additionally, the document was provided to the 
Embassy via  Honduran Military Intelligence (C-2).  RSO 
Comment:  The C-2 organization is a small group struggling 
with limited resources that has on occasion provided 
information from questionable sources for questionable 
reasons.  While the document was reportedly given to/obtained 
from a local newspaper, post was unable to find any mention 
of the communique in today\'s Press.  Normally, the local 
press does not hesitate to report this type of story.  End 
Comment. 
 
4.  (C)  RSO sources indicate that two leaders of the FPR (or 
the attempt to create a new FPR) are Carolos Umberto Paz and 
Carlos Umberto Amalya Amador (possible aka: Ramon Amalya 
Amador).  Both were active in the recent May Day 
demonstrations in Tegucigalpa, and were personally involved 
in tearing down a fence at the National Congress.  Both have 
been seen participating in demonstrations outside the Embassy 
and RSO staff has photographed Paz painting a revolutionary 
slogan on the street outside the Embassy during the last 
demonstration.  Paz also reportedly played a role in the 
burning of the AID building 15 years ago. 
 
5.  (C)  It appears that Carlos Umberto Paz and Carlos 
Umberto Amalya Amador are attempting to re-establish the FPR 
as part of a continuing effort by certain elements to 
de-stabilize the Maduro government. They are said to be 
looking for \"sponsors\" and feel they will be easier to obtain 
if they identify with their old name and organization. This 
communique may be an early attempt to garner support for a 
re-kindled FPR. 
 
6.  (C)  Paz, Amador, and several other members of the 
original FPR, aka: Fuerzas Populares Revolutionarias - 
Lorenzo Zelaya movement including Gustavo Garcia Espana, 
Rigoberto Padilla Russell and Clementina Garcia Espana are 
known to be active members of the party that became the 
Democratic Union Party (Unificacion Demoncratica) or UD 
represented in the National Congress. 
 
7.  (C)  Post has shared copies of the comminique with the UK 
and Spanish missions and been in contact with the police who 
are also assessing the information.  RSO and PolOff will meet 
tomorrow with representatives from the UK and Spanish 
diplomatic missions to brief them on the latest developments. 
 Based on information available, Post concurs with the 
initial Honduran police assessment (assuming the document is 
valid) that the communique represents an attempt to gain 
political support and is not a realistic threat at this time. 
 Post will continue to investigate and provide additional 
information as it becomes available.  Below is an informal 
translation of the communique. 
 
 
Popular Revolutionary Forces 
 
Communication 
 
We, the popular revolutionary Forces announce to the Honduran 
people the beginning of our political and military activities 
in an effort to eliminate the neo-liberal and pro-imperialist 
government of Ricardo Maduro that is imposed on the majority 
of our people. 
 
In the international arena, we condemn the military 
occupation of Iraq by the United States, along with the 
despicable governments of Great Britain and Spain. 
We demand the immediate retreat of the Yankees\' occupation 
forces in Iraq and support the fight of the Arab people 
against the International Zionism. 
 
We, again, raise our trenches to fight politically and 
militarily against the enemies of our people, who deeply 
rooted in the government, distribute among themselves the 
country\'s wealth whilst forsaking thousands of fellow 
citizens. 
 
Our liberty rifles will be aimed from now on, to the heads of 
those white-collar thieves; and as revolutionaries we swear 
to not rest until we seize them and do justice in the name of 
our country. 
 
We have defined our military objectives as the following: 
fight political corruption amongst government employees; the 
bourgeoisie\'s businesses, buildings, companies, as well as 
their accomplices involved in such corruption.  For these 
people, we have a long list of their addresses and know of 
their movements. 
 
We have also defined as subjects of our military objectives 
all diplomats of the governments of the United States of 
America, Great Britain and Spain who are accredited in 
Honduras. We won\'t rest until we avenge the blood of our 
Iraqi brothers, who\'s peoples are today, victims of the 
aggression of those countries. 
 
We urge the patriotic officers of the police and the army to 
rebel against a tyrannical government.  Let your weapons 
point to the thieves and corrupt officials who have wronged 
this noble country. 
 
THE REVOLUTIONARY POPULAR FORCES call on this country\'s 
popular and rebellious organizations, to repossess the 
streets and overthrow this government that mangles the 
dignity of the poor and humble citizens. 
THE PEOPLE UNITED AND ARMED, SHALL NEVER BE DEFEATED OR 
DESTROYED. 
 
From an unknown location in Honduras: 
Political-military Commission of the 
POLITICAL REVOLUTIONARY FORCES 
 
May 2003 END OF TRANSLATION 
Palmer 
"
"8188","5/20/2003 20:32","03TEGUCIGALPA1169","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA865","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 001169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB, DRL/IL, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCD/IOI/WH/RD/DLUTTER 
USDOC FOR 4320/IEF/WH/OMCB 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/EJAFFEE 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON AND AGAH FCOOLIDGE 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, ENRG, EINV, EAIR, ELAB, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ECON HIGHLIGHTS: MARCH AND APRIL 2003 
 
REFS: A) TEGUCIGALPA 00865 
 
      B) TEGUCIGALPA 00606 
      C) TEGUCIGALPA 00652 
 
TOPICS: 
 
MACROECONOMIC ISSUES 
     GDP Growth in 2003 
     Lempira Devaluation 
     Rise in Inflation 
     Honduran Congress Approves New Agricultural Law 
     Honduran Congress Adopts New Fiscal Package 
     GOH Increases Minimum Wage Base 
 
TRADE 
     Coffee Woes in Exports and Prices 
     Nicaraguan National Assembly Temporarily Suspends Tariff 
 
INVESTMENT 
     Honduran Bid of Mobile Telephone Service 
     Sol Air to Commence Daily Service to El Salvador 
 
FOREIGN AID 
     IDB and Central American Bank of Economic Integration Loans 
 
MACROECONOMIC ISSUES 
 
------------------ 
GDP Growth in 2003 
------------------ 
 
1. (U) The Central Bank of Honduras expects the GDP to increase 
by 3.0 to 3.5 percent in 2003. It grew by 2.0 percent in 2002, 
which was lower than the increases of 2.7 and 4.8 percent in 2001 
and 2000, respectively. The Bank expects the GDP to reach more 
than 121 billion lempiras (USD 7.03 billion), a 21 billion 
lempira (USD 1.2 billion) increase from the 2002 GDP of 100 
billion lempiras (USD 5.89 billion).  The expected GDP growth is 
being attributed to a recuperation of traditional exports and the 
anticipation of increased profits from the telecommunication, 
electricity, housing, agriculture and livestock sectors. 
 
------------------- 
Lempira Devaluation 
------------------- 
 
2. (U) From January to March, the lempira devalued by 1.3 
percent, less than the trimester of the previous years 
devaluation of 1.7 percent.  In nominal terms this year\'s 
devaluation equals 22 centavos, while the past year registered 28 
centavos. 
 
----------------- 
Rise in Inflation 
----------------- 
 
3. (U) The Central Bank of Honduras registered a 1.3 percent 
increase for the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in February, which is 
higher than the 1.1 percent increase from February 2002. 
January\'s CPI registered a .8 percent increase, which is higher 
than the .3 percent increase from January 2003.  The rising 
inflation has been attributed to the increase in the price of 
electricity, water, and fuel, which contributed .3 points to the 
percentage of the February CPI.  Higher educational cost was the 
most influential factor in February\'s CPI increase and 
contributed .4 points to the percentage. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Honduran Congress Approves New Agricultural Law 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
4. (SBU) The Honduran National Congress approved on April 23 an 
agricultural debt relief program (called the Agricultural Sector 
Financial Strengthening Law).  This law replaced the agricultural 
credit laws enacted in previous years that were deemed to be 
ineffective in dealing with the debt arrears of the agricultural 
sector and too costly for the government if they were to be 
implemented.  The stated purpose of the new law, proposed by the 
Executive Branch, is to resolve the agricultural debt crisis for 
some 13,600 Honduran farmers by providing debt forgiveness, 
rescheduling of the existing debt, and providing new credit. The 
law will also help the private banking system because it pays off 
much of the bad agricultural debt held by the banks (although in 
the form of low-yielding long-term government bonds), and 
attempts to protect banks against future financial agricultural 
losses by requiring farmers to pay for crop insurance. 
 
5. (SBU) This law creates a trust fund of up to 4.0 billion 
lempiras (USD 235.3 million) in FONAPROVI (the government\'s 
second tier development bank) to finance this agricultural debt- 
relief program over ten years.  The law legislates that the 
government will forgive the entire debt of farmers who owe banks 
less than 50,000 lempiras (USD 2,941). In addition, the 
government will forgive 50 percent of the debt of farmers who owe 
banks more than this amount, up to a maximum of 4.0 million 
lempiras (USD 235.3 million). These farmers\' debts will be paid 
by having the government provide 1.7 billion lempiras (USD 100 
millon) in low-yield long-term government bonds to the creditor 
banks over a period of ten years. The yearly government payment 
to the banks, including interest payments, is a declining amount, 
starting with an initial payment of 347 million lempiras (USD 
20.4 million) in 2003, which has already been included in this 
year\'s national budget. The remaining 2.3 billion lempiras (USD 
133 million) to be allocated to the trust fund will be used to 
reschedule the remaining 50 percent of the farmers\' debt arrears 
so that the banks can issue discounted new loans to these farmers 
at interest rates of 8.725 percent for a maximum ten year term. 
The GOH has estimated the total fiscal cost of the consolidated 
package of assistance at USD 133 million over 10 years (0.15 
percent of the yearly GDP). 
 
6. (SBU) In addition, this new law set off a firestorm of 
criticism in the press, because the President of Congress and a 
number of other politically influential individuals were listed 
as potential beneficiaries of this law.  These individuals\' 
interests include ownership and/or business partnerships in 
agricultural enterprises that are highly indebted to banks. 
Several of these individuals are also shareholders in banking 
institutions that will be compensated for bad agricultural loans 
made to agricultural producers.  The law will become effective 
upon President Maduro\'s signature and its publication in the 
Gaceta. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Honduran Congress Adopts New Fiscal Package 
------------------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) On April 2, the Honduran National Congress adopted its 
second fiscal package of tax measures (called the Law of Tax 
Equity).  The stated purpose of this package is to expand the tax 
base, reduce chronic budget deficits, move the GOH towards an IMF 
agreement, and eliminate a number of special tax exemptions.  The 
GOH\'s target had been an annual revenue increase of 3.5 billion 
lempiras (USD 200 million)- of which 2 billion lempiras (USD 118 
million) would be collected from the remaining months of 2003. 
 
8. (SBU) Key provisions in the fiscal package include reducing 
income tax exemptions for bonuses and representation expenses for 
individuals with an annual income above 600,000 lempiras (USD 
35,294), unifying the corporate tax at a rate of 25 percent of 
net taxable income and reducing the number of products exempt 
from sales tax (from 800 to about 200 mostly foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals, books and publications and school supplies).  On 
the expenditure side, provisions include freezing wages for 
public employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements 
and canceling 60 percent of government positions that were vacant 
on December 31, except in education, health and security.  The 
Congress discarded three important tax measures from the original 
government proposal and increased the sales tax on tobacco 
products and alcoholic beverages (to 15 percent) to compensate 
for this lost revenue.  IMF sources are skeptical that the total 
revenue from the measures will be as high as the GOH\'s 
projections.  (See ref A for further information on the tax 
measures). 
 
------------------------------- 
GOH Increases Minimum Wage Base 
------------------------------- 
 
9. (U) On March 21, the GOH officially increased the minimum wage 
base by nine percent for most workers with retroactive payments 
starting from January 1.  Only a small number of workers, mostly 
in companies with fewer than 15 employees received the 12 percent 
increase that the press was reporting.  The minimum wage decision 
was devolved to President Maduro after bilateral negotiations 
between the three labor confederations and the business 
associations ended without an agreement.  Congress is also 
examining possible legislation for the creation of a USD 88 
million workers fund that will provide money to the unemployed 
for living expenses and other necessities. 
 
10. (U) The nine percent increase has garnered discontentment 
from representatives of the business community.  The National 
Association of Industries (ANDI) has been one of the most vocal 
groups.  They have stated that the increase in the minimum wage 
will force businesses to increase the prices of their products, 
which will lead to a rise in inflation.  The increase will occur 
because businesses have already set the prices of their products 
based on a minimum wage increase of no more than 8 percent.  ANDI 
has also stated that the decision of the GOH was not based on the 
needs of the nation, but on the need to gain the political 
support of labor confederations and their members. 
 
TRADE 
 
--------------------------------- 
Coffee Woes in Exports and Prices 
--------------------------------- 
 
11. (U) According to the Honduran Institute of Coffee, coffee 
exports in 2003 will amount to 2.8 million sacks, a decrease of 
18 percent from last year\'s 3.4 million.  From the period of 
October 2002 to April 2003, exports amounted to 2,007,578 sacks 
that represented an income of USD 115 million.  The increase in 
international coffee prices of USD 8.16 from USD 49.54 to USD 
57.70 was being looked upon as a possible savior for the coffee 
industry whose production and revenues have been declining. 
Industry analysts are expecting the numbers to continue their 
descent as the year moves ahead. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Nicaraguan National Assembly Temporarily Suspends Tariff 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
12. (U) The Nicaraguan National Assembly\'s March 11, temporary 
suspension of its 35 percent tariff on Honduran goods put an end 
to the long-standing dispute between the two nations.  The 
Nicaraguan National Assembly implemented the tariff, called the 
\"Patriotic Tax\" in December of 1999, after Honduras ratified a 
treaty with Colombia recognizing a Nicaraguan-Colombian maritime 
dispute as a Colombian possession.  In March, after waiting three 
years for Nicaraguan legislators to repeal the tariff, the 
Honduran National Congress decided it was time to implement 
retaliatory tariffs on Nicaragua.  With the National Assembly\'s 
temporary suspension of the tariff the Honduran National Congress 
cut short their efforts to enact retaliatory tariffs. Under the 
direction of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, Honduran 
companies are now in the process of restoring Honduran exports to 
Nicaragua.  If all goes well Honduran exports to Nicaragua can 
accumulate between USD 60 to 70 million and should continue to 
increase in the future. (Full report in ref B and additional 
background information in ref C). 
 
INVESTMENT 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Honduran Bid of Mobile Telephone Service 
---------------------------------------- 
 
13. (U) On April 25, CONATEL (Honduras\' equivalence of the FCC) 
announced the awarding of a 25-year PCS contract to the Honduran- 
Swedish consortium Megatel-EMCE.  Megatel-EMCE\'s bid of USD 7.1 
million won it the contract over two other bidding companies 
Entel of Chile and Bellsouth Honduras.  Working under band b, 
Megatel-EMCE plans to install more than 50,000 lines within the 
next year to provide nationwide and international cellular 
service.  Megatel-EMCE will also provide transmission of video, 
data, and photos through its lines.  Megatel-EMCE plans to 
commence service towards the end of this year and is stating that 
it will offer competitive prices (relative to existing wireless 
operator, Celtel) to consumers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Sol Air to Commence Daily Service to El Salvador 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
14. (U) Starting June 11, the Honduran air carrier Sol Air will 
begin daily flights (except for Saturday) to San Salvador.  Sol 
Air had originally applied for a five-year contract to operate in 
El Salvador, but instead Salvadoran aviation officials granted 
them a contract for one-year (until March 31, 2004).  Sol Air has 
been applying for access to the Salvadorian market since 2002, 
but had been consistently denied by Salvadorian officials.  In 
March, this became a highly contentious issue when, after meeting 
with Salvadoran aviation officials for almost two years, the 
president of Sol Air, Ricardo Martinez, requested that the GOH 
cancel Salvadoran commercial airlines entrance privileges into 
Honduras.  It is widely believed that officials of TACA, an El 
Salvadoran air carrier, were highly influential in convincing 
Salvadoran officials to deny Sol Air access. 
 
FOREIGN AID 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
IDB and Central American Bank of Economic Integration Loans 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
15. (U) The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) approved a USD 
20 million loan to the GOH for its peace and coexistence project. 
The project\'s objective is to reduce crime and violence among 
youth in the Valle de Sula region, a region that has some of the 
highest crime statistics in the nation.  The program will provide 
social services to youth such as educational assistance, 
training, outreach and counseling services, prevention campaigns, 
and the reformation of gang members. 
 
16. (U) The Central American Bank of Economic Integration (CABEI) 
approved a USD 22.5 loan to the GOH to complete the last portion 
of the highway, which will link Puerto Cortes to the Guatemalan 
border.  The latest loan will bring the CABEI\'s total 
contribution to this project to USD 45.3 million. 
 
Palmer 
"
"8381","5/30/2003 23:52","03TEGUCIGALPA1243","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","03TEGUCIGALPA1075|03WARSAW2016","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR T, PM, L, NEA, WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, PHUM, KTIA, HO, KICC 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CONGRESS APPROVES IRAQ TROOP DEPLOYMENT 
RESOLUTION AND ICC ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT WITH U.S. 
 
REF: A. WARSAW 2016/2015 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1075 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Political Section Chief Francisco L. Palmieri; Reasons 1 
.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST:  The Honduran Congress 
approved on the evening of May 28 both the resolution 
authorizing the deployment of Honduran troops to Iraq and the 
ICC Article 98 Agreement with the U.S.  Ambassador Palmer met 
with the President of Congress,  Porfirio Lobo Sosa, on May 
22 to personally urge the Congress to act expeditiously and 
favorably on these two important U.S. foreign policy 
initiatives.  As the final slim majority outcomes 
demonstrated, both measures were seen as controversial in 
Honduras and cost the Maduro administration political 
capital.  The deployment will cost the Government of Honduras 
(GOH) about USD 400,000 in unbudgeted military deployment 
costs, which represents a significant financial burden for 
the GOH as it continues difficult negotiations to reach a new 
IMF agreement.  Given these favorable policy actions by 
Honduras, Post requests that Washington policymakers give all 
possible consideration to reprogramming FMF funds to Honduras 
as a tangible sign of our appreciation for both their 
steadfast political support and, now, their concrete 
contribution to the Coalition of the Willing.  See action 
request in paragraph 8.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) The Honduran Congress approved on the evening of May 
28 both the resolution authorizing the deployment of Honduran 
troops to Iraq and the ICC Article 98 Agreement with the U.S. 
 The margin for both resolutions was small, as President 
Ricardo Maduro\'s National Party and its small coalition 
partner, the Christian Democrats, narrowly defeated 
opposition from the Liberal Party, as well as the minor PINU 
and UD parties.  Liberal Party Congressman Ramon Villeda 
Bermudez criticized the resolution as \"the Government of 
Honduras legitimizing the illegal war that the U.S. declared 
against Saddam Hussein\'s regime.\"  Other opposition centered 
on the cost of the deployment and the lack of consultation by 
President Maduro with the Congress over his management of 
Honduran foreign policy. 
 
3. (U) The Iraq resolution authorizes sending 370 soldiers to 
Iraq for a one-year deployment, with rotations of soldiers by 
\"semester.\"  Each soldier will receive USD 150/month, with 
USD 5,000 allotted for administrative expenses.  The total 
estimated cost is 6.5 million lempiras (USD 382,353).  A key 
additional expense is life insurance policies for the 
deployed soldiers.  None of these costs were anticipated in 
this year\'s defense budget.  Given the stalled negotiations 
with the IMF on a new poverty reduction and growth facility, 
these additional expenses could not come at a more difficult 
budgetary moment for the GOH. 
 
4. (C) Ambassador Palmer met with Pepe Lobo, the President of 
Congress, on May 22 to specifically relay our interest in 
seeing the Article 98 agreement and the Honduran troop 
deployment to Iraq approved.  Lobo understood immediately the 
importance of rapid action by the Congress in its last week 
in session before a one month recess.  Even though the Maduro 
Administration had not yet delivered either piece of 
legislation to Congress and had only consulted informally 
with Lobo the previous week, Lobo was very optimistic about 
the two measures being approved before the May 29 recess. 
The Ambassador suggested the wisdom of packaging the two 
measures together in order to limit the political opposition 
to a single foreign policy debate.  Lobo closed the meeting 
in the great tradition of a previous President from Texas, 
who once served as Senate Majority Leader, by telling the 
Ambassador that if the Executive Branch would get him the 
treaty, he\'d get it through the Congress.   True to his word, 
Lobo delivered. 
 
5. (C) Separately, the DCM earlier last week, re-delivered 
long-standing demarche points to the Acting Foreign Minister 
laying out the need for immediate Honduran ratification of 
the Article 98 agreement and congressional authorization for 
the troop deployment.  He pressed the Acting Foreign Minister 
for immediate action on the Article 98 agreement and flagged 
the need for expeditious action on the authorization for 
deploying Honduran troops to Iraq given the impending 
congressional recess.  The MFA responded in a timely manner 
and provided important information to the Congress during the 
late night debate.  In addition, other country team members 
effectively lobbied the Ministry of Defense and congressional 
party leaders to actively support passage of the measures. 
 
6. (U) The vote on the ICC Article 98 Agreement was 65 in 
favor - 61 Nationals and four Christian Democrats, and 62 
opposed - 55 Liberals, four UD, and three PINU.  The 
opposition denounced the agreement and claimed that approval 
required either a two-thirds or three-quarters of the 
Congress, and not just a majority of the votes.  In their 
comments, opposition congressmen both criticized the U.S. and 
showed a lack of understanding of the fact that Article 98 
Agreements are explicitly allowed by the Treaty of Rome that 
established the ICC.  In response to opposition complaints, 
National Congressman Carlos Espinoza said, \"If it is a sin to 
support a government like the United States, then one must 
sin.\" 
 
7. (U) Both resolutions will now be published in La Gaceta, 
the Honduran version of the Federal Register, to become 
official.  For the ICC Article 98 Agreement, Post\'s 
understanding is that the USG and GOH must then exchange 
instruments of ratification for the agreement to take effect. 
 The Liberal Party is threatening to take a constitutional 
challenge to the Supreme Court over the simple majority vote 
for the ratification of the Article 98 agreement.  A leading 
Honduran politician, Oswaldo Ramos Soto, stated that such a 
challenge would fail because the agreement is a protocol to a 
treaty that has already been approved by the Congress, thus 
obviating the need for a super-majority approval. 
 
8. (C) Action Request: As noted the approved troop deployment 
will cost the GOH about USD 400,000 in unbudgeted costs. 
This budget hit represents a real financial challenge for the 
GOH as it proceeds with difficult negotiations to reach a new 
IMF agreement.  Given the very postive outcome on these two 
high-profile U.S. foreign policy initiatives, Post requests 
that Washington policymakers give all possible consideration 
to reprogramming FMF funds to Honduras as a tangible sign of 
our appreciation for both their steadfast political support 
and, now, their concrete contribution to the Coalition of the 
Willing. 
 
9. (C) Comment: Facing the May 29 adjournment of Congress for 
a one month recess, the GOH had to obtain Congressional 
passage of the Iraq resolution now if it was going to be able 
to assist in post-conflict Iraq.  The GOH had been delaying 
sending the ICC Article 98 Agreement to Congress ever since 
it became the first country in Central America (and the 
second in Latin America) to sign such an agreement on 
September 19, 2002.  Post had been urging the GOH for months 
to act to avoid possible cutoff of U.S. military assistance 
under the American Service Members Protection Act (ASPA) on 
July 1, and is pleased to see congressional approval of the 
agreement.  In the end, the much maligned Nationalist 
congressional delegation, under the strong leadership of its 
President of Congress, delivered a crucial foreign policy 
victory for the Maduro government.  In doing so, the 
Nationalist deputies showed that they understand the vital 
nature of the U.S.-Honduras bilateral relationship, a fact 
that the opposition parties failed to acknowledge in their 
knee-jerk opposition to these measures.  End Comment. 
Pierce 
"
"8426","6/2/2003 22:20","03TEGUCIGALPA1253","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA2444","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001253 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR PM, INL/LP, WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN, AND DRL/PHD 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND OFDA 
SAN JOSE FOR OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS, SNAR, PREL, PGOV, PHUM, EAID, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: JOINT TASK FORCE BRAVO - U.S. MILITARY PRESENCE IN 
HONDURAS APPLAUDED AND CRITICIZED 
 
REF: 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2444 
 
1. (U)  SUMMARY:  Since 1982 the U.S. military has maintained 
a presence at the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) airbase at 
Soto Cano (commonly known by Hondurans as Palmerola).  The 
base is also the site of the Honduran Air Force Academy. 
Currently, Joint Task Force Bravo (JTF-B) houses more than 
600 U.S. troops and employs more than 700 Hondurans.  Through 
salaries, contracts, tourism and donations, JTF-B contributes 
approximately USD 30 million annually to the Honduran 
economy.  The initial mission of JTF-B was to deter 
aggression from the Nicaraguan National Sandinista Liberation 
Front (FSLN).  Today, U.S. forces train the HOAF; conduct 
bilateral operations in counternarcotics; and provide 
humanitarian assistance, medical emergencies, and disaster 
relief.  JTF-B is also a first responder for natural disaster 
crises for the entire Central American region.  Now some 20 
years later, with the threat of communism gone, some 
Hondurans continue to question the validity of the U.S. 
presence at Soto Cano.  END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------ 
U.S. PRESENCE BENEFICIAL 
------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU)  Since 1982 the U.S. military has maintained a 
presence at the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) airbase at Soto 
Cano (commonly known by Hondurans as Palmerola).  For the 
HOAF, the base, also the site of the Honduran Air Force 
Academy, represents a strategic relationship with the U.S. 
military.  With the U.S. Southern Command departure from 
Panama in 1999, JTF-B now serves as the principal military 
presence for the U.S. in Central America.  JTF-B is the first 
responder to crises in the region, and supports 
counternarcotics and counterterrorism missions when directed 
from Southern Command.  Moreover, it conducts and supports 
recovery and evacuation operations in all of the Central 
American (CENTAM) region.  Additionally, the task force 
maintains and jointly operates the only C-5 capable airfield 
base in the region.  It provides support for joint combined 
exercises and unit training, theater deployable surgical 
team, all-source intelligence, an operational footprint for 
immediate reaction forces, and maintains pre-positioned 
stocks for theater-wide military operations.  Secondarily, 
JTF-Bravo conducts and supports humanitarian civic assistance 
and military civic action operations, and supports USAID 
disaster relief programs. 
 
--------------------------- 
HONDURAN PERSPECTIVE VARIES 
--------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU)  Hondurans find themselves sitting on both sides of 
the fence in regards to the U.S. presence at Soto Cano.  On 
the one hand, many recognize the strategic bilateral 
relationship that is maintained between the two countries. 
The training and operation resources provided to the HOAF are 
also recognizably important beneficial aspects of the base. 
Furthermore, the more than USD 30 million in economic 
activity generated by the base makes a direct and significant 
economic impact on the surrounding Comayagua Valley.  On the 
other hand, Honduran critics of the base voice several 
concerns over the JTF-B mission.  First, some knee-jerk 
critics say that the U.S. uses the base more for selfish 
unilateral motives rather than with the intention of helping 
the HOAF and the people of CENTAM in general.  This view 
unfortunately also generates the belief that the U.S. should 
provide Honduras with greater monetary compensation for use 
of the land, above and beyond the rent the USG currently 
pays.  Another criticism is over JTF-B\'s missions.  The 
Committee of Families of the Detained and Disappeared in 
Honduras (COFADEH), a Honduran NGO that focuses on alleged 
human rights abuses from the 1980s and is skeptical of a U.S. 
military role in Honduras, recently criticized JTF-B for 
possible violations of Honduran sovereignty in 
counternarcotics operations.  Often, this type of criticism 
reflects a lack of knowledge of what the base does.  PolOff 
met May 19 with Bertha Oliva de Nativi, the COFADEH General 
Coordinator, to answer her questions and allay her concerns. 
PolOff emphasized that JTF-B undertakes all actions working 
in cooperation with the GOH and referred her to the Ministry 
of Defense if she had more questions about Soto Cano.  PolOff 
is also providing Oliva with public relations information 
from JTF-B. 
 
------------------- 
COMMERCIAL AIRPORT? 
------------------- 
 
4. (U)  In August of 2002, President Ricardo Maduro announced 
that he was considering the possibility of converting the 
airstrip at Soto Cano for use by commercial airlines. 
Currently, the small size of the Toncontin airport in 
Tegucigalpa severely limits the type of aircraft that can 
safely land there (reftel).  This primarily affects cargo 
planes used for exportation of Honduran products.  A joint 
commercial-military airport at Soto Cano could mean greater 
commercialization and revenue possibilities for Comayagua and 
the surrounding area, especially for the development of 
textile factories (maquilas).  However, such a project would 
necessitate very careful planning so as not to compromise the 
security and safety of military operations that currently 
take place at the base.  To date, no official plans for a 
civilian airport project have been developed. 
 
5. (SBU)  COMMENT:  While a small minority of outspoken 
critics question the motive of a U.S. military presence in 
Honduras, many understand the benefits of having JTF-B 
stationed at Soto Cano.  JTF-B was instrumental in providing 
disaster relief in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch, and 
continues to provide tangible benefits to the host country 
through medical visits and other humanitarian missions.  The 
GOH is also grateful for the monetary contribution JTF-B 
provides to the domestic economy and the stabilizing effect a 
U.S. military presence provides to regional security.  END 
COMMENT. 
Pierce 
"
"8451","6/3/2003 14:53","03TEGUCIGALPA1258","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR INL/LP, DRL/PHD, WHA/CEN, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/03/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, PINR, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MUSICAL CHAIRS:  WHO\'S WHO IN HONDURAN GOVERNMENT 
COUNTERNARCOTICS LEADERSHIP POSITIONS 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU)  SUMMARY:  Several high-profile Honduran 
counternarcotics agencies are receiving a leadership 
makeover.  Gustavo Alfredo ((Landaverde)) Hernandez is 
leaving the Executive Secretary position at the National 
Council Against Narcotrafficking (CNCN), and has been 
replaced by the Direction in the Fight Against 
Narcotrafficking (DLCN) Acting Director Ofelia Margarita 
((Gutierrez)) Gonzalez.  In turn, taking Gutierrez\'s place at 
the DLCN will be retired Army Brigadier General Julian 
Aristides ((Gonzalez)) Irias.  Profiled below are the key 
players in these counternarcotics organizations.  END SUMMARY 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Gustavo Alfredo ((Landaverde)) Hernandez 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C)  Landaverde was the Executive Secretary of the 
National Council Against Narcotrafficking (CNCN) until April 
30.  Landaverde, a Liberal party member, was dismissed due to 
ongoing public disagreements with the Nationalist Maduro 
Administration over counternarcotics policy.  A specific 
example was his criticism of Vice President Armida Lopez 
Contreras regarding her decision to leave her deputy, Manuel 
Euceda, in office after his indictment on fraud charges. 
Landaverde has a long-standing political career in Honduras 
and is an intelligent and outspoken person.  He was one of 
the founding members of the Honduran Christian Democratic 
Party (PDCH) and served as its President at one time. 
Landaverde also served in Congress while a member of the 
PDCH, before becoming a Liberal Party member.  He remains a 
close contact of the Embassy. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Ofelia Margarita ((Gutierrez)) Gonzalez 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (C)  In March 2000 Gutierrez began her work with the 
Direction in the Fight Against Narcotrafficking (DLCN), an 
office which reports to the Attorney General, as Sub Director 
under Fidel Omar ((Borjas)) Flores, and later Wilfredo 
Alvarado.  Gutierrez has been the Acting Director since 
Alvarado left the DLCN in September 2002.  With Landaverde\'s 
April 30 departure from the CNCN, she is also serving as the 
acting Executive Secretary of that organization.  Gutierrez 
graduated with a bachelor\'s degree from the Honduran National 
University (UNAH) in 1994 and obtained a law degree from UNAH 
April 30, 2002.  Gutierrez has a legal background and worked 
as a legal counsel at the National Preventative Police (PNP). 
 She is the widow of a police officer who died in the line of 
duty.  While she has not been particularly effective as 
Acting Director of the DLCN in mounting narcotics 
investigations, she has been cooperative and honest in 
implementing U.S. assistance projects, such as our maritime 
and canine units. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Julian Aristides ((Gonzalez)) Irias 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. (C)  Brigadier General Gonzalez, the new Director of the 
DLCN, is a 30-year military veteran with numerous awards and 
decorations.  Although in the past there were media 
allegations of corruption related to the military pension 
fund, throughout his military career General Gonzalez 
developed a reputation as a competent, results-oriented but 
stern and demanding field commander.  Prior to his mandatory 
retirement on December 11, 2002, General Gonzalez served as 
Special Assistant to Minister of Defense Federico Breve 
Travieso.  In July 1998 Gonzalez was named Deputy Minister of 
Defense in a controversial appointment.  His predecessor was 
suddenly removed from office by General Mario Hung Pacheco 
without approval or consultation with then President Carlos 
Flores.  There were allegations that Pacheco used this 
appointment to advance officials considered close to him.  A 
succession of promotions for Gonzalez continued as follows: 
July 1999 to Vice Chief of Joint Staff where he ran the 
day-to-day operations of the HOAF and then October 2001 to 
General. 
 
5. (SBU)  Born in La Ceiba, Honduras on February 24, 1952; he 
is married to Leslie Ondina Portillo Andino with whom he has 
one daughter.  His resume boasts of extensive military 
education and training in Taiwan and at the School of the 
Americas in the U.S.  Areas of study include airborne 
training, national security, anti-terrorism, and crisis 
management.  He holds Engineering and History degrees from 
the Honduran National University (UNAH) and has studied 
International Relations and Diplomacy at the Catholic 
University.  Gonzalez speaks Spanish, English, and Portuguese. 
 
6. (C)  Gonzalez brings some baggage to the position (he was 
particularly dogmatic while in the military that the Armed 
Forces did not have Constitutional authority to carry out 
counternarcotics activities).  However, Post is hopeful that 
Gonzalez will bring order and enhanced command and control to 
what has been an ineffective law enforcement agency.  In 
order to do this, he will have to clean house in the DLCN. 
Gonzalez brings to the DLCN a strong operational background 
and superb organizational skills.  He also will benefit from 
the essential contacts within the Ministries of Defense and 
Public Security that he holds.  Post supported his 
appointment for exactly this reason and with the hope that he 
might bring the zeal of a convert to the nation\'s 
counternarcotics efforts.  However, he will face strong 
resistance from the leadership of the Public Ministry that 
preferred an insider for the position of DLCN Director. 
Currently, more than 80 percent of the DLCN budget goes to 
personnel costs.  Gonzalez will have to change this ratio if 
he hopes to be successful.  If Gonzalez fails to invigorate 
the DLCN, it could be on the chopping block for elimination 
when a new Attorney General is appointed in 2004. 
 
------------------------------- 
Embassy Thoughts on the Changes 
------------------------------- 
 
7. (C)  COMMENT:  Post was not surprised to see Landaverde 
ousted at the CNCN and is not particularly enthused with 
Gutierrez as his replacement.  Landaverde was often a 
solitary voice, praising the recent INCSR report and 
disputing official GOH criticism of the USG counternarcotics 
assistance.  He was an excellent source on the Honduran 
counternarcotics community.  As noted, Gonzalez may be the 
last (somewhat) best hope for the DLCN, which has become a 
major disappointment to the Embassy.  Post is increasingly 
focusing counternarcotics cooperation on the Frontier Police 
due to the ineffectiveness of the DLCN. Only new vigorous 
leadership at the DLCN might be able to reverse this new 
Embassy focus.  END COMMENT. 
Pierce 
"
"8454","6/3/2003 15:17","03TEGUCIGALPA1259","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SECSTATE83098","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 001259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR L/CID 
FOR EB/IFD/OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, EFIN, PGOV, KIDE, KSPR, HO 
SUBJECT: 2003 EXPROPRIATION REPORT: HONDURAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 83098 
 
1. (U) 
HONDURAS 
 
 
     The United States Government is aware of thirteen (13) 
claims of United States persons that may be outstanding against 
the Government of Honduras (GOH).  The U.S. Government is also 
aware of numerous other investment disputes involving U.S. 
investors, the majority of which have arisen out of inadequate 
titling procedures and involve disputes between U.S. citizens and 
private Honduran citizens. 
 
2. (U) Eight of the claims described below involve the Honduran 
National Agrarian Institute (INA) and land invasion by squatters. 
Land invasions are common for both Honduran and foreign 
landowners.  According to the National Agrarian Reform Law, idle 
land fit for farming can be expropriated and awarded to the 
landless poor.  Generally, an INA expropriation case begins after 
squatters target and invade unprotected property. The squatters 
then file for the land with the INA under the Agrarian Reform 
Law.  In most cases, pursuing the subsequent legal avenues have 
proven to be costly and time consuming, and have rarely lead to 
positive results.  The U.S. Embassy is actively engaged in 
dialogue with the INA and claimants in order to encourage 
progress toward resolution of outstanding disputes.  Most cases 
reported below require further legal action in Honduran courts by 
the claimants or decisions by the court. 
 
3. (U) a) Claimant A 
 
     b) 1985 
 
     c) Claimant A\'s family land known as Jerico was taken over 
by the Mayor of Trujillo in 1985.  That same year, the 
Municipality began titling and selling off parcels of Claimant 
A\'s land.  By 1991 Claimant A had won every court case up through 
the Supreme Court level, thereby declaring Claimant A\'s family as 
the legal owners of Jerico lands.  Claimant A requested that the 
public registrar\'s office inscribe the court\'s rulings and 
correct the situation in the public registry, having falsely 
registered the illegal titles. 
 
To date the Municipality of Trujillo has not returned the 
parceled sections of land to Claimant A\'s family.  In May 2002, 
after Embassy advocacy, the public registrar informed the Embassy 
that Claimant A\'s lands were officially inscribed in the 
registry.  Legally, that office can no longer register titles 
issued by the Municipality for Jerico lands.  Claimant A alleges 
that the Municipality continues to title and sell Jerico lands 
under a different name. 
 
In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant A of the GOH\'s new 
arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) that allows the 
government and claimants to jointly submit disputes for 
arbitration as an alternative to continued legal proceedings. 
Claimant A informed the Embassy the family is interested in 
entering into arbitration with the Municipality, however the 
Mayor is not.  The Mayor instead wishes to draft a private, extra- 
judicial agreement with Claimant A\'s family.  The Embassy 
continues to encourage the two parties to reach an agreement. 
 
4. (U) a) Claimant B 
 
     b) 1984 
 
     c) Claimant B inherited 2,417 acres of land from his father. 
Claimant B\'s dispute started in 1963 when peasant groups squatted 
on his father\'s land.  Allegedly in 1975, INA signed a letter of 
intent to purchase the land but never did.  In 1984 when small 
farmers began squatting on Claimant B\'s land near Nacaome, Valle 
Department, Claimant B again offered to sell the land to INA. 
Claimant B reported he has documents showing that the INA 
intended to initiate expropriation proceedings in 1989, though it 
is not entirely clear that this process was ever actually 
started.  Claimant B reports that in 1992 INA responded it was no 
longer interested in purchasing the land.  INA decided not to 
follow through with the expropriation order, but instead 
suggested that Claimant B sue to have the squatters removed. 
Claimant B may remove the liens in civil-court procedures and get 
a court order to remove the squatters.  Due to Claimant B\'s ill 
health, legal proceedings were never initiated. 
 
In June 2002, Claimant B\'s son reported that a court case is 
still an option. In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant B 
of the GOH\'s new arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) 
that allows the government and claimants to jointly submit 
disputes for arbitration as an alternative to continued legal 
proceedings.  Claimant B indicated he will not pursue arbitration 
due to his skepticism about the arbitration procedure.  The 
Embassy considers this case inactive at this time, pending 
further action by Claimant B. 
 
5. (U) a) Claimant C 
 
     b) 1992 
 
     c) In 1990 Claimant C\'s land in Cofradia, Cortes Department 
was invaded by a group of squatters.  In 1992, the INA issued a 
certification of occupation (title) to the squatters.  Claimant C 
reports difficulty in discussing the case with GOH officials, who 
claim not to have taken action against the land.  In 1995 INA 
realized this land is classified as urban and therefore claimed 
to have no authority to resolve the dispute.  The agency said it 
can neither give the land to the squatters nor evict them.  In 
1996 the INA also reported that others have claims to the land in 
addition to the squatters and Claimant C.  In December 1998 INA 
issued a resolution denying a petition presented by Claimant C to 
annul the title (formerly issued by INA) held by the campesino 
squatters.  Claimant C has not contested the granting of this 
title in court. 
 
At various times in recent years the Embassy has assisted 
Claimant C in communicating with INA concerning his claim.  In 
June 2002, Claimant C reported that he may seek to evict the 
squatters in court.  In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant 
C of the GOH\'s new arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) 
that allows the government and claimants to jointly submit 
disputes for arbitration as an alternative to continued legal 
proceedings.  The Embassy has yet to receive a response from 
Claimant C concerning arbitration and considers this case 
inactive at this time, pending further action by the claimant. 
 
6. (U) a) Claimants D 
 
     b) 1974 
 
     c) Claimants D are a U.S. citizen brother and sister with 42 
hectares of property near Balfate, Atlantida Department. 
Claimants D report squatter problems beginning in 1974 when the 
INA reportedly placed squatters \"temporarily\" on their land. 
Despite repeated promises from GOH officials, no action has been 
taken to evict these squatters.  A group of squatters who arrived 
more recently and who repeatedly threatened the owners was 
removed by Honduran authorities at the request of the Embassy, 
which has worked extensively on Claimants\' behalf.  According to 
INA attorneys, in 1974 INA began proceedings to expropriate much 
of the land belonging to Claimants D. 
 
In late 1995, INA officials told the Embassy that it was planning 
formally to expropriate a portion of the property, not including 
valuable beachfront, and compensate Claimants D.  In 1997, GOH 
officials confirmed this remained their intention.  One of the 
Claimants visited the Embassy and reiterated opposition to the 
expropriation.  While in the past Claimants D had reportedly 
contracted with a lawyer to prosecute their claim, the Embassy 
has no current knowledge regarding the status of Claimants D\'s 
legal actions.  The most recent information received by the 
Embassy confirms that INA is in the final stages of expropriating 
the property.  Despite not hearing from Claimants D since 1996, 
the Embassy, through regular communication with the INA office in 
Tegucigalpa, has advocated for a fair and transparent resolution 
to this case. In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimants D of 
the GOH\'s new arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) that 
allows the government and claimants to jointly submit disputes 
for arbitration as an alternative to continued legal proceedings. 
The Embassy has yet to receive a response from Claimant D 
concerning arbitration and considers this case inactive at this 
time, pending further action by the claimant. 
 
7. (U) a) Claimant E 
 
     b) 1975 
 
     c) Claimant E contacted the Department of State in July 
1996, alleging that his property, which he had leased from INA 
and then developed into a large banana plantation, had been 
invaded by squatters with the encouragement of GOH officials. 
Claimant E explained that he had previously filed a lawsuit in 
Honduran courts and lost.  Claimant E has exhausted all 
administrative and legal avenues of recourse, culminating in an 
unfavorable Supreme Court ruling. 
 
The Embassy has helped arrange meetings between Claimant E and 
the President of the Supreme Court, the Vice-President of the 
country and the INA Director.  The Department of State has 
reviewed information and evidence provided by Claimant E 
pertaining to his claim and his efforts to resolve it, and is 
considering whether the circumstances of his case would support a 
U.S. Government espousal action based upon a denial of justice 
claim. 
 
Honduran government officials maintain that while Honduran law 
requires the payment of compensation for improvements made on 
leased land that is expropriated under Honduras\' land reform 
laws, the Honduran Supreme Court decision against compensation 
for Claimant E makes such a settlement impossible.  In 2002, the 
Embassy has met with several high level representatives in the 
Honduran government to push for consideration of possible forms 
of resolution of this and similar cases.  GOH officials, however, 
repeatedly state that since this case has been decided at the 
Supreme Court level, there is nothing more that can be done for 
Claimant E and they consider this case closed. 
 
8. (U) a) Claimant F 
 
     b) 1991 
 
     c) In 1991, a squatter group invaded Claimant F\'s property 
near Guaimaca, Francisco Morazan Department.  INA issued the 
squatters a \"certificate of occupation\" for the land in 1992. 
The INA subsequently revoked the certificate when Claimant F 
contested it, but the squatter group remained.  Claimant F later 
offered to give the group a portion of the property to resolve 
the dispute.  The squatters declined the offer, and did not allow 
anyone to enter the land.  They threatened violence against 
people seeking to evict them and several times threatened to kill 
Claimant F. 
 
Claimant F contacted the Embassy in February 1998 to ask for 
assistance in resolving the case. In April 1998, Claimant F 
traveled to Honduras, met with the Embassy, and hired a new 
attorney.  Claimant F, Embassy officers, and Claimant F\'s 
attorney met with the INA\'s attorney several times to discuss the 
case.  The INA agreed to work with Claimant F to persuade the 
squatters to accept Claimant F\'s prior offer to avoid a court 
battle. 
 
Working closely with the Embassy, the INA accepted Claimant F\'s 
offer to donate 176 hectares of agricultural land to the INA to 
give to the campesino squatters in return for INA\'s help in 
evicting the squatters from the rest of his land.  In May 2001, 
Claimant F filed a criminal suit against the squatters, who were 
summarily evicted from the property.  However, a few of the 
original squatters reinvaded the land several weeks later. 
Claimant F indicated that the offer to donate substitute land was 
conditioned on certain actions by the INA and that the offer had 
expired. 
 
In January 2003, INA expropriated 176 hectares of Claimants F\'s 
land and granted him 80,020.36 lempiras in compensation (USD 
4,644.25 - roughly USD 10 per acre).  Claimant F has appealed to 
the National Agrarian Counsel for a overturning of the INA\'s 
resolution to expropriate his land.  Claimant F\'s appeal is 
currently pending and he has yet to receive compensation due to 
his pending appeal. In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant 
F of the GOH\'s new arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) 
that allows the government and claimants to jointly submit 
disputes for arbitration as an alternative to continued legal 
proceedings. The Embassy has yet to receive a response from 
Claimant D concerning arbitration. 
 
9. (U) a) Claimant G 
 
     b) 1993 
 
     c) Claimant G purchased land in Comayagua, Comayagua 
Department, in 1993.  A group of campesino squatters subsequently 
invaded the land and allegedly received INA support.  Claimant G 
won a complaint before the INA and paid the squatters for 
improvements they made on the land in anticipation of their 
removal.  However, the INA ignored its own ruling, gave title to 
the squatters, and moved to annul Claimant G\'s title.  On June 
30, 1998, a court ruled against Claimant G and ordered to revoke 
the title.  Subsequently, INA accepted the court\'s ruling and 
annulled Claimant G\'s title.  In May 2000, Claimant G filed a 
legal procedure asking for the Supreme Court to review the case. 
In December 2000, per a Supreme Court request, the INA sent its 
file to the Court.  The Embassy understands that this case is 
still pending.  In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant G of 
the GOH\'s new arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) that 
allows the government and claimants to jointly submit disputes 
for arbitration as an alternative to continued legal proceedings. 
The Embassy has yet to receive a response from Claimant G 
concerning arbitration and considers this case inactive at this 
time, pending further action by the claimant. 
 
10. (U) a) Claimant H 
 
     b) 1998 
 
     c) Claimant H owned a fishing boat registered in Florida. 
When the boat arrived in Roatan, Bay Islands, Honduras, in 1987, 
the Honduran Navy allegedly seized it without justification (the 
claim that there was no justification for the seizure remains 
unsubstantiated).  After years of litigation to recover the boat, 
Claimant H was notified in 1996 that the Navy had sold the boat 
in 1989 by executive decree.  However, the decree was not 
published in the official gazette until 1996.  Claimant appealed 
through the Honduran court system up to the Supreme Court, losing 
each time on procedural grounds.  The Embassy is not aware of any 
recent developments in this case. 
 
11. (U) a) Claimant I 
 
     b) 1999 
 
     c) Claimant I owns land near El Progreso, Yoro Department. 
The land suffered from squatter invasions for more than 30 years. 
In 1969, Claimant I\'s now-deceased husband signed an agreement 
with INA, donating some land to distribute to squatters in return 
for INA\'s promise to protect the rest of the land from further 
invasions.  Notwithstanding the 1969 agreement, the INA 
expropriated an additional parcel of land in 1987 that had been 
occupied by a separate group of squatters.  The new group of 
squatters subsequently illegally sold the land to a third party 
not eligible to buy it under the land reform law. 
 
In 1999, INA confirmed that the property belongs to Claimant I 
and in 2000 issued an eviction order to evict the third-party 
occupants.  The police refused to recognize INA\'s eviction order. 
In 2001, the local court rejected Claimant I\'s request for an 
eviction and in June 2002, the Appeal\'s court again ruled against 
Claimant I.  Claimant I informed the Embassy in late 2001 that 
her attorney had received death threats regarding the case and 
that the attorney\'s property had been damaged.  Claimant I may 
appeal the unfavorable ruling in the Supreme Court.  The Embassy 
routinely raises this case with Honduran court and government 
officials and will continue to assist Claimant I\'s efforts to 
recover the land.  In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant I 
of the GOH\'s new arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) 
that allows the government and claimants to jointly submit 
disputes for arbitration as an alternative to continued legal 
proceedings. Claimant I responded she is not interested in 
pursuing arbitration. 
 
12. (U) a) Claimant J 
 
     b) 2000 
 
     c) Since 1927, Claimant J\'s Honduran wife\'s family has owned 
the title to 44 hectares of urban land in Trujillo, Colon 
Department.  Beginning in the mid 1990s, the land was invaded by 
squatters.  Over the years, Claimant J\'s family won a total of 
seven eviction judgments, only to see the land invaded anew after 
each eviction.  In 1999, Claimant J requested from the 
Municipality of Trujillo permission to divide the property into 
lots for development.  The permission was never granted.  In 
2000, the property was invaded for the eighth time.  In late 
2000, before the court ruled on the eviction, the Municipality 
began expropriation proceedings, effectively freezing the 
eviction procedure. 
 
Claimant J suspects that the squatters invaded the land with the 
tacit approval of local political leaders.  In a May 2001 meeting 
with an Embassy officer, the Mayor of Trujillo admitted that the 
Municipality was expropriating the land, but contradicted himself 
on the justification for the expropriation.  Legal documents and 
correspondence show that Claimant J has not been offered 
compensation.  While the Municipality has finished its 
administrative procedure to expropriate the property, the case is 
still pending resolution in court.  In a May 2002 meeting with 
the Ambassador, municipal officials admitted that the previous 
municipal administration may have made a mistake in expropriating 
Claimant J\'s property.  The officials stated that the 
Municipality of Trujillo would respect the decision of the court. 
Embassy officers consistently urge Honduran court and government 
officials to reach a fair resolution of this case.  Embassy staff 
have stayed in touch with local law enforcement officials when 
the situation appears to have potential for violence.  In April 
2003, the Embassy informed Claimant J of the GOH\'s new 
arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) that allows the 
government and claimants to jointly submit disputes for 
arbitration as an alternative to continued legal proceedings. 
Claimant J has shown some interest concerning arbitration, but to 
date has not moved to file his request with the Attorney 
General\'s office.  The request needs to be filed by July 29, due 
to the short time frame designated by the law. 
 
13. (U) a) Claimant K 
     b) 1999 
 
     c) Claimant K owned 41 hectares of property on Utila, Bay 
Islands, to be used to develop a tourism project.  Claimant K 
estimates the value of the property at approximately $2.9 
million.  In 1999, the Ministry of Public Works announced the 
public tender to build a new airport in Utila on Claimant K\'s 
land and subsequently expropriated Claimant K\'s property without 
paying compensation.  Claimant K requested compensation from the 
Ministry of Public Works in late 2001.  Embassy officials urged 
the Ministry on three occasions in 2002 to effect prompt and 
effective compensation.  Ministry officials solicited the court 
in Utila to confirm the legal background regarding the 
expropriated property.  The court has not yet issued its opinion. 
In June 2002, Ministry officials said that Claimant K\'s case will 
be submitted to an inter-agency commission for a determination of 
the value of the land.  In a January 2003 meeting with Embassy 
officials presidential legal advisors were informed of Claimant 
K\'s case.  The advisors said that they would address the issue of 
compensating Claimant K with the Minister of Public Works.  The 
Embassy has not received any confirmation that this was done. 
 
In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant K of the GOH\'s new 
arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) that allows the 
government and claimants to jointly submit disputes for 
arbitration as an alternative to continued legal proceedings. 
Claimant K\'s attorneys informed the Embassy that this case is in 
its final stages.  They are waiting on a final evaluation to 
calculate the economic compensation to be awarded. 
 
14. (U) a) Claimant L 
 
     b) 1976 
 
     c) Claimant L owns land on the southeastern edge of Honduras 
in territory that once was Nicaragua until the two governments 
moved the boarder in 1960.  In 1976, Claimant L\'s father (then 
owner) filed to register his lands with the corresponding land 
registry office in Honduras but never received any reply.  In 
2003, when Claimant L inherited the property she discovered the 
INA had parceled off and sold almost half of the 3,460 acres of 
land. In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant L of the GOH\'s 
new arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) that allows the 
government and claimants to jointly submit disputes for 
arbitration as an alternative to continued legal proceedings.  On 
April 10, 2003, Claimant L filed an administrative proceeding 
with the INA with plans to file for arbitration.  Claimant L 
hopes for eventual economic compensation for the invaded lands. 
 
15. (U) a) Claimant M 
 
     b) 1995 
 
     c) In 1995, the Municipality of La Ceiba issued a title for 
land owned by Claimant M to a local Honduran family.  This family 
in turn sold the lands to a third party family with very strong 
political influences.  Claimant M\'s attorney filed a law-suit to 
cancel said transaction, without success.  Only after continued 
Embassy advocacy was the case finally sent to the Attorney 
General\'s office in early 2002. In May 2002, the Attorney General 
sent the case back to the Municipality of La Ceiba for final 
resolution, having issued his opinion in favor of Claimant M.  On 
March 28, 2003, the Municipality voted to cancel the title 
originally issued to the local Honduran family.  To date, 
however, the municipality has failed to actually revoke the 
title, and the Honduran party has renewed its appeal efforts. 
 
In April 2003, the Embassy informed Claimant M of the GOH\'s new 
arbitration procedure (Decreto No. 349-2002) that allows the 
government and claimants to jointly submit disputes for 
arbitration as an alternative to continued legal proceedings. 
 
16. (SBU) Key to Claimants\' Identities: 
 
Claimant A: Eduardo Valenzuela, U.S. citizen, waiver received 
Claimant B: Gustavo Valle, U.S. citizen, limited waiver 
Claimant C: Carlos Madrid, U.S. citizen, waiver received 
Claimant D: Lily Jones Bourne and Edward Purcell Jones, U.S. 
          citizens, no waiver 
Claimant E: Alfred McDaniel, U.S. citizen, waiver received 
Claimant F: Mark Latty, U.S. citizen, no waiver 
Claimant G: Antonia Fajardo de Hubert, U.S. citizen, waiver 
          received 
Claimant H: Anthony Fish Company, U.S. company, no waiver 
Claimant I: Norma Bogran, U.S. citizen, no waiver 
Claimant J: Jaime Castano, U.S. citizen, no waiver 
Claimant K: James Harley Crockett, U.S. citizen, no waiver 
Claimant L: Maria Cecilia Cerna, U.S. citizen, waiver received 
Claimant M: Yolanda Guite, U.S. citizen, no waiver 
 
Pierce 
"
"8487","6/4/2003 17:13","03TEGUCIGALPA1272","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JUNE 3, 2003 
 
1. Editorial on liberal daily \"La Tribuna\", Tegucigalpa based 
6/3   entitled:  \"Plastic  Jails\".  If  Honduras   does   not 
demonstrate  a  serious interest on the  fight  against  drug 
trafficking,  it  could become an issue which  may  harm  the 
relationship  between Honduras and the  United  States.  This 
happened to Guatemala, which has recently been accused  of  a 
serious  lack  of  compliance  to  international  regulations 
concerning this issue. 
 
Honduras  worked closely with the United States in the  fight 
against drug trafficking. Now, there are more severe laws  to 
penalize   narco  trafficking,  as  well  as  other  criminal 
activities  related  to  drug  trafficking,  such  as   money 
laundering. 
 
However, there is no point if the Honduran authorities arrest 
and convict people responsible of such actions if the bars of 
its  jails are made of plastic. This situation could be  much 
worse  if  it is true that some authorities have collaborated 
in  the  escape  of these criminals, as in the  case  of  two 
convicted drug dealers who escaped when they were taken  back 
to prison under police custody. 
 
Pierce 
"
"8488","6/4/2003 17:35","03TEGUCIGALPA1273","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JUNE 4, 2003 
 
 
1.  Editorial  on  liberal daily \"La  Tribuna\",  Tegucigalpa 
based 6/4 entitled: \"Obstacles for CAFTA\". \"The CAFTA, which 
is  being negotiated by five Central American countries  and 
the  United  States, is progressively facing more  and  more 
obstacles and disagreements from various social sectors  all 
over  Central  America.  They believe  their  interests  and 
proposals are not being considered in the negotiations, even 
though  the  governments  involved  in  this  process   have 
facilitated  the  participation of  entrepreneurial  groups, 
workers\'  unions  and  civil  society  organizations  in  an 
\"adjacent  room\",  next  to  the rooms  where  the  official 
negotiations are taking place.\" 
 
\"During  the  latest  round of negotiations,  some  Honduran 
entrepreneurial  groups were shocked by certain  concessions 
made  by Guatemala, which were believed to be a strategy  to 
make  up  for  the  poor record in the fight  against  narco 
trafficking. As a result, Guatemala was accused of  \"selling 
the   guitar\"   or  undermining  the  basic  principles   of 
negotiation  that  the Central American  teams  have  agreed 
upon.\" 
 
\"The  fact  that the obstacles to CAFTA are not  exclusively 
related  to  the \"unyielding position\" of the United  States 
toward  this  process, but also to the severe  disagreements 
between the Central American negotiation teams.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"8490","6/4/2003 20:45","03TEGUCIGALPA1274","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE118495","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001274 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/USOAS, WHA/CAR, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR L/WHA, L/T, AND S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, KTIA, AORC, HO, OAS 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS HAS SIGNED BUT NOT YET RATIFIED 2002 
INTER-AMERICAN CONVENTION AGAINST TERRORISM 
 
REF: A. STATE 118495 
 
     B. STATE 112939 
     C. TEGUCIGAPA 862 AND PREVIOUS 
 
1. (U) The Government of Honduras has signed but not yet 
ratified both the 2002 Inter-American Convention Against 
Terrorism (ref A), as well as the 1971 Convention to Prevent 
and Punish the Acts of Terrorism Taking the Forms of Crimes 
Against Persons and Related Extortion that are of 
International Significance.  USG officials, from the 
Secretary to the Ambassador to PolOff, have repeatedly urged 
 
SIPDIS 
senior GOH officials, including President Ricardo Maduro and 
Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias, to ratify 
these two conventions, as well as five UN counterterrorism 
conventions/protocols that the GOH has yet to sign and/or 
ratify (refs B and C). 
 
2. (SBU) Senior GOH officials have told EmbOffs that they 
will soon submit the two OAS conventions to the Congress for 
approval, but they have yet to do so.  No GOH official has 
voiced any concern to EmbOffs that ratifying the two 
conventions would be problematic for Honduras.  Neither the 
GOH nor Post believe that congressional approval would be 
difficult or controversial.  Once Congress has approved the 
conventions and the congressional resolution has been 
published in La Gaceta (akin to the Federal Register), the 
GOH would then need to deposit its instruments of 
ratification with the OAS.  Post notes that the Honduran 
Congress is currently on recess until early July. 
 
3. (U) Post recommends that the U.S. delegation to the OAS 
Assembly in Santiago urge the Honduran delegation to move 
promptly to ratify the two OAS counterterrorism conventions 
without further delay. 
Pierce 
"
"8491","6/4/2003 21:16","03TEGUCIGALPA1276","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 001276 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, INL/RM, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, EAID, PREL, KCRM, AFIN, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT:  INL FY 2002 LAW ENFORCEMENT LETTER OF AGREEMENT AND 
REQUEST FOR ADVICE OF ALLOTMENT FOR HONDURAS 
 
1. This is an action request.  Please see para 2. 
 
2. Action request for INL: Paragraph three has the proposed 
text of the INL FY 2002 Law Enforcement Letter of Agreement 
scheduled to be signed June 11, 2003 by the Ambassador and 
Honduran Minister of Public Security Oscar Arturo Alvarez. 
Post requests INL authorization to sign the proposed 
agreement and INL advice of allotment as soon as possible. 
 
3. Begin text of proposed agreement: 
 
                LETTER OF AGREEMENT ON LAW ENFORCEMENT 
                              BETWEEN 
           THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
                                AND 
                    THE GOVERNMENT OF HONDURAS 
 
I.  GENERAL 
 
The Government of the United States of America and the 
Government of Honduras, (hereinafter each individually a 
\"Party\" and, collectively, the \"Parties\") agree to establish 
and to support a project designed to develop, enhance and 
improve Honduran law enforcement capabilities. 
 
The actions to be taken and the resources to be provided by 
the Government of the United States of America (\"USG\") and 
the Government of Honduras (GOH) in support of this Letter of 
Agreement (\"LOA\") are set forth below and constitute firm 
commitments by each Party.  Funds granted by the USG under 
the terms of this LOA are specified in a separate face sheet 
and total $1,900,000.00.  Future funding for these projects 
by the USG is contingent upon the availability of duly 
authorized and appropriated funds, satisfactory progress 
toward project goals, and the approval by the U.S. Department 
of State, Assistant Secretary of State for International 
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (\"INL\"). 
 
II.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
This project is designed to strengthen the Honduran Ministry 
of Public Security as a civilian law enforcement organization 
operating as an integral part of the criminal justice system. 
Toward that goal, the USG and the Government of Honduras 
shall take actions and commit resources on an annual basis as 
authorized by their respective legislative processes to 
support this LOA. 
 
Actions to be taken include providing the services of a full- 
time law enforcement development advisor, other technical 
assistance, training, purchase of equipment, materials and 
supplies needed by the Ministry to improve the organizational 
effectiveness and implement key criminal laws in 
collaboration with other institutions of the justice system, 
in particular the Public Ministry.  The planned life of this 
project is two (2) years, following which time the Ministry 
of Public Security will have developed a strong 
partnership with the Public Ministry and other investigative 
elements of the Government of Honduras and high priority 
crimes will be routinely prosecuted in accordance with the 
Criminal Procedure Code.  The Government of Honduras will be 
expected to provide appropriate budgetary and other support 
to the Ministry of Public Security and cooperating 
organizations to maintain both the specialized investigative 
task forces, including trained personnel, and other 
improvements to organizational structure or equipment 
obtained through this project. 
 
The Parties may increase, amend, or terminate projects 
undertaken in conjunction with this LOA as agreed to by the 
Parties in writing.  Such project shall be subject to the 
terms and conditions of this LOA. 
 
 
  III.  PERFORMANCE GOALS AND MEASUREMENTS OF EFFECTIVENESS 
 
The specific goals of this project are to: (1) enhance the 
organizational, administrative and operational effectiveness 
of the Ministry of Public Security, with specific focus on 
its budgeting and planning capabilities, public relations and 
recruitment, and an internal affairs unit; (2) facilitate 
development of standardized operational procedures between 
the Ministry of Public Security, Public Ministry and other 
essential organizations to investigate crime and bring 
prosecutions under the new criminal procedure code in the 
priority areas of kidnapping, homicide, burglary, organized 
crime, money laundering and alien smuggling; (3) provide 
technical assistance and training to the Ministry of Public 
Security in the implementation of the Criminal Procedure 
Code, including amendments currently under discussion in the 
areas of kidnapping, money laundering, narcotics trafficking 
and alien smuggling; (4) enhance the curriculum and 
instructional capabilities of the Ministry of Public Security 
training programs; and (5) develop a Field Training Officer\'s 
Program for the Frontier Police.  Effectiveness will be 
measured by qualitative and quantitative indicators, 
including observation by personnel of the Parties, and by 
completion of: (1) the implementation of a five-year 
strategic plan and budget allocation (including proposals for 
continued cooperation from donor programs) for continued 
effective administration (defined as an administration that 
is able to allocate resources and personnel appropriately) of 
the Ministry of Public Security and the development and 
implementation of a working internal affairs unit within the 
police structure; (2) specialized investigative units 
operating in the areas of kidnapping and money laundering, 
homicide, organized crime and alien smuggling whose levels of 
operation will improve as indicated by case management and 
the increased number of complete cases sent forward to the 
Public Ministry for prosecution; (3) Implementation of any 
amendments to the Criminal or Criminal Procedure Codes 
adopted by the Government of Honduras related to prosecution 
of such cases; (4) Development and provision of specialized 
investigative training to members of the Ministry of Public 
Security, the Public Ministry and other government agencies 
to enable them to work in task force style units, in the 
priority areas of kidnapping, homicide, organized crime, 
money laundering and alien smuggling, with the understanding 
that members of these units will serve in such capacity for a 
minimum of two years and (5) implementation of an operational 
field training program for the Frontier Police, including 
full Government of Honduras budget support for Frontier 
Police training and operational needs, and documented field 
training reports for all graduates of the Frontier Police 
Academy after September 2003. 
 
IV.  EVALUATION PLAN 
 
Representatives of the Government of the United States and 
the Government of Honduras will meet at least once every 
month to review progress towards achievement of project goal 
and objectives.  Progress will be evaluated in accordance 
with the measurements of success described above. A report 
will be prepared jointly to summarize the results of these 
evaluations.  These evaluations are in addition to the 
ongoing monitoring of the programs and activities conducted 
by relevant personnel of both governments. 
 
V.  STANDARD PROVISIONS 
 
1.  Funds 
A.  Disbursement of USG funds shall be for procurement of 
property, equipment, supplies, material and services 
(hereinafter collectively \"property\"). 
 
B.  Funds obligated by the USG that have not been spent 
within twelve months following the close of the USG fiscal 
year in which the LOA is signed may be de-obligated by the 
USG.  An extension of this period may be granted by INL. 
 
C.  The Government of Honduras shall contribute to the 
projects in the LOA by ensuring adequate funding for normal 
administrative and related expenses for host country 
personnel.  These expenses include the payment of rents and 
utilities, telephone costs, salaries and benefits (including 
medical and other insurance protection), per diem and travel 
costs within Honduras, personal equipment and uniforms, and 
by recruiting and retaining competent personnel. 
 
D.  The Government of Honduras shall make such reasonable 
efforts as are necessary to ensure that funds or other 
support provided under this LOA are not employed in any way 
in support of drug trafficking. 
 
2.  Title 
Title to all property, procured with funds provided by the 
USG under this LOA shall be to the Government of Honduras 
unless otherwise specified. 
 
3.  Property and Personnel 
A.  Property 
(1) Property furnished to the Government of Honduras through 
funds provided by the USG shall be used to further the object 
and purpose of this LOA.  The Government of Honduras shall 
return to the USG, or reimburse the USG for the original 
purchase price of, any property that it obtains through funds 
provided by the USG that is not used in accordance with this 
provision.  The Government of Honduras shall not authorize 
the re-export, transfer, loan, sale or other disposition of 
any property provided to it under this LOA without the prior 
written authorization of the USG.  Funds derived from the re- 
export, transfer, loan, sale or other disposition of any 
property furnished or funded by the USG to the Government of 
Honduras under this LOA shall be used to further the 
objectives of the LOA. 
 
(2) All property furnished or funded under this LOA shall be 
accounted for to the U.S. Embassy by the Government of 
Honduras in no less rigorous manner than would be used if the 
property was acquired by the Government of Honduras with the 
Government of Honduras\' funds. 
 
B.  Personnel 
(1) Before scholarships, fellowships or participant training 
for personnel proposed by the Government of Honduras can be 
furnished or funded under this LOA, each such person must 
execute a certification, as set forth in the Annex to this 
LOA, that he/she has not been convicted of a narcotics 
offense and has not been involved in narcotics trafficking 
within the last ten years. 
 
(2) In order to obtain the maximum benefits from the 
investment in training and other assistance provide under 
this LOA, the Government of Honduras agrees to retain 
personnel who have received training furnished or funded 
under this LOA for a minimum of two years after completing 
such training.  This provision may be waived by written 
agreement of the Parties. 
 
4.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
A.  Each Party shall have the right:  (1) to examine any 
property furnished or funded by that Party under this LOA to 
determine that such property is being used in accordance with 
the terms of the LOA; and (2) to inspect and audit any 
records and accounts with respect to funds, property or 
services furnished or funded by that Party under this LOA to 
determine that such funds, property and services are being 
utilized in accordance with the terms of this LOA. 
 
B.  The Parties shall monitor the progress of implementation 
of this LOA, including the use of funds, property and 
services furnished or funded under this LOA at least 
annually.  Each Party shall assign qualified personnel to 
participate in the monitoring and evaluation process. 
 
C.  Each Party shall furnish the other with information 
necessary to evaluate the effectiveness of project operations 
under the terms of this LOA.  At the termination of each 
project, a completion report shall be issued.  This report 
shall include a summary of USG and Government of Honduras 
project contributions, a record of activities performed, 
objectives achieved and related data. 
 
5.  Applicable Laws 
 
A. Each Party shall expend funds and support project 
operations in accordance with its applicable laws and 
regulations. 
 
B.  All property furnished or funded by the USG under this 
LOA shall be procured in and shipped from the United States 
unless otherwise provided for in this LOA, or in any project 
annex, or as otherwise authorized in writing by the USG. 
 
6.  Taxes 
 
A.  Property and Funds 
Any property or funds introduced into or acquired in Honduras 
by the USG or by any person or entity (including but not 
limited to contractors and grantees) funded by the USG as 
part of, or in conjunction with this LOA shall be exempt from 
all taxes, service charges and investment or deposit 
requirements and currency controls in Honduras. The import, 
export, purchase, acquisition, use or disposition of any such 
property or funds in conjunction with this LOA shall be 
exempt from all tariffs, custom duties, import and export 
taxes, taxes on acquisitions or purchases or disposition, 
value-added taxes and any other taxes or similar charges in 
Honduras. 
 
B. USG Personnel 
All personnel employed directly or indirectly by the USG and 
assigned by the USG to perform duties in Honduras in 
connection with this LOA, and accompanying members of their 
families, shall be exempt from all Honduran income taxes and 
social security taxes with respect to income earned while in 
Honduras and from property taxes on real or personal property 
located in Honduras and intended for their own personal use. 
Such personnel and accompanying members of their families 
shall receive the same treatment with respect to the payment 
of customs and import duties on personal effects, equipment 
and supplies imported into Honduras for their own use, as is 
accorded by the Government of Honduras to diplomatic agents 
of the U.S. Embassy in Honduras. 
 
C.  Contract Services 
Any non-Honduran national contractor, including any 
consulting firm, any non-Honduran national personnel of such 
contractor funded under this LOA and present in Honduras to 
perform work in connection with this LOA, any property or 
transaction related directly to such contracts, and any 
commodity procurement transaction funded under this LOA, 
shall be exempt from all taxes, tariffs, duties or other 
levies imposed in Honduras. 
 
D. The tax arrangements provided under paragraphs B and C are 
not applicable to citizens or permanent residents of Honduras 
present in Honduras in conjunction with this LOA. 
7.  Status of USG Personnel in Honduras 
A.  The Government of Honduras shall receive persons 
designated by the USG to discharge responsibilities of the 
USG under this LOA.  Upon appropriate notification from the 
USG, the Government of Honduras shall grant USG employees the 
privileges and immunities accorded to the Administrative and 
Technical staff of the USG and assigned to the U.S. Embassy. 
Contractors under this agreement shall be granted official 
acts immunity. 
 
B.  The privileges and immunities provided under paragraph A 
are not applicable to citizens or permanent residents of 
Honduras present in Honduras in conjunction with this LOA. 
 
8.  Human Rights 
The Parties recognize that the protection of human rights is 
an important element of this LOA.  To this end, the Parties 
understand that: 
 
A. USG assistance to the Government of Honduras\' law 
enforcement development efforts is conditioned on the 
Government of Honduras actively protecting human rights in 
Honduras and; 
 
B.  In accordance with United States law and policy, no USG 
assistance or funds shall be provided under this LOA to or 
for use by a unit of the security forces of the Government of 
Honduras if the USG has credible evidence that such a unit 
has committed gross violations of human rights, unless the 
USG determines that the Government of Honduras is taking 
effective measures to bring the responsible members of the 
security forces unit to justice.  The Parties understand that 
\"effective measures\" means that the Government of Honduras is 
carrying out a credible investigation and that the 
individuals involved face appropriate disciplinary action or 
impartial prosecution in accordance with Honduran law. 
 
9.  Final Clauses 
A.  This LOA shall enter into force upon signature by 
authorized representatives of both Parties. 
 
B.   Modifications to this LOA may be made as agreed by the 
Parties and issued as amendments to this LOA. 
 
C.  Either Party may terminate this LOA by giving the other 
Party 90 days\' prior written notice of its intention to 
terminate.  The USG may suspend its obligations under this 
LOA in whole or in part, upon giving the Government of 
Honduras written notice with immediate effect. 
 
D.  Notwithstanding the notification procedures set forth in 
Paragraph B, the USG reserves the right to terminate any and 
all assistance provided under this LOA immediately upon 
notice, or to take any other appropriate measures, if an 
agency of the Government of Honduras to or through which 
assistance is being provided under this LOA, or a key 
individual of such agency, or any recipient of scholarships, 
fellowships or training furnished or funded under this LOA, 
is found to have been convicted of a narcotics offense, or to 
be or have been engaged in drug trafficking. Drug trafficking 
is defined as any activity undertaken illicitly to cultivate, 
produce, manufacture, distribute, sell, finance or transport, 
or to assist, abet, conspire, or collude with others in 
illicit activities, including money laundering (defined as 
the process whereby proceeds of criminal activity are 
transported, transferred, transformed, converted, or 
intermingled with legally acquired funds, for the purpose of 
concealing or disguising the true nature, source, 
disposition, movement, or ownership of these proceeds), 
relating to narcotic or psychotropic drugs, precursor 
chemicals, or other controlled substances.  A narcotics 
offense is defined as a violation of, or a conspiracy to 
violate, any law or regulation of the United States, a State, 
the District of Colombia or other U.S. territory, or a 
foreign country relating to narcotic or psychotropic drugs or 
other controlled substances as defined under United States 
law. 
 
E.  Notwithstanding the termination of this LOA, the 
obligations of the Government of Honduras under Section IV, 
Paragraph 3 of this LOA relating to the use of property shall 
continue to apply without respect to time, unless otherwise 
agreed in writing by the Parties. 
DONE at Tegucigalpa, Honduras in duplicate this 11th day of 
June 2003 in the English and Spanish languages, both texts 
being equally authentic. 
 
 
For the Government of the          For the Government 
United States of America           of Honduras 
 
 
-----------------------------    --------------------------- 
Ambassador Lawrence L. Palmer,   Oscar Arturo Alvarez, 
United States Ambassador to      Minister of Public Security 
Honduras                         Honduras 
4. End text of proposed agreement. 
Pierce 
"
"8523","6/5/2003 15:41","03TEGUCIGALPA1284","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE133022","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001284 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/IP, DS/OCS, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, CASC, KSCA, PTER, HO 
SUBJECT: SOFT TARGET VULNERABILITY - TEGUCIGALPA RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 133022 
     B. TEGUC 1153 (EAC 5/13/03) 
     C. TEGUC 839 (EAC 3/20/03) 
     D. TEGUC 1144 (THREAT COMMUNIQU) 
     E. TEGUC 912 (SEPQ ANTI-U.S. ORG LIST) 
     F. TEGUC 776 (ACEQ CRIME EVAL) 
     G. 12 FAM 334.2 (INTERNATIONAL SCHOOLS) 
     H. 12 FAM 422.4 (PRIVATE SECTOR SUPPORT) 
     I. TEGUC 1221 (USAID SECURITY) 
 
1. Reference (A) Para 6, this mission has had an outreach 
program in effect with the Amcit private sector since well 
before 9/11. The program addresses a number of long-standing 
concerns related to violent crime, corruption and judicial 
system problems. The number one concern of Americans and 
Hondurans is the pervasive, ever-present threat of violent 
crime characterized by robberies, carjackings, bank 
robberies, home invasions, murder and street crime. 
 
2. The Consul General meets with a wide range of Amcit 
residents in various parts of the country including retirees 
and those involved in education, NGOs, religious missions and 
business. The Economic/FCS section does much the same on an 
ongoing basis, as does RSO in terms of providing security 
advice. The three major areas of concern are crime, 
corruption and land dispute problems - all common to Honduras 
and Central America. 
 
3. Honduras has one of the lowest ratios of police to 
civilians in Latin America, and the protection of personnel 
and property has been effectively privatized by the use of 
about 40,000 security guards countrywide versus 5,400 police. 
The case closure rate for murder is 1.5 percent so the need 
for caution is taken seriously. Businesses, fast food shops, 
gas stations, schools, banks and many residences are 
protected by private armed guards and patrols. Facilities 
that might be termed \"Soft Targets\" already have armed 
security protecting them from the one proven threat-crime. 
 
4. Reference (B) and (C) RSO has worked with the local 
schools attended by Mission family members - American and 
Discovery school, (they close 6/12 for summer vacation and 
reopen in late August). They are independent, non-U.S. 
government institutions and have had security in place for 
some time due to the local situation. The more affluent 
students have their own bodyguards. These in-place measures 
and the security at most other facilities is an added benefit 
when faced with the possibility of the global terrorist 
threat. 
 
5. Reference (D) outlines the recent communiqu that 
allegedly threatened  American, British and Spanish diplomats 
in Honduras - not the public. The threat was deemed to be of 
concern, but not credible at this time. Reference (E) details 
the politically active Anti-U.S. groups in country that 
demonstrate, but have not been involved in terrorist-level 
actions. 
 
6. The Mission website has a RSO section 
www.usmission.hn/english/secuirty.htm that provides a wide 
range of Honduras-specific security briefings including 
personal, residential, vehicle, travel, street, business and 
tourist advice. Additionally, information is provided to 
NGOs, religious missions, health workers and others to stay 
safe. The business security advice notes the risk of 
commercial vehicle hijackings and provides countermeasures. 
The site has a direct hotlink to the RSO office, which is 
used to quickly respond to questions regarding the security 
situation. Issues that are of interest to the Consular 
section are coordinated with the American Citizen Services 
unit. 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"8527","6/5/2003 22:46","03TEGUCIGALPA1499","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03STATE144757","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 001499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
FOR GENERAL HILL AND WHA/FISK FROM AMBASSADOR PALMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/25/2013 
TAGS: AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT: OFFICIAL INFORMAL - RESUMPTION OF AIR-TRACKING 
INFORMATION SHARING WITH THE GOH 
 
REF: A. STATE 144757 
 
     B. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 052246Z JUN 03 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1. (S) General Hill: 
 
Thank you for your May 29 note in which you requested the 
April 15 accident investigation report and a review of the 
substantive actions taken be the Honduran military to prevent 
a similar occurrence from happening in the future. I will 
provide you a copy of the official accident report issued by 
the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) to Honduran Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve, coupled with an informal translation 
completed by the Embassy.  (Note, the date of the report is 
March 14, rather than April 15, due to an error by the GOH.) 
 
Regarding substantive actions taken by the HOAF to prevent a 
similar incident from reoccurring, the HOAF recently 
announced a shift from aerial interdiction to a ground 
interdiction strategy (ref B).  While the HOAF could have 
withdrawn entirely from any counter-drug participation during 
the suspension of intelligence sharing, this strategy shift 
demonstrates that they are still engaged, and is a direct 
result of MOD Breve\'s new strategic focus to combat drug 
trafficking while avoiding the pitfalls of shooting down a 
plane.  I believe that a new and unequivocal understanding 
exists between the HOAF and the senior Honduran civilian 
leadership which will not permit a future shoot-down incident 
to occur.  The Government of Hondurans and its Armed Forces 
are ready to move forward in accordance with SOUTHCOM policy 
on intelligence sharing. 
 
I appreciate the opportunity to work with you on this 
important issue and look forward to the resumption of 
air-track information sharing with the GOH at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Larry Palmer 
 
Palmer 
"
"8553","6/6/2003 18:19","03TEGUCIGALPA1309","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02TEGUCIGALPA1755|03STATE138274|03TEGUCIGALPA861","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 001309 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, DRL/IL, INL/LP, INR, AND DS 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, ASEC, ELAB, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN COMMISSION ASSIGNS RESPONSIBILITY FOR LA 
CEIBA PRISON INCIDENT: SECURITY FORCES AND PRISON \"TRUSTIES\" 
 
REF: A. STATE 138274 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 861 
     C. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 1755 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Political Section Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: A Special Commission of the Honduran 
National Council for Internal Security (CONASIN) has issued a 
report assigning responsibility to GOH security forces and 
prison \"trusties\" for the majority of the 68 deaths that 
occurred in an April 5 incident at the El Porvenir prison, 
located just outside the Caribbean port city of La Ceiba, 
Honduras.  Sixty-one of the dead were gang members from Mara 
18, one of Central America\'s largest gangs.  President 
Ricardo Maduro is seeking U.S. and UK assistance for a 
further investigation of the events.  Post has brought in a 
retired U.S. law enforcement investigator through the Police 
Assistance Program to assist the Internal Affairs Unit of the 
police to further investigate the incident.  End Summary. 
 
CONASIN Ad-Hoc Commission\'s Report 
---------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) On April 5 prison riot in the El Porvenir (The Future) 
prison, located just outside the Caribbean port city of La 
Ceiba, Honduras, left 68 dead (65 men and three women) and 
approximately 40 wounded (ref B).  Immediately following the 
incident, President Ricardo Maduro ordered an investigation 
into the deaths by an ad-hoc commission of the Honduran 
National Council for Internal Security (CONASIN).  Members of 
the Commission include: Andres Pavon, President of the 
Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Honduras 
(CODEH); Dinora Aceituno, Secretary General of the 
Confederation of Honduran Workers (CTH, which is affiliated 
with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions 
(ICFTU)); Jorge Gomez, a businessman and representative of 
the Honduran Council of Private Enterprise (COHEP); and Ana 
Pineda, Deputy Human Rights Commissioner.  (Note:  The Human 
Rights Commission later withdrew from the commission and is 
conducting a separate investigation.  End Note.)  The ad-hoc 
commission was commissioned on April 9 and delivered its 
completed report May 9 to CONASIN, in accordance with the 
30-day timeframe it was given. 
 
3.  (SBU) Post obtained a copy of the report, which was also 
leaked to the press before it was presented to President 
Maduro, that details the Commission\'s conclusions after 
investigating the incident.  It is not clear who leaked the 
report, but Maduro is said to be quite upset that it 
happened.  In addition to the Honduran press, the contents of 
the report were included in wire service reports and an 
article in the New York Times, leading the Department of 
State to draft contingency press guidance (ref A). 
 
4. (C) PolOff has met with Pavon and Gomez, and spoke by 
phone with Aceituno and Pineda.  All four are good contacts 
of the Political Section.  PolOff also visited the prison May 
15, and was given a tour by the new warden.  The report 
begins by severely criticizing the GOH\'s combined handling of 
the incident, criticizing the Preventative Police and the 
district attorney for not adequately securing the crime 
scene, the General Direction of Criminal Investigation (DGIC) 
for shoddy initial investigative work, and the forensic 
doctor for moving the bodies without first conducting a 
preliminary inspection.  Visits to the prison the day of the 
incident by VIPs, including President Ricardo Maduro and 
Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez, undoubtedly caused 
further contamination of the crime scene, commission members 
told PolOff.  (Note:  Other reports indicated that the crime 
scene had already been cleaned up prior to their arrival. 
End Note.)  The report harshly criticizes the role of the 
prison\'s \"trusties,\" non-gang member inmates who enforce 
discipline within the prison.  (Note: It appears to Post be 
to a prime example of \"the inmates running the asylum.\"  End 
Note.) 
 
5. (C) The CONASIN report notes incredulously that there was 
an agreement signed March 7 between the \"trusties\" and gang 
member prisoners, drafted on the warden\'s computer, that 
outlines when and where drugs can be smoked (only in the gang 
members cell blocks).  One commission member went so far as 
to speculate to PolOff that the Honduran north coast 
Atlantida drug cartel may have had a role in instigating the 
April 5 incident to assert control over the lucrative drug 
trade at the prison.  In a May 28 lunch with PolOffs, Gomez 
said that the GOH planned to change some of the report, 
something that was proved true when the final version of the 
report was released June 3.  Pavon denounced the changes, 
which the GOH claims were necessary to not prejudice ongoing 
investigations, and accused the GOH of softening the wording 
and trying to cover up the security forces\' responsibility in 
the incident.  Gomez told PolOff that the final version does 
not alter the fundamental conclusions of the CONASIN 
Commission. 
 
The Events of the Day 
--------------------- 
 
6. (U) As reported in ref B, initial press reports indicated 
that a riot broke out around 10 a.m. shortly after visiting 
hours, when a scuffle between inmates turned deadly after 
Mara 18 gang members produced pistols and a number of 
machetes and attacked non-gang member prisoners.  According 
to press reports, regular prisoners then reportedly 
brandished weapons of their own and proceeded to attack Mara 
18 members.  The facility is a prison farm where both 
convicts and suspects facing various felony charges are held. 
 
7. (SBU) The investigative report\'s account of the events 
differs greatly from those initial press reports.  In the 
CONASIN report, GOH security forces and \"trusties\" are held 
responsible for the majority of the deaths and injuries. 
According to the report, which is based on the Commission\'s 
investigation drawn from testimony of unnamed witnesses 
(including inmates), information from GOH authorities, and 
two site visits to the prison, the incident began at 9:55 am 
on April 5. Mara 18 gang member Mario Roberto Cerrato, AKA 
Boris, allegedly shot and killed Jose Alberto Almendarez, the 
vice president of the \"trusties\", and wounded Jose Edgardo 
Coca, the president of the \"trusties\" and a corrupt ex-cop. 
Although numerous accounts appear to confirm this was the 
proximate cause of the ensuing violence, the gun allegedly 
used by Cerrato was never found (nor were any of the other 
alleged firearms supposedly used by gang members).  Another 
gang member known as \"Danjers\" then assaulted and killed 
non-gang member Angel Emilio Gutierrez.  At this point the 
Penitentiary Police apparently intervened supported by a unit 
of the Fourth Infantry Battalion of the Honduran Army). 
 
8. (SBU) At some point during this scuffle the report states 
that Penitentiary Police started firing from towers at the 
corners of the prison.  (Pavon told PolOff that he speculates 
that this firing may have disoriented policeman on the ground 
who then thought that gang members were firing weapons, 
leading police on the ground to fire upon gang members.) 
Dimas Antonio Benitez, a penitentiary policeman on the 
ground, took the pistol of Deputy Warden Oscar Reinery 
Sanchez, who was in charge of the prison at the time of the 
incident due to the fact that the warden was not there.  The 
report states that Benitez then shot and killed gang member 
\"Danjers,\" while \"trusty\" Jose Quintanilla beat and shot to 
death Cerrato, thus leaving the two gang members who 
allegedly started the incident dead.  The \"trusties\" then 
forced the rest of the gang members back into their cell 
blocks (two and six).  There were an estimated 70 gang 
members and 180 non-gang members. 
 
9. (SBU) According to the CONASIN report, instead of ending 
with five people dead, the violence escalated.  The report 
states that fifteen minutes into the incident the chief of 
the Preventative Police from the Department of Atlantida 
(which includes the city of La Ceiba) arrived with a 
detachment of police in response to a phone call from the 
prison.  The report states that the gang members in cell 
block two then left their cell block with their hands in the 
air, while \"trusties\" blocked the exit from cell block six. 
Four \"trusties\" named Santo Aguilar, Yobhany Banegas, Javier 
Solis, and \"Sonarriba\" then set fire to cell six, leaving the 
gang members inside trapped in the bathroom of the cell block 
trying to avoid the fire which was fueled by mattresses.  The 
report alleges that the police did not remove the obstacles 
that blockaded the exit from cell block six.  According to 
the report, a policewoman shot at four gang members, and a 
policeman in a Cobra Unit (specially trained police) shot a 
gang member in flames who managed to exit cell six despite 
the obstacles. 
 
10. (SBU) The report alleges that the Atlantida police did 
not attempt to resolve the situation peacefully, but rather 
shot indiscriminately at gang members, and allowed \"trusties\" 
to beat, stab, and kill gang members who were trying to 
surrender.  The report states that 17 of the 19 gang members 
injured suffered either gunshots or beatings in the back of 
their heads or necks.  During the melee at least one Cobra 
policeman was injured. 
 
11. (SBU) When the chaos ended, 68 people were dead.  Many 
had multiple wounds from one to three different types of 
weapons.  According to the CONASIN report: 
-- 27 had been shot to death 
-- 17 had been beaten/stabbed to death 
-- 24 had been burned to death 
 
12. (U) Of the 68 killed: 
-- 61 were members of the Mara 18 gang 
-- five were non-gang member prisoners 
-- three were female visitors (two of those were ages 14-16) 
 
13. (U)  Many of the gang members had been transferred to the 
La Ceiba prison from Tamara Prison, the principal Honduran 
prison located outside of Tegucigalpa (ref C).  The report 
criticized conflicting provisions in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure and the Law of Rehabilitation of Criminals with 
regard to transfers of inmates from one prison to another by 
prison authorities.  The surviving gang members have since 
been transferred to a prison in Tela, up the coast from La 
Ceiba.  The La Ceiba prison has been repaired, with little 
sign of what happened April 5, other than a lack of 
mattresses. 
 
Multiple GOH Investigations Into Actions of Security Forces 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
14. (SBU) To date, only Deputy Warden Sanchez is under 
arrest.  By all accounts his handling of the incident was 
disastrous.  From panicking so much that he reportedly called 
the Roatan Fire Department (located on a Caribbean island) to 
ask them to call the La Ceiba Fire Department for assistance, 
to letting another policeman take and use his pistol, to 
generally providing no leadership to end the incident with as 
little violence as possible, Sanchez appears to have failed 
on many levels.  The Public Ministry (led by the Attorney 
General), the DGIC, and the Internal Affairs Unit of the 
police, are all investigating the incident to determine what 
charges should be bought against members of the security 
forces or prisoners. 
 
15 (U) PolOff attended a June 5 briefing by the Public 
Ministry that outlined similar preliminary conclusions to the 
CONASIN report and had grisly forensic details from the 
autopsies of the victims.  The Public Ministry\'s 
investigation in continuing, and no specific security 
officials were named as responsible in the briefing, but 
officials did recommend that any prison police and/or 
\"trusties\" involved in the incident should be immediately 
transferred from the prison.  Pavon noted at the briefing, 
and the Public Ministry concurred, that despite Maduro\'s 
order to end the \"trusty\" system the prison had not yet done 
so due to a lack of trained personnel to replace the 
\"trusties.\"  Maduro has stated that the GOH will prosecute 
any member of the security forces found to have been involved 
in human rights abuses during the incident. 
 
16. (SBU) The report, which will be used in all of these 
investigations, recommends that GOH authorities conduct 
ballistic tests to determine, if possible, which units of the 
police and/or military were responsible for which gunshots. 
According to the report, while not alleging that all of these 
security forces took part in the shooting, units of the 
following security forces were at the prison for part or all 
of the incident: 
-- Penitentiary Police 
-- Army Fourth Infantry Battalion (based in La Ceiba) 
-- Preventative Police (reportedly accompanied by Navy and 
Air Force soldiers who conduct joint patrols with the police 
as part of Maduro\'s crackdown on Honduras\' extremely high 
crime rate) 
-- Tourist Police 
-- Cobras (specially trained police) - their presence is 
disputed by some GOH officials 
 
Maduro Asks for FBI; Post Brings In Retired Investigator 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
17. (SBU)  Maduro publicly asked for the assistance of the 
FBI and Scotland Yard to further investigate what happened. 
(The child advocacy NGO Casa Alianza has meanwhile asked for 
Scotland Yard to assist the GOH to investigate over 1,600 
extrajudicial killings of children and youth over the last 
five years.)  As there were no American citizens involved in 
the prison incident, and it does not directly affect U.S. 
national security, Post does not believe that an 
investigation by the FBI (or any other USG law enforcement 
agency) is warranted.  However, Post has brought in a retired 
U.S. law enforcement investigator, through the INL Police 
Assistance Program, to assist the Internal Affairs Unit of 
the police to further investigate the incident.  Post 
facilitated the travel of Minister Alvarez to Puerto Rico to 
gain insights from the FBI and Puerto Rican Police on 
internal affairs investigations.  Maduro also called for a 
250 million lempiras (USD 14.7 million) investment in 
upgrading Honduran prisons, but to date has not asked for USG 
assistance in this effort.  The lack of funds in the GOH 
treasury is likely to hamper any attempt to fulfill that goal. 
 
18. (C) Comment:  While not publicly criticizing the report, 
some GOH officials have privately cast aspersions on the 
report as either one-sided or taking all critical statements 
as fact, as well as noting that it was not done by 
professional investigators.  While true that none of the 
commission members are professional investigators, Post notes 
that the GOH has been happy to use CONASIN investigative 
commissions in the past, including one made up of the same 
commission members, to investigate other controversial police 
episodes.  The GOH has also used these reports to buttress 
its decisions and defend its actions in the past.  The most 
difficult questions remain unanswered, including: 
-- 1) why did the gang members suffer such a disproportionate 
amount of the fatalities if they were contained in two jail 
cells? 
-- 2) what did the security forces at the prison do to 
minimize/prevent casualties in their actions? 
-- 3) why hasn\'t the GOH arrested/suspended anyone beside the 
Acting Prison Warden? 
By its decision to use an ad-hoc CONASIN Commission to 
investigate this incident, the GOH has painted itself into a 
corner, leaving little choice but to support the report 
publicly. 
 
19. (C) Comment continued:  Instead of criticizing the 
report, Maduro is now instead calling for U.S. or UK 
assistance in conducting further investigations of the 
incident.  Unfortunately, the poor handling of the crime 
scene, and that fact that the jail has been repaired and the 
bodies buried, could make it extremely difficult for even a 
professional investigation to accurately determine what 
happened in detail.  Nevertheless, Post believes that U.S. 
assistance to the Police Internal Affairs Unit will aid 
Honduran efforts to better understand what happened during 
the riot.  End Comment. 
Pierce 
"
"8598","6/9/2003 20:19","03TEGUCIGALPA1328","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON ARTICLE 98, JUNE 9, 2003 
 
 
1.  Regular columnist Ramon Villeda Bermudez on liberal daily 
\"La  Tribuna\", Tegucigalpa based 6/7 entitled: \"International 
Disgrace\". \"The Government of Honduras has committed  one  of 
the   most   degrading  acts  by  approving  a  \"dishonorable 
agreement\"  with  the  United  States  (Article   98).   This 
agreement prohibits both countries from turning over  to  the 
International  Criminal Court (ICC)  any  citizen  from  both 
countries  that  is  accused  of  genocide,  crimes   against 
humanity or war crimes. This degrading act violates the  Rome 
Statute of the ICC, which had been approved unanimously by  a 
past legislature.\" 
 
\"The  manner  in which this agreement was approved  was  also 
irregular.  First  at  all, the bill  was  submitted  to  the 
National  Congress past-midnight during the final session  of 
the  legislature, after the agreement was kept in secret  for 
more  than eight months since President Maduro signed  it  on 
September 2002. Furthermore, this agreement was approved by a 
simple   majority  of  deputies  of  the  National  Congress, 
violating  a  Constitutional clause that states that  a  two- 
thirds  majority  in Congress must approve all  international 
agreements.\" 
 
\"A  significant segment of deputies and other  social  groups 
have  condemned this decision, which makes clear  the  scarce 
self-esteem and sovereignty of Honduras. It is time  to  show 
our gratitude to the global superpowers with more dignity.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"8720","6/13/2003 21:53","03TEGUCIGALPA1390","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ATMOSPHERICS ON CAFTA, JUNE 5-12, 2003 
 
1. Op-ed by Rodil Rivera in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La 
Tribuna\" (6/05) entitled \"Frustration,\" \"What has happened to all 
the wealth that the bureaucrats assured us would come from CAFTA? 
As we see it, the negotiations are stalling and the American 
negotiators are offering less than Central America expected.\" 
 
2. San Pedro Sula-based Liberal daily \"Tiempo,\" (06/06) ran an 
article entitled \"The US has cards hidden up its sleeve in the 
CAFTA negotiations.\" \"Some segments in the Honduran private 
sector believe the U.S. is not responding to the expectations it 
had aroused because, during the last round of negotiations in 
Guatemala, it proposed a five-year tariff reduction program, 
instead of offering to let goods enter the US tariff-free right 
from the start of the agreement as Honduran business had 
expected.\" 
 
3. Op-ed by Roger Marin in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" (06/06) entitled, \"Dangerous relationships,\" which says 
that the signing of CAFTA is not supposed to provide all answers 
to problems from agricultural productivity to the macro economy 
and exchange rate balance.  \"CAFTA can only be a mechanism to 
creating a more prosperous and fairer economy, but that will be 
our responsibility.\" 
 
4. San Pedro Sula-based Liberal daily \"La Prensa\"(6/08) carried 
an interview with Jesus Canahuati, president of the Honduran 
Association of Maquiladores and member of the CAFTA negotiation 
team, entitled \"Guatemala: reckless and confrontational in CAFTA 
negotiations,\" in which he emphasized that there is a severe 
conflict between the Guatemalan private sector and the 
governmental team, who is carrying out the negotiations in a 
reckless and unilateral manner. 
 
5. \"La Tribuna\" (6/09) featured an article entitled \"Honduras 
will not be fully aggressive on the fifth round of negotiations.\" 
\"None of the Central American teams will be belligerent during 
the upcoming round towards the aggressive proposals of the U.S. 
team. \"This round will be key to finding out more about the U.S. 
position on CAFTA.\" 
 
6. Article in \"Tiempo\" (6/09) entitled \"CAFTA will lose income\". 
Honduran authorities have estimated that the country would lose 
1.5 billion lempiras per year due to the decrease in tariff 
revenues. 
 
7. \"El Heraldo\" (6/10) carried an interview with former Costa 
Rican president Miguel Angel Rodriguez entitled, \"We need to 
negotiate more than just free trade.\" \"Free trade with the US 
beyond question beneficial, but Central America also needs to 
include other issues, such as migration, cooperation and 
compensation to social groups.\" 
 
8. Article in \"El Heraldo\" (6/10) entitled \"Central America will 
expand trade offer to the US\" reports that the Central American 
negotiation teams agreed to expand the trade offer to the US from 
58% to 75%. This proposal that will be presented in the fifth 
round of negotiations means that the basket of goods included in 
the agreement went from 3,700 to 4,800 products. \"This means that 
the next round will be key because the real negotiations will 
kick off.\" 
 
9. Article in \"La Prensa\" (6/11) entitled \"Guatemala will 
negotiate by itself.\" The discrepancies among the Central 
American teams have become evident since Guatemala announced it 
might present its own trade offer to the U.S. in the Fifth round. 
Guatemalan private groups have criticized their government\'s 
proposal for not considering the interests of the entire country. 
 
10. An article in \"La Tribuna\" (6/11) entitled, \"Central American 
textile entrepreneurs are finishing up their proposal to U.S.,\" 
says the proposal will consider the needs of the textile and 
clothes-making sector, stressing the importance of textiles in 
CAFTA. The Central American textile entrepreneurs are also 
assessing the advantages and disadvantages of the U.S. proposal 
for their industry. 
 
11. Article in \"La Prensa\" June 12, entitled \"Tegucigalpa will be 
the starting point of the negotiations,\" sees the fifth round as 
the real beginning of CAFTA negotiations.  It also goes on to say 
that Honduras will present a concrete proposal on labor 
integration. 
 
12. An article in \"EL Heraldo\", 6/12), entitled \"Textile 
counterproposal is ready to be presented to the U.S.,\" says that, 
according to Honduran maquila owners, the most critical issues 
are the rules of origin, access to plain fabrics and the 
definition of \"preferences\" in U.S. market access. 
 
Palmer 
"
"8780","6/16/2003 21:32","03TEGUCIGALPA1398","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03USDOC2142","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001398 
 
SIPDIS 
 
COMMERCE FOR 532/OEA/MARY R. CORSEY/MICHELLE ZAGER 
COMMERCE FOR 3134/FCS/OIO/WH/RD/DDEVITO 
PANAMA CITY FOR CUSTOMS ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, ETRD, ETTC, HO 
SUBJECT:  PRE-LICENSE CHECK: MINISTRY OF SECURITY 
 
REF: USDOC 02142 
 
1. In response to reftel, Economic Officer Nicholle 
Urdaneta performed a Pre-License Check for Application 
number (A) D306740 and (B) D306739 at the facilities of 
the Ministry of Security, Tegucigalpa, Honduras, on 
June 9, 2003. 
 
2. EconOff met with Minister of Security Oscar Alvarez 
and Secretary General Luis Pineda Batres. The meeting 
and visit was arranged without any delay or 
complication.  When EconOff explained the purpose of 
the visit all individuals were cooperative and 
forthcoming. 
 
3. The Ministry of Security has been authorized, 
through Executive Decree 132-2002 of August 6, 2002, to 
make direct purchases of special intelligence equipment 
and modern technology for safety and security purposes. 
The Ministry of Security plans to sign a Contract with 
Phoenix American Technologies for the purchase of 
thermal imager devices to be installed in two Bell-206 
helicopters. 
 
4. The total cost of the equipment, which will be 
funded by the Government of Honduras, is USD 1,053,000 
over the C.I.F. value.  An initial payment of USD 
526,500 will be provided to the U.S. firm through wire 
transfer to Ocean Bank of Miami, Florida.  The 
remaining 50 percent will be paid by letter of credit. 
All supportive documentation, including a draft 
purchasing contract, detailed description of the goods, 
and terms of payment, were provided by the consignee. 
 
5. The equipment and systems have been customized to 
the specific needs of the two Bell-206 helicopters, 
owned and operated exclusively by the Ministry of 
Security.  A strict 24-hour surveillance is given to 
the helicopters on a daily basis. The equipment will 
aid the National Police in a series of crime combat, 
prevention and control activities during night hours, 
such as narcotics and kidnappings, particularly in the 
urban areas of Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.  Through 
the purchase of this modern equipment, the Minister 
will be able to view and monitor the helicopter\'s 
efforts directly from his office. 
 
6. Recommendation:  Based on the visit and information 
obtained about the purchasing transaction, consignee 
will be using the thermal imager equipment and systems 
in accordance with the terms of the license.  Consignee 
should be considered a reliable recipient of the 
exported material. 
 
PALMER 
"
"8920","6/23/2003 14:13","03TEGUCIGALPA1462","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001462 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB, DS, AND INR 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ETRD, SOCI, PREL, ECON, ELAB, ASEC, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTI-CAFTA PROTEST ANTICLIMACTIC 
 
 
1.  Only 100-200 protesters turned out on June 18 to voice 
their opposition to CAFTA negotiations, signaling that there 
is little focused, popular resistance in Honduras to the 
U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA).  The 
demonstration, which so far has been the only organized 
protest to occur during this round of talks, went on for less 
than two hours outside the conference hotel and ended after 
lead Honduran CAFTA negotiator Melvin Redondo met with 
protest leaders. 
 
2.  EmbOffs, having received notice by e-mail had alerted 
delegates by mid-day that there would be an afternoon protest 
in front of the main entrance of the Clarion hotel.  By 4:00 
p.m. the protest was underway, with demonstrators blocking 
traffic in front of the hotel and carrying ten-foot-tall red 
banners denouncing CAFTA and the Free Trade Area of the 
Americas.  The protest was organized by the Popular Block 
(PB), a left-leaning organization that claims to represent 
teachers and workers, whose leader, Carlos H. Reyes, read a 
declaration to the press.  Congresswoman Doris Gutierrez, who 
belongs to the small Democratic Unification Party (a remnant 
of the 1980s socialist movement), also addressed 
demonstrators. 
 
3.  Eyewitnesses estimate that police outnumbered protesters 
2-1, with uniformed officers surrounding the entire hotel. 
The police nearest to the demonstration wore helmets, carried 
riot shields, and were armed with batons rather than 
firearms.  The protest subsided after lead Honduran CAFTA 
negotiator Melvin Redondo met with protest leaders and 
received a list of their grievances. 
 
4.  COMMENT:  The lone anti-CAFTA protest during this round 
of negotiations turned out to be a non-event.  The small 
number of demonstrators stopped traffic on one street and 
delivered their standard anti-free trade message, but talks 
were not impeded in any way.  This level of protest indicates 
that here in Tegucigalpa CAFTA is an issue too nebulous to 
inspire extensive resistance, and attests to the lack of 
widespread, organized opposition to CAFTA in Honduras.  In a 
conversation with LabAtt June 19, labor leader Dinora 
Aceituno (CTH Secretary General) dismissed the demonstration 
as ineffective and counterproductive.  END COMMENT 
Palmer 
"
"8931","6/23/2003 17:01","03TEGUCIGALPA1463","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001463 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JUNE 20, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial on Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 6/20 entitled \"Kindergarten\". \"CAFTA negotiations have 
encountered a serious obstacle because the Central American 
countries have not been able to present a consistent 
position, debilitating its already fragile negotiation 
power, and evidencing the contradictions we face because we 
do not want to understand the need to present ourselves as a 
solid bloc.\" 
 
\"From the beginning, Central America should have worked in 
an unified project, considering the regional needs and 
proposals. Before initiating the negotiations with the other 
counterpart, Central America must have agreed on a common 
position.\" 
 
\"All these problems could have been easily avoided, because 
from a good negotiation process we can come out with a CAFTA 
with manageable disadvantages and far-reaching benefits for 
everyone.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"8932","6/23/2003 20:32","03TEGUCIGALPA1470","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001470 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTIONS ON CAFTA, JUNE 23, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Moises Starkman in Tegucigalpa-based moderate 
daily \"El Heraldo\" on 6/23 entitled \"CAFTA opportunities\". 
\"The conflicts that the CAFTA negotiations have faced show, 
once again, that we as Central Americans have not learned to 
work taking into account our common regional interests.\" 
 
\"Unfortunately, CAFTA does not expect to solve the problems 
that the Central American integration process has 
experienced for so many years. we should not waste the 
opportunity to sign CAFTA and promote through it higher 
levels of investment, production, exports and employment in 
the region, as well as access to better and cheaper 
products.\" 
 
\"We are confident that the Honduran delegation will be able 
to defend the national interests during these negotiations. 
We are optimistic that they will listen to the proposals and 
suggestions from the private sector, workers and consumers, 
who should be the basis of this agreement.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 6/23 entitled \"The failures of CAFTA\". \"The facts 
are more eloquent than words and they show that the Fifth 
round of CAFTA negotiations carried out in Tegucigalpa were 
a complete failure.\" 
 
 
 
\"One of the factors that caused this fiasco was the lack of 
vision of the U.S. lead negotiator Regina Vargo, or perhaps 
of her superiors, that led to an absurd offer from 
Washington to act as if the Generalized System of 
Preferences and the Caribbean Basin Initiative do not exist, 
proposing that trade with the U.S. should start from scratch 
which could mean a step back for Central America in certain 
productive areas, such as textile production.\" 
 
\"To go forward, it is crucial to find out what Washington 
wants from this negotiation, to offer the U.S. something 
they are interested in, and put an end to the stagnation of 
the process.\" 
 
3. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 6/23 entitled \"Fifth Round of CAFTA negotiations\". \"These 
negotiations should not only be limited to trade, CAFTA 
should become a mechanism to solve the basic problems of the 
relationship between Central America and the U.S.\" 
 
\". CAFTA should help to create a value-added production zone 
and employment in Central America to prevent the current 
massive flows of illegal migration to the U.S. Furthermore, 
it ought to eliminate the socio-economic problems that 
favors other unlawful activities such as narco trafficking, 
terrorism and organized crime.\" 
 
4. Article in \"La Tribuna\" on 6/23 entitled \"The U.S. wants 
to make a double play\". According to Medardo Galindo, 
president of the Federation of Agricultural Exporters of 
Honduras, many Honduran products would be exported to the 
U.S. tax-free since they are included in the Caribbean Basin 
Initiative, but if CAFTA was approved as it is now, they 
would be paying taxes in a range of 11 to 29 percent. 
 
5. Article in \"La Tribuna\" on 6/23 entitled \"CAFTA proposals 
were unrealistic\". The Honduran congressman and private 
entrepreneur Gilberto Goldstein stated, \"We\'re like small 
fish facing a shark. An agreement was trying to be signed 
when the region is not even united, making any proposal 
unattainable. My suggestion is that the Central American 
presidents find a form of unity within the isthmus in order 
to deal with the first and biggest economy of the world.\" 
 
 
 
6. On 6/23 \"La Tribuna\" featured an article entitled 
\"Chicken in pounds\". \"During the fifth Round of CAFTA 
negotiations, there were discussions on the possibility of 
exporting and importing chicken breasts and legs between the 
US and the region. The trading of chicken parts would fall 
under the `sensitive\' category, along with fruits, grains, 
pork and beef.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"8933","6/23/2003 20:35","03TEGUCIGALPA1471","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001471 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, IZ, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, JUNE 23, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 6/23 entitled \"Chandelier\". \"President Bush is trying to 
reconfigure the U.S.\'s alliances with its southern 
neighbors. Bush visited Europe to reunite with his 
colleagues from the G-8; tensions decreased between France 
and Germany, yet it seems Bush and Chirac do not have enough 
chemistry. A few weeks later the European Union, imposed 
sanctions on Cuba because of this country\'s political 
opposition, in a move that some have interpreted as an 
action to get closer to Washington.\" 
 
\"The U.S. and Brazil are enhancing their bilateral 
relationship, and to prove that, President Bush agreed to 
aid President Lula in his `Zero Hunger Project\'. Although, 
the Brazilian press has noted that Lula has slighted his 
deal because Bush did not compromise to the Brazilian 
aspiration to become a member of the U.N. Security Council. 
Chile has already signed a FTA with the U.S. Even though 
some Central American countries are part of the `coalition\' 
and are sending troops to aid in Iraq\'s reconstruction, they 
still cannot sign a CAFTA agreement because the Central 
American countries have not yet agreed on a common 
proposal.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"8955","6/24/2003 21:14","03TEGUCIGALPA1483","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JUNE 24, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" 
on 6/24 entitled \"After transporting drugs, small plane is 
burned and destroyed\". \"The police found a small plane 
burned and destroyed in the Tinto river, close to the city 
of Tocoa in the northern coast. The police believe the plane 
carried about 500 kilos of cocaine.\" 
 
According to the police, \"Apparently, the drugs were coming 
from Colombia, we have found many empty wrappings and small 
amounts of cocaine. this year we have demolished three 
landing fields in this region, but we have not been able to 
arrest the contacts of the drug trafficking network from 
this zone.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"8956","6/24/2003 21:15","03TEGUCIGALPA1484","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001484 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA,(MBUCKLEY; MPROCTOR); IIP/G/WHA (DDIPASQUALE) 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, APAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON JUSTICE AND SECURITY, JUNE 24, 
2003 
 
1. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" 
on 6/24 entitled \"Congress will request the removal of the 
Minister of Security, the Attorney General and the President 
of the Supreme Court\". \"The President and the Secretary of 
Congress are so displeased with the limited results of the 
fight against criminality that they will request the removal 
of several high-ranking governmental officials.\" 
 
Juan Orlando Hernandez, Secretary of Congress stated, \"In a 
short-term, Congress will request from these officials an 
explanation of what is going wrong, also ask them if 
Congress should do anything to help. We must demand them to 
act immediately, and if they do not do anything having the 
conditions to do their job, we will talk to President Maduro 
to promote changes, if necessary.\" 
 
He added, \"We cannot wait anymore for actual results. the 
people is in shock, to the point they believe the government 
is not doing enough to fight criminality and Congress is 
demanding to act promptly and vigorously to stop impunity in 
the country.\" 
 
2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 6/24 entitled \"President Maduro acknowledges that police 
forces are infiltrated\". \"President Maduro is well aware his 
police force is infiltrated with criminals and needs to be 
amended as soon as possible, acknowledging this is one of 
the topics less attended to that should have been done 
otherwise. After meeting with the President of Congress, 
Porfirio Lobo Sosa, Maduro announced a new law was being 
enacted that would pursue the lawless policemen in the force 
and give them a fair trial.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"8957","6/24/2003 21:15","03TEGUCIGALPA1485","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001485 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, IZ, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON MIGRATION, JUNE 24, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial on Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 6/24 entitled \"Migration\". \"Negotiations on the migration 
issue were conducted between the governor of New Mexico and 
the Mexican President, Vicente Fox. President Fox believed 
that, with Mexico being one of the U.S.\'s closest neighbors, 
the openness of the U.S. on the migration issue would be 
without precedents. Migration was not at the top of 
President Bush\'s To-Do list but it is one of the top 
priorities for Mexico. Tensions and amicable feelings have 
been on and off and recently it seems Mexico has been 
distancing itself from the U.S., so much that Fox hasn\'t 
contributed very much with the Bush Administration nor did 
he support the U.S. campaign in Iraq.\" 
 
\"Resentment has grown between the two nations, yet it has 
helped Fox since he rose and gained support from his 
citizens by using the traditional bitterness already felt 
for the U.S. Yet this antipathy can\'t continue if Mexico 
wishes to continue with a Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. 
close at hand. That is why the governor of New Mexico 
visited Fox, to try to amend the tension between the two 
countries. Honduras is included in the migratory topic 
because if the U.S. is willing to reopen its doors for 
Mexico then Honduras should take advantage of the 
opportunity as well.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"8976","6/25/2003 13:18","03TEGUCIGALPA1487","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 001487 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, EB/TPP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR DCHA/DG, EGAT, AND LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT AND AGATT 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, ECON, EINV, PGOV, PREL, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT:  Bilateral Labor Consultations on Margins of CAFTA 
Talks in Honduras Emphasize Need for Further Progress 
 
Ref: State 155098 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  A joint delegation from the Departments 
of Labor and State emphasized June 17-19 the need for the 
GOH to increase its protection of labor rights and for the 
private sector to augment its respect for labor rights, with 
U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) soon 
opening the door to greater U.S.-Honduran trade and 
investment.  The visit focused attention on problems in the 
Ministry of Labor\'s enforcement of labor laws and 
regulations, possible reform of the labor code, difficulties 
with exercising the rights to organize and bargain 
collectively, and efforts to eliminate the worst forms of 
child labor.  The U.S. delegation pressed the MOL and the 
private sector to be more aggressive in addressing the 
problems that exist, even if longer-term structural changes 
in the labor code are not politically possible in the short 
term.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) A USG delegation led by Jorge Perez-Lopez, Director 
of the Office of International Economic Affairs in the 
Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) at the 
Department of Labor, and also including Arlen Wilson, Deputy 
Director of the Office of International Labor Affairs in the 
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (DRL/IL) at the 
Department of State, and Carlos Romero, International 
Economist at ILAB in DOL, held a series of bilateral labor 
consultations June 17-19 in Tegucigalpa on the margins of 
the fifth round of negotiations for the U.S.-Central America 
Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA).  LabAtt accompanied the 
delegation to all meetings. 
 
Ministry of Labor/Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3. (U) The USG delegation met June 17 with Vice Minister of 
Labor (MOL) Angel Escobar and Vice Minister of Industry and 
Trade Irving Guererro, as well as Honduran CAFTA labor 
negotiator Jorge Ponce.  Minister of Labor German Leitzelar 
was in Geneva for the International Labor Organization (ILO) 
meetings and was unable to take part in the meeting. 
 
4. (SBU) VM Escobar, himself a former leader of the Honduran 
beer company\'s employees\' union, said that the MOL has good 
relations with labor.  Perez-Lopez inquired about the labor 
rights situation in Honduras and asked about the still 
pending revisions to the Labor Code.  VM Escobar said that 
the GOH had written a draft law in 1995 but it never came to 
a vote in Congress and has been frozen ever since.  The MOL 
was now working again on drafting a revised Labor Code, with 
approximately 15 percent of the draft law still under 
tripartite (GOH, Labor, business) negotiation under the 
mandate of the GOH\'s Economic and Social Council.  He noted 
that the GOH had recently reformed articles 43-45 covering 
Honduran workers overseas and said the MOL hoped to make 
more changes to specific articles if the whole law could not 
be reformed.  Romero raised the 1995 Memorandum of 
Understanding between USTR and the MOL in the context of 
improvements in worker rights that still needed to be made. 
Key aspects of this MOU could be vehicles for change through 
administrative action. 
 
5. (SBU) VM Escobar noted a lack of funds and staff severely 
hampered what the MOL was able to do.  He said the MOL was 
improving the level of coverage, including inspectors, in 
the San Pedro Sula area where most economic activity 
(including export processing manufacturing (maquilas)) is 
concentrated.  He noted that the problem of child labor had 
been successfully eradicated in the maquila sector and said 
that while there were some labor problems with maquilas, 
they were generally not with U.S.-owned maquilas.  In fact, 
MOL and union officials have previously told EmbOffs that 
U.S.-owned maquilas have taken a leadership role in making 
positive changes on labor issues in the industry. 
 
6. (SBU) Perez-Lopez noted that perception in the U.S. could 
be as important as reality in Honduras and cautioned there 
were still ongoing labor rights problems that needed to be 
addressed as soon as possible, especially given the ongoing 
negotiation of CAFTA that includes a chapter on protecting 
labor rights.  Specifically Perez-Lopez and Romero 
mentioned: 
-- the lack of reinstatement of workers unjustly fired for 
labor activities (as well as the alleged use of blacklists 
by maquila owners), 
-- leaks to management of lists of union supporters forming 
a union that leads to the subsequent unjust dismissal of 
these employees, and 
-- complaints raised in reports by the AFL-CIO and the 
Department of State\'s Human Rights Report about general 
difficulties with the right to organize and bargain 
collectively, especially in the maquila sector. 
 
7. (SBU) VM Escobar said the MOL works directly with maquila 
owners and workers to resolve problems and the San Pedro 
Sula office continued to inspect maquilas and conduct 
alternative conflict resolution training.  VM Escobar noted 
that the lack of money for inspectors was a serious problem; 
Perez-Lopez agreed this was a real problem and also noted 
that low salaries for inspectors left them more susceptible 
to corruption.  Perez-Lopez explained that USG assistance on 
labor issues could not be used for inspectors\' salaries; VM 
Escobar replied that neither could World Bank money, which 
limited MOL options because of the tight overall government 
budget. 
 
8. (SBU) Escobar and Ponce clarified the issue of 
solidarity/employee associations, saying that they had no 
standing under Honduran law and that while an employer could 
form one it would not prevent the establishment of a union. 
MOL officials noted that there could only be one union per 
company and that by law it took 30 employees to form a 
union.  Once a union is recognized and receives its 
\"personeria juridica\" (legal standing) from the MOL, by law 
the employer is obligated to negotiate a collective 
bargaining agreement if the union presents a list of issues 
to negotiate.  (Note:  In reality, getting a Honduran 
employer to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement can 
be a serious challenge in the current labor rights 
environment in Honduras.  End Note.) 
 
9. (U) Perez-Lopez highlighted the USG\'s interest in 
eliminating the worst forms of child labor and noted that 
DOL was funding a number of ILO International Program to 
Eradicate Child Labor (IPEC) projects in Honduras, including 
in coffee and melon sectors, as well as in the commercial 
sexual exploitation of children.  (Romero and LabAtt also 
had a breakfast meeting June 19 with ILO/IPEC Coordinator 
Paulino Isidoro and IPEC melon project coordinator Martha 
Chavez to discuss DOL-funded IPEC projects.  Isidoro and 
Chavez said they had seen a marked improvement in the 
private sector\'s approach to the problem of child labor. 
The IPEC program was now granted access to melon farms and 
processing plants in the Department of Choluteca and even 
sugar cane owners had admitted there was a problem with 
child labor in their sector -- where no IPEC project exists 
-- and had pledged to move toward eliminating it.  Isidoro 
noted that IPEC also had projects with child domestic 
servants, child divers in the lobster industry, children 
working in the tobacco industry, and children working in 
garbage dumps in Tegucigalpa.)  While Honduras has made 
strides against child labor in general, Isidoro noted that 
child labor remains a pervasive problem, particularly 
(although by no means exclusively) in commercial 
agriculture. 
 
Labor Confederations: CGT and CTH 
--------------------------------- 
 
10. (U) The USG delegation hosted a meeting at the Embassy 
June 17 with representatives of the General Workers\' Central 
(CGT), affiliated with the World Congress of Labor (WCL) and 
led by Secretary General Daniel Duron, and the Confederation 
of Honduran Workers (CTH), affiliated with the International 
Congress of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU).  The third Honduran 
labor confederation, the United Confederation of Honduran 
Workers (CUTH), led by SecGen Israel Salinas and applying 
for affiliation with the ICFTU, was invited, but Salinas was 
unable to attend the meeting and the other CUTH 
representatives did not show up.  Wilson, Romero, and LabAtt 
also had lunch June 19 with CTH SecGen Dinora Aceituno, who 
had been unable to attend the June 17 meeting. 
 
11. (U) Duron said that the CGT appreciated that labor 
issues would be a key part of CAFTA and said that the CGT 
wanted real protection for labor rights in the agreement. 
Noting that only eight to 10 percent of the economically 
active Honduran workforce is unionized, Duron said that it 
was difficult to exercise the right of association in 
Honduras, particularly in the maquila sector, where he 
claimed only two percent of workers were unionized and had 
collective bargaining agreements.  (Note:  Minister of Labor 
Leitzelar told a Congressional StaffDel May 27 that the low 
rate of unionization in Honduras was due to a variety of 
factors and not necessarily an indicator of a lack of 
freedom of association.  He said that of the 122,000 workers 
in the maquila sector, 10 percent of female workers (11,000) 
were unionized and two percent of male workers (2,500) were 
unionized.  LabAtt is seeking updated statistics from the 
MOL on the number of unions with collective bargaining 
agreements in the maquila sector.  End Note.) 
 
12. (U) Duron said that it was common for businesses to fire 
union organizers and that reinstatement of unjustly fired 
workers seldom, if ever, occurs.  He noted that some 
maquilas hired former MOL labor inspectors to work in their 
human resources office.  Duron also explained that it was 
not easy to move from registering an intent to organize a 
union to getting a union\'s \"personeria juridica\" from the 
MOL.  He outlined how maquilas used loyal employees to 
\"infiltrate\" union organizers to provide information on them 
to management that then led to the organizers being fired 
unjustly.  Duron said that solidarity/employee associations 
were not a major problem, and cautioned that the labor 
unions were skeptical about proposed \"flexibilization\" of 
the labor code.  Duron said unions were open to revision of 
the labor code provided their previously hard-won labor 
rights were preserved.  He said any reform process had to 
balance the equities of workers, as well as employers 
 
13. (U) Duron said that with the GOH still unable to reach 
agreement with the International Monetary fund and 35 
percent unemployment (a MOL statistic), the Honduran economy 
was in poor shape.  His affiliates were worried that it 
would be very difficult to compete with the U.S. in 
manufacturing or agriculture.  He criticized NAFTA and 
claimed it had not reduced poverty in Mexico or the rate of 
illegal Mexican immigration to the U.S. 
 
14. (U) Aceituno\'s statements were similar to Duron\'s 
comments.  She cited the right of association and the right 
to bargain collectively as the two most important labor 
rights that were the most difficult to exercise in Honduras. 
She complained about the unjust dismissal of union 
organizers in maquilas and agreed that reinstatement was a 
remedy in theory but not in practice, noting that the fine 
for unjustly firing a worker was only 500 lempiras (less 
than USD 29).  (Note:  Employers also have to pay severance 
pay - see paragraph 17.  End Note.)  The delegation told 
Duron and Aceituno they agreed that progress was needed on 
the protection and respect of labor rights in Honduras. 
 
Private Sector: COHEP, Maquila Association, and others 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
15. (U) The USG delegation met June 17 with over a dozen 
representatives of the private sector, including leaders of 
the Honduran Council on Private Enterprise (COHEP), the 
Honduran Apparel Manufacturers Association (the Maquila 
Association), the National Association of Industrialists 
(ANDI), and the National Federation of Cattlemen and 
Agriculture of Honduras (FENAC) at COHEP.  Honduran 
Ambassador to the U.S. Mario Canahuati and Maquila 
Association President Jesus Canahuati (brothers) both 
attended the meeting. 
 
16. (U) Adolfo Facusse, ANDI President and a leading 
businessman, emphasized that the majority of the workforce 
was employed in the informal sector (52 percent according to 
Minister of Labor Leitzelar).  He noted that COHEP and the 
three labor confederations had agreed to labor code 
revisions in the mid-1990s, but that the GOH delayed 
introducing the revised code to Congress for a vote and that 
the consensus had since broken down.  Reforming the labor 
code remained a difficult political issue, despite the fact 
that the current code was obsolete, according to the private 
sector representatives.  Maquila Association representatives 
said they wanted to see the union registration process 
expedited and agreed with the need to reform that aspect of 
the labor code. 
 
17. (U) Jesus Canahuati said that there were generally 
harmonious labor/management relations in the maquila sector, 
and noted the importance of bipartite (labor/management) and 
tripartite (labor/management/GOH) discussions on labor 
issues.  Canahuati said that of 180 maquilas, 66 had unions, 
of which 48 were functioning, and many had collective 
bargaining agreements (he did not have a precise number). 
He said that unjustly fired workers can receive pay 
equivalent to one month for every year worked (maximum 15 
months).  Jacobo Kattan, a maquila executive, admitted that 
blacklists had been used in the early years of the maquilas 
(1989-91), but claimed that now it hardly happened. 
Canahuati said that to the best of the Maquila Association\'s 
knowledge, blacklists are not used.  Canahuati said that the 
maquila sector realized it had a large impact in Honduran 
society and the economy.  The Association was open to 
investigate any complaints about its members, said 
Canahuati.  (Note:  After the meeting LabAtt gave Canahuati 
the names of two maquilas that had been the subject of 
recent complaints and asked him to investigate.  End Note.) 
 
18. (U) COHEP President Jacobo Regalado said that COHEP was 
working to combat child labor and noted the private sector 
was working with the Ministry of Education to adjust the 
school calendar so it did not conflict with the coffee 
harvest, which in the past has led many parents to keep 
their children out of school so they could help harvest 
coffee beans.  Facusse noted that the poor state of public 
education and repeated teacher strikes contributed to the 
problem of child labor.  Canahuati stated that child labor 
was not a problem in the maquila industry. 
 
19. (U) LabAtt noted that the two most numerous labor issues 
he dealt with were complaints about the right to organize 
and bargain collectively in maquilas and the problem of 
child labor in commercial agriculture.  The USG delegation 
emphasized the need for the private sector to make 
improvements in both areas. 
 
Former Minister of Labor Gautama Fonseca 
---------------------------------------- 
 
20. (SBU) The USG delegation also had a breakfast meeting 
June 18 with former Minister of Labor (and former Minister 
of Public Security) Gautama Fonseca.  Fonseca noted the 
problem of corruption hampered MOL efforts and said that 
corruption, along with economic problems, had weakened the 
labor movement.  He said that Minister of Labor Leitzelar 
was a good minister but hampered by an under-funded and 
understaffed ministry. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
21. (SBU) Comment:  Honduras enjoys a fair reputation on 
labor rights because of important advances in labor rights 
made over the years.  Partially because of this, Honduras 
has at times looked better than its Central American 
neighbors (three of which face GSP petitions) with respect 
to the provision of labor rights.  However this perception 
is only partially consistent with the reality of labor 
rights in this country.  There is still much work to be done 
to meet international labor standards, as reflected in the 
section on workers rights in the Human Rights Report. 
 
22. (SBU) Comment continued.  The Honduran maquila sector 
feels it faces unfair criticism given the achievements it 
has made in eliminating child labor in maquilas, improving 
occupational safety and health, and meeting demanding labor 
codes of conduct established by U.S. buyers/retailers. 
Since it is practically the only sector of the Honduran 
economy that is rebounding from a post-September 11 downturn 
and the largest source of non-agricultural employment in the 
country, maquilas naturally remain the focus of labor 
unions\' organizing efforts.  Those efforts combined with 
continued resistance by some employers to the establishment 
of unions has meant maquilas continue to be the subject of 
complaints from Honduran and U.S. labor organizations/NGOs 
regarding problems with freedom of association and 
collective bargaining.  There are many steps the government, 
private sector, and labor unions can undertake to improve on 
these issues.  (Even Minister Leitzelar has noted that there 
are a variety of other factors that also affect the ability 
to organize new unions, including a weak economy in general 
and internal problems within unions.) 
 
23. (SBU) Comment continued:  The paltry budget and staff of 
the Ministry of Labor is a real impediment to improved 
enforcement of labor laws, but the MOL could do more with 
what it has.  The U.S. delegation pressed the MOL and the 
private sector to be more aggressive in addressing the 
problems that exist, even if longer-term structural changes 
in the labor code are not politically possible in the short 
term.  With DOL-funded technical assistance (on occupational 
safety and health, rights of association/collective 
bargaining) and IPEC projects, the MOL is already greatly 
benefiting from a USG commitment to improve respect for 
labor rights in Honduras.  It is now up to the GOH to 
increase the MOL\'s capacity to protect labor rights and for 
the private sector to address the remaining problems.  End 
Comment 
 
24. (U) This cable was cleared by DOL (ILAB) and State 
(DRL/IL). 
 
Pierce 
"
"8979","6/25/2003 14:14","03TEGUCIGALPA1488","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CA/VO/I, CA/VO/L 
 
E.O.  26598:  N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, PREL, CMGT, AMGT 
SUBJECT:  Advisory Opinion Request:  Restriction on Issuance 
of Non-Immigrant Visas in Honduran Diplomatic Passports 
 
 
1. Summary.  In light of the widespread abuse of diplomatic 
passports in Honduras, and the request from the MFA to 
assist the GOH in curbing the misuse of these passports by 
persons not entitled to have them, or by persons no longer 
entitled to use them, Post proposes to modify how we provide 
Non-Immigrant Visas to Honduran citizens who possess 
diplomatic passports.   We submit a draft diplomatic note 
explaining the new restrictions.  End Summary. 
 
2. Background.  Several months ago, MFA officials approached 
us to request help in curbing the unauthorized use of 
Honduran diplomatic passports.  There is little or no 
accountability for diplomatic passport issuance in Honduras 
and persons traveling with them are exempt from paying exit 
fees as well as duties and taxes on goods brought into the 
country.  They also effectively avoid paying the MRV fee. 
The GOH estimates that there are approximately forty 
thousand of these passports currently in circulation.  The 
majority are in the hands of former appointed and elected 
government officials and their families who have terminated 
their official duties, but failed or refused to surrender 
the passports. The GOH has publicly requested the return of 
these passports, without success.  In addition, an unknown 
number of Honduran diplomatic, official, and regular 
passports were stolen from the passport office in San Pedro 
Sula approximately two years ago. 
 
2. We propose sending a diplomatic note to the GOH, a draft 
of which is attached, after we receive your guidance on how 
best to adhere to the regulatory guidelines on providing 
visas of any classification to holders of diplomatic 
passports. 
 
Begin text.  The Embassy of the United States of America 
presents its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of the Republic of Honduras and wishes to inform the 
Ministry of a policy change regarding visa applications from 
certain government officials and others who possess 
diplomatic passports. 
 
Effective immediately, bearers of diplomatic passports in 
the following categories are exempt from the $100.00 
processing fee for nonimmigrant visas:  a) current Head of 
State and alternates; b) current Cabinet ministers and vice 
ministers; c) active duty military officers holding a rank 
not inferior to that of a U.S. Brigadier General or Rear 
Admiral; d) career diplomats; e) ambassadors, officers of 
the diplomatic service, consular officers, and military 
attaches assigned to a foreign diplomatic mission; f) 
officers of delegations assigned to an international 
organization; g) magistrates of the Supreme Court of 
Justice; h) territorial governors and their alternates; i) 
presiding officers of the national legislature; and j) 
spouse and unmarried dependent children of the above. 
 
The Embassy will continue to accept applications for 
diplomatic visas on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday 
from 1:00 p.m. to 1:30 p.m.  All applications must be 
accompanied by a photograph of the applicant, a diplomatic 
note stating the individual\'s government position, and 
travel plans.  The Embassy of the United States requests 
that all persons in possession of a current visa for the 
United States, of any classification, in a non -diplomatic 
passport, present this visa to the consular officer at the 
time of the application for a visa in the bearer\'s 
diplomatic passport.  Persons on the list above will be 
issued visas upon receipt of a diplomatic note that 
expressly states that the bearer is on official duty status 
for the Government of Honduras.  Persons who only possess a 
diplomatic passport, but are traveling on personal business 
or pleasure must also present evidence that they have paid 
the proper visa fee.  Visas are normally issued in three 
business days.  An employee of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs may drop off the application. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to reiterate to the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
3. We receive a large number of diplomatic notes requesting 
visas for Hondurans who possess diplomatic passports, but 
who have no current official role in Honduran governmental 
affairs.  Some already have valid tourist visas in their 
regular passports, but want visas in their diplomatic 
passports to avoid paying exit fees and duties on consumer 
products.  Many applicants who have diplomatic passports do 
not have valid regular passports.  They want to travel on 
the diplomatic passport for personal business and avoid 
paying the duties, taxes, and the one hundred dollar MRV 
fee. 
 
4. Establishing the proposed modification would provide the 
MFA with the support it needs to refuse diplomatic notes to 
persons using diplomatic passports to get visas for personal 
travel to the U.S.  It would force persons who have regular 
passports, with valid visas, to use them.  It would simplify 
the process for obtaining diplomatic visas.  And, it would 
prevent applicants from using diplomatic passports to avoid 
paying the MRV fee.  We request your opinion on the most 
expeditious manner to correct this misuse of the diplomatic 
privilege. 
PIERCE 
"
"8986","6/25/2003 18:55","03TEGUCIGALPA1495","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JUNE 25, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Rodil Rivera on Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily 
\"La Tribuna\" on 6/25 entitled \"The Fifth Column of CAFTA\". 
\". plain and simple, Guatemala is acting as the fifth column 
of the U.S. negotiators, to force us to give in on the few 
points where Central America has presented some resistance. 
In other words, our Guatemalan `brothers\' are helping to 
twist our arm. If there remains any doubt about it, we only 
need to read what Barbara Bowie-Whitman stated in the plain 
words of trade specialists, `If anyone wants to be more 
ambitious in its offer, we can reach an agreement faster\'.\" 
 
\"About the chance of Guatemala withdrawing its proposal, 
Regina Vargo answered for Salomon Cohen, the lead Guatemalan 
negotiator, saying, `Guatemala can\'t do that, because it\'s 
impossible to turn in a product offered with a  zero-tariff 
for one with a higher tariff. we can\'t go forward this way\'. 
This means that this is no longer a negotiation, it is a 
mere puppet show where Vargo is a ventriloquist and Cohen 
the U.S. puppet.\" 
 
\"Is there anything we can do against a decision already 
taken by the U.S.? Is there any chance that CAFTA could 
actually be somewhat beneficial for Honduras and Central 
America, as some people think? I don\'t know. I\'m firmly 
convinced that this criticism may help our negotiators and 
private entrepreneurs to do the best they can to get some 
benefits from CAFTA and, at least, to exclude agricultural 
products from the agreement.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"8989","6/25/2003 20:58","03TEGUCIGALPA1497","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","02PANAMA3031|02TEGUCIGALPA2549","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001497 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, INL/LP, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/25/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SMIG, CVIS, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PARLACEN CONGRESSMAN BUSTED ON DRUG 
CHARGES IN NICARAGUA CLAIMS IMMUNITY 
 
REF: A. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2549 
     B. 02 PANAMA 3031 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco L. Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On Friday June 20, a Honduran representative 
to the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), Cesar Augusto 
Diaz Flores, was arrested in Nicaragua for trafficking and 
possession of seven kilos of heroin (said to be worth some 
USD 6.3 million and a portion of a larger 20-kilo shipment 
from the same source).  With details still developing in this 
case, many questions are being raised about high-level 
government officials meddling in illicit activities and the 
use of legislative immunity by congressmen. END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Claiming Immunity After Being Caught Red-Handed 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
2. (U) According to press reports and Honduran contacts, on 
Friday, June 20, a Honduran representative to the Central 
American Parliament (PARLACEN), Cesar Augusto Diaz Flores, 
was arrested in Nicaragua for trafficking and possession of 
seven kilos of heroin (said to be worth approximately USD 6.3 
million and part of a 20-kilo shipment from the same source). 
 At approximately 7:30 PM, Diaz was stopped just inside the 
Costa Rican border for a standard vehicle check.  He was 
traveling with three other companions in a gray Hyundai SUV 
with diplomatic plates CD 044 (and an anti-corruption bumper 
sticker).  When asked by the Costa Rican patrol for proof of 
vehicle registration, Diaz reportedly became agitated and 
explained that he had diplomatic plates and need not be 
bothered with the inspection.  After some further bantering, 
Diaz then wielded a .45 caliber pistol and fired two shots 
outside of the vehicle.  No one was hurt in the shooting 
incident.  He then turned his vehicle around and sped over 
the border into Nicaragua, breaking through a security 
barrier in the process.  He was then detained by Nicaraguan 
authorities and the vehicle searched.  The search turned up a 
small suitcase which held seven kilos of heroin. 
Furthermore, the three companions (2 Chinese and 1 Guatemalan 
who were later released) were unable to produce proper 
documentation and it is now believed that Diaz may have been 
involved with alien smuggling.  Diaz has since maintained his 
innocence on all charges brought against him.  He is claiming 
immunity from prosecution based on his status as a Honduran 
member of the PARLACEN. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Growing Nexus between Political Elites and Organized Crime 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Cesar Augusto Diaz Flores is a leading political 
figure in his native Sabanagrande, which is in the Department 
of Francisco Morazan just 30 minutes south of the capital. 
He is a member of the Liberal Party and served two terms in 
the Honduran Congress from 1990-1994 and again from 
1994-1998.  His political endorsement was actively being 
sought by practically all of the possible candidates seeking 
the Liberal Party presidential nomination because of his 
popularity with the voters in southern Francisco Morazan 
department.  He has a reputation of generosity and assistance 
to people in need.  He is currently serving a 2002-2007 term 
as 1 of 20 Honduran Congressman with the Central American 
Parliament, with offices located in Guatemala.  (Note: 
PARLACEN membership is widely sought by Honduran political 
leaders because of its perceived broader regional legislative 
immunity.  Former President Rafael Callejas is a PARLACEN 
member.  End Note.) 
 
4. (C) According to Embassy sources, Diaz is connected with a 
well-known cartel involved with arms and drug trafficking. 
More specifically, the Costa Rican Ministry of Security 
claims that Diaz works directly with known Colombian 
traffickers Delgado Orozco and Vazquez Salazar.  Costa Rican 
authorities claim to have intelligence that puts Diaz at the 
heart of some recent drug activities in Costa Rica, just 
north of the capital city of San Jose.  Concurrently, Diaz 
has been tied to a large stolen vehicle scam that imported 
stolen vehicles from the U.S. for resale in Honduras.  Diaz 
is known by EmbOff to be close friends with Wilfredo 
Alvarado, the Honduran Consul General in San Jose and a 
former head of the DLCN (the counternarcotics directorate) 
and former special assistant to Attorney General Roy Medina 
(another Liberal Party politician).  Post previously 
suspected a possible connection, but had no proof, between 
Alvarado and Diaz in the sale of Honduran citizenship for 
purposes of smuggling aliens illegally to the United States. 
5. (SBU) Diaz\'s case is similar in many respects to the 
September 9, 2002 arrest of Ricardo Antonio Pena, a former 
Nationalist Party member of the Honduran National Congress, 
who also was traveling on a diplomatic passport and was 
attempting to smuggle four kilos of heroin from Panama to 
Costa Rica.  His U.S. nonimmigrant visa has since been 
revoked by the Consular Section (ref A).  (Note:  Press 
reports in 1999 alleged that Pena was linked to the 
contraband trade in coffee.  End Note.) 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Immunity or Impunity - When is Enough, Enough? 
--------------------------------------------- - 
6.  (C)  COMMENT:  Diaz\'s arrest comes at a time when the 
involvement of public figures of various sectors of the 
Honduran government and political class in illicit activities 
has come under intense media scrutiny and speculation.  His 
criminal activity is yet another strong piece of evidence in 
the growing indictment against Honduras\'s political and 
economic elite.  It appears to be another case of the 
outright purchase of power and corrupt use of official status 
to carry out criminal activities.  His invocation of 
parliamentary immunity in order to cover up exposed criminal 
actions reveals the extent to which these powerful Honduran 
political figures believe they are above the law.  It also 
raises the question of when enough is enough in regards to 
immunity claims by Honduran members of the National Congress 
and the PARLACEN. 
 
7. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED:  The Embassy has already received 
credible reports from local sources that members of the 
Liberal Party have begun an effort to press on behalf of 
Diaz\'s claim to immunity from Nicaraguan prosecution and 
incredibly to suggest that charges be brought against the 
police agents that executed the search against him. 
Nonetheless, Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso 
declared to the media that the government will provide only 
normal consular services and will await action by the 
PARLACEN on any immunity claim by Diaz.  MFA Director General 
for Foreign Policy Mario Fortin told PolOffs June 25 that the 
GOH had no plans to protect Diaz or any other corrupt 
officials claiming immunity.  However, Post believes there 
are intense efforts under way by Diaz\'s supporters to force 
PARLACEN to act in support of Diaz\'s immunity claim. 
 
8. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED:  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro 
and President of Congress Pepe Lobo are calling for immediate 
immunity reforms.  According to these two leaders, no one 
should be above the law and that it is now long-past time to 
bring a stop to the ease with which people escape prosecution 
on grounds of immunity.  Despite these public declarations, 
the jury remains out on whether or not Diaz will be made an 
example of, or if he will escape punishment like so many 
before him.  What is obvious is that this is not simply a 
Honduran problem, but one with which the entire Central 
America region will have to deal. Sadly, we do not expect 
Honduras or its top political figures to lead the effort to 
reform this ongoing abuse of legislative immunity.  END 
COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"8990","6/25/2003 21:27","03TEGUCIGALPA1498","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03Tegucigalpa3391","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001498 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/T/ES; IIP/G/WHA (CBARONE; GLLOYD); WHA/PDA 
(MBUCKLEY) 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: Evaluation of U.S. Speaker on the U.S.-Central 
American Free Trade Agreement (US-CAFTA), David E. Lewis, 
Tracker #17827 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 3391 
 
SUMMARY: U.S. Speaker David E. Lewis addressed private 
sector organizations, labor, GOH, congressmen, academics, 
the general public and the media in his weeklong visit to 
Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.  PAS sponsored him the first 
three days and USAID/Honduras programmed him two days.  PAS- 
arranged press events received excellent coverage and 
highlighted his message on the benefits and challenges of 
free trade.  The program served to focus Honduran audiences 
focused on the upcoming V Round of the US-CAFTA Negotiations 
in Tegucigalpa June 16-20.  END SUMMARY. 
 
A) Description of the Activity: Dr. David E. Lewis, Vice 
President of Manchester Trade, Ltd., visited Honduras June 1- 
7, 2003, as a U.S. Speaker on the U.S.-Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (US-CAFTA). During his weeklong program, 
sponsored by PAS for the first three days and by 
USAID/Honduras the other two days, he spoke to private 
sector organizations, senior and mid-level government 
officials, academics, members of the Honduran Congress, 
labor union representatives, and the general public.  He 
also participated in a PAS-organized press conference, a 
live morning TV talk show with the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, and was guest of honor at a luncheon hosted by the 
PAO. 
 
B) Date: June 1 - 4, 2003 
   Fiscal year: FY-03, Third Quarter 
 
C) Justification and Objective: To discuss with Honduran 
audiences the benefits of free trade in promoting economic 
growth and development. 
 
D) Tracker No. 17827; MPP Goal: Regional Stability, U.S. 
Exports, Economic Development and Mutual Understanding. 
Audience reached: Approximately 350 people directly, 
including representatives from the public and private 
sectors; members of the labor unions; students and 
professors from the National Autonomous University\'s Central 
American Graduate Program in Economics and Development 
Planning (POSCAE); and the general public.  His 
participation in a live TV program with nationwide coverage 
and a PAS-arranged press conference allowed Dr. Lewis to 
reach a large number of the general public. 
 
E)  Result/Impact: Excellent/Excellent 
 
The post fully met its objective for this program by 
providing forums in which to discuss the opportunities, 
challenges and benefits for Honduras in the CAFTA, what U.S. 
business seeks, the importance of Central American 
integration, and the fact that CAFTA is only the first step 
in a long-term trade relationship with the U.S.  Most 
important of all, Dr. Lewis stressed that CAFTA is an 
opportunity to reform the economy and the legal system.  He 
also noted that it was the Central American countries who 
had requested a FTA with the U.S. 
 
Dr. David Lewis conducted an intensive program during his 
visit to Honduras in his dual role as a U.S. Speaker on the 
U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement and a consultant 
with USAID/Honduras. 
 
On his first program day, Dr. Lewis lectured 20 students and 
faculty (among them Dr. Hugo Noe Pino, former Honduran 
Ambassador to the U.S.) at the POSCAE, was briefed by the 
DCM and other Embassy officials, and was guest of honor at a 
lunch hosted by the Honduran-American Chamber of Commerce 
(AMCHAM).  At the end of the day, he held a roundtable 
discussion with members of the Honduran Council for Private 
Enterprise (COHEP). 
 
The following day, Dr. Lewis appeared on \"Frente a Frente,\" 
the interview segment of Honduras\'s most watched morning TV 
news program, with Minister of Industry and Commerce Norman 
Garcia.  During the 45-minute program, he made the point 
that Central America needs to identify what the U.S. market 
demands and find out how they can supply it, that Central 
America is negotiating with two fronts - the internal 
process among the five countries and with the U.S., and that 
nothing is final until the negotiations end. The program 
moderator expressed appreciation of the U.S. Embassy\'s 
outreach with publications such as IIP\'s \"The Language of 
Commerce\" and the brochure \"US-CAFTA.\" 
 
Afterwards, Dr. Lewis held a roundtable discussion with the 
Vice Minister of Finance, the Director of the Income Tax 
Bureau and Customs officials to discuss how lower tariffs 
will reduce government income and how to substitute for 
them.  He also stressed the political decisions that will 
have to be taken to make the adjustments and noted that 
standardized import/export procedures are an incentive for 
foreign investment. 
 
Following this meeting, Dr. Lewis held a press conference in 
PAS, which was featured in all four newspapers and on 
national TV and four major radio stations 
 
PAO hosted a luncheon for David Lewis with members of the 
Honduran Congress, labor union leaders and representatives 
of private sector organizations.  During the lunch, labor 
union officials asked if we could schedule a meeting with 
Dr. Lewis so that their leadership and the Minister of Labor 
could discuss their concerns in depth.  In addition, one of 
the congressmen attending decided to arrange a meeting with 
the President of the National Congress and several members 
of the Commission on Trade. 
 
Dr. Lewis participated in a public program at the 
Tegucigalpa Chamber of Commerce, using his PowerPoint 
presentation \"CAFTA and Honduras: Challenges and 
Opportunities\" to address the background and issues 
surrounding CAFTA and initiate a discussion on how 
agricultural, small business and other sectors could take 
advantage of CAFTA. 
 
The following day, Dr. Lewis traveled to the northern city 
of San Pedro Sula, accompanied by the PAO and a USAID 
official, to meet with the Honduran Apparel Manufacturers 
Association (\"Maquiladores\") and the Cortes Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry (CCIC) and to participate in a public 
program.  The \"Maquiladores,\" by far the best-prepared 
sector in the negotiations, discussed the textile proposal 
on the table vis--vis CBI and GSP benefits and their hope 
that the U.S. would present a more liberal proposal. 
 
Upon returning to Tegucigalpa, Dr. Lewis continued his 
program with USAID/Honduras, meeting with the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce and members of the Honduran 
negotiating team, the President and Vice President of the 
Honduran Congress, and representatives from the labor 
unions. 
 
Throughout his presentations, Dr. Lewis tried to make the 
following points with all his audiences: (1) an FTA is an 
instrument for economic development, not a replacement for a 
national economic development plan to overcome poverty; (2) 
Honduras needs to invest in its human resources; (3) in 
international negotiations each nation must be aware of its 
important national interests in order to get the greatest 
benefit for its economy; (4) Honduras needs to decide where 
it wants to be 50 years from now; (5) CBI and GSP are 
government-to-government agreements and can be cancelled 
anytime, whereas an FTA is a contractual commitment that 
involves all sectors; and (6) countries need to find out 
what the market demands and how they can supply it. 
 
PAS Tegucigalpa highly recommends Dr. Lewis for future 
programs.  His vast experience in international trade and 
his knowledge of Latin America, plus his fluent Spanish and 
hard-working disposition, make him an ideal speaker.  He 
immediately establishes excellent rapport with his audiences 
and manages to keep the discussion on track.  We would 
welcome him back at any time. 
 
Post distributed copies of IIP handouts, a pamphlet 
promoting our IRC, and Dr. Lewis\'s presentation at all the 
venues. 
 
F) Non-USG Sources of In-country Funding/In-kind Support and 
Amount: The private sector organizations provided venues and 
coffee breaks for the conferences, and the other host 
institutions provided conference facilities for their 
programs. 
 
G) Quality of U.S. Support and IIP Offices Involved:  Very 
Good.  Post appreciates Gloria Lloyd and Camille Barone\'s 
assistance in making financial arrangements for this 
program. 
 
Palmer 
"
"9033","6/27/2003 14:25","03TEGUCIGALPA1509","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JUNE 24, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" 
on 6/24 entitled \"After transporting drugs, small plane is 
burned and destroyed\". \"The police found a small plane 
burned and destroyed in the Tinto river, close to the city 
of Tocoa in the northern coast. The police believe the plane 
carried about 500 kilos of cocaine.\" 
 
According to the police, \"Apparently, the drugs were coming 
from Colombia, we have found many empty wrappings and small 
amounts of cocaine. this year we have demolished three 
landing fields in this region, but we have not been able to 
arrest the contacts of the drug trafficking network from 
this zone.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9034","6/27/2003 14:26","03TEGUCIGALPA1510","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JUNE 26, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 6/26 entitled \"U.S. Ambassador doesn\'t see results 
against narcos.\" \"U.S. Ambassador Larry Palmer affirmed that 
his government, just like the rest of Hondurans, expects to 
see positive results in the fight against narco- 
trafficking.\" 
 
\"The Ambassador stated, `We want results: drug seizures, 
arrests of narco traffickers and convictions for those 
responsible of such acts. we are deeply concerned with the 
recent rise of organized crime and narco trafficking\'.\" 
 
\"He added, `More than a year ago, the Embassy received an 
anonymous report that gives names of many people linked to 
narco-trafficking and organized crime. We\'d like to see a 
thorough investigation by the Honduran authorities to find 
out whether those allegations are true or not; the Honduran 
people are entitled to know\'.\" 
 
\"Concerning the arrest of Cesar Diaz, the Honduran member of 
the Central American Parliament who was arrested in 
Nicaragua with 7 kilos of heroin, he declared `it is more 
important what comes after his apprehension. I hope the 
Honduran authorities do their best to penalize rigorously 
those responsible for narco-trafficking\'.\" 
 
2. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" 
on 6/26 entitled \"The U.S. demands the maximum penalty for 
narcos\". \"U.S. Ambassador Larry Palmer sent a clear 
challenge to the Judicial branch, the police and the General 
Attorney\'s Office: seize more drugs and penalize drug 
traffickers with the maximum penalty.\" 
 
\"In a press conference, Palmer affirmed, `The police and the 
General Attorney Office\'s are responsible for finding out 
the whereabouts of narco-traffickers. We expect positive 
results from their task\'.\" 
 
\"About the arrest of Congressman Cesar Diaz, the Ambassador 
stated that the behavior of one person can\'t affect the 
image of the whole country. He declared that the important 
thing is that those guilty of these crimes must be severely 
punished by law.\" 
 
3. Article in \"La Tribuna\" on 6/26 entitled \"U.S. aid is 
only enough for their advisors\". \"The coordinator of 
prosecutors of the Attorney General Office, Humberto 
Palacios Moya, said that they will only keep arresting minor 
users of marijuana and cocaine if the U.S. doesn\'t help to 
improve their logistical structures.\" 
 
\"Palacios affirmed, `The anti-narcotics police has only 29 
agents for the whole country, we have said this to the 
National Congress and the U.S. Embassy but their answer is 
that they have given enough money for the fight against 
drugs. what the Americans do not say is that their money 
mainly goes to the DEA advisors and other international 
organizations\'.\" 
 
4. Article in \"La Tribuna\" on 6/26 entitled \"The Attorney 
General\'s Office is also infiltrated\". \"Alfredo Landaverde, 
former Executive Director of the National Council against 
Narco Trafficking, challenged governmental authorities to 
categorically face narco-trafficking, one of the most 
dangerous branches of organized crime.\" 
 
\"Concerning the infiltration of organized crime in the 
country\'s security forces, he emphatically affirmed, `many 
policemen have personally told me they are afraid of some of 
their colleagues because they know they work for criminal 
organizations. Honduras has a few good prosecutors, judges 
and policemen determined to fight against organized crime 
but beside them, we can also find infiltrated officials\'.\" 
 
\"He added, `I know they will call me once again to confirm 
those accusations. Then, I guess they will also call the 
U.S. embassy\'s DCM Roger Pierce for saying that as well\'.\" 
 
5. Article in \"La Tribuna\" on 6/26 entitled \"Four Colombians 
are arrested in narco plane case\". \"Four Colombians and two 
Hondurans were arrested and accused for being tied with the 
narco organizations operating in the region of Colon, which 
recently burned and destroyed a plane that was used to 
transport 500 kilos of cocaine, apparently from Colombia\". 
 
6. Article in \"La Prensa\" on 6/26 entitled \"Maduro asks the 
U.S. for help\". \"President Maduro stated that the fight 
against drug trafficking is much more difficult for a poor 
country like Honduras, and `that is why I\'m asking the U.S. 
which has always been an extraordinary ally, to increase its 
support on this issue. this campaign requires a lot of money 
and we need the help of a big country like the U.S.\'.\" 
 
\"Maduro declared, `. the fight against drug trafficking 
demands sophisticated equipment, such as radars and special 
vehicles the country can\'t afford because public funds are 
used to address other priorities, such as the fight against 
crime and health and education programs\'.\" 
 
7. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
on 6/26 entitled \"The U.S. should aid more\". \"President 
Maduro stated the United States has helped, but not in the 
degree this country needs for accomplishable results. 
Ambassador Larry Palmer replied, `the Honduran public has 
the right to know and if they determine these allegations to 
be true, then we want the guilty to receive the maximum 
penalty of the law.  I won\'t be satisfied until all drug- 
traffickers are in jail, but it\'s a pretty hard fight\'.\" 
 
\"Maduro added, `Honduras needs more help because the public 
funds go towards teenage delinquency and education systems. 
money and sophisticated equipment are needed for this 
project, and the amount of money Honduras currently has is 
not enough to cover certain needs\'.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"9076","6/30/2003 22:10","03TEGUCIGALPA1529","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JUNE 30, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
6/30 entitled \"Honduras on course to become a Narco State\". \"U.S. 
Ambassador Larry Palmer stated that even though Honduras is not 
considered a `Narco State\', it may be on course to become one.\" 
 
\"Palmer affirmed, `that is why it is essential to take needed 
action as early as possible to avoid this through the legal 
institutions and through the police\'.\" 
 
\"When asked about the role of the General Attorney\'s Office, 
Palmer declared, `I don\'t think it has done a good job because 
during the nine months I\'ve been in Honduras, I haven\'t seen it 
accuse or prosecute any of the prominent individuals who are 
suspected of being involved in criminal activities\'.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9096","7/1/2003 13:15","03TEGUCIGALPA1534","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA625","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, INR/AN/IAA, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, PREL, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: CARDINAL\'S CORRUPTION COMMENTS SPARK PUBLIC 
DEBATE; CARDINAL STILL RECEIVING DEATH THREATS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 625 
 
     B. 02 VATICAN 4582 
     C. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2054 
     D. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 962 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY. During a private meeting with the Ambassador 
on June 20, the Cardinal expressed heightened concern over 
the pervasiveness of drug-related corruption at the highest 
levels of government as well as continuing death threats he 
had received. Cardinal Oscar Andres Rodriguez Maradiaga used 
the bully pulpit of his chairmanship of the National 
Anti-Corruption Council to raise questions about a corrupt 
political arrangement that was allegedly negotiated between 
Liberal Party President Rafael Pineda Ponce and former 
Honduran President Rafael Leonardo Callejas.  The Cardinal\'s 
criticisms were widely reported by the media as truth and 
spawned a fiery response from Pineda Ponce, who challenged 
the Cardinal to come forward with his evidence of the 
supposed deal.   END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
CARDINAL EXPRESSES CONCERN OVER CORRUPTION/DEATH THREATS 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
2. (C) Cardinal Rodriguez expressed significant concern that 
drug-related corruption had penetrated the highest levels of 
the Congress and the Public Ministry in a June 20 meeting 
with the Ambassador.  He provided the Ambassador with a 
confidential document from an informant, outlining 
 
SIPDIS 
allegations of corruption within the Public Ministry.  (Note: 
Embassy had previously received this document from another 
source.)  The Cardinal believes the culture of corruption and 
impunity in Honduras to be so pervasive that he was planning 
to resign from his position as Chair of the CNA. 
Additionally, the Cardinal relayed that threats to his life 
have continued in recent weeks. He has accepted an offer from 
the Ministry of Public Security for a single police officer 
to serve as a security detail during his public appearances 
only.  The Ambassador urged the Cardinal not to resign and to 
continue his vigilance in fighting corruption. 
 
3. (C) During a March discussion with the Ambassador, 
Cardinal Rodriguez privately confided that he had received a 
recent death threat that merited concern (ref A).  Though 
Post has been unable to assess the credibility of the 
gatekeeper\'s kidnapping story, the Cardinal interpreted the 
kidnapping to represent an escalation in the seriousness of 
threats to his life.  The Cardinal indicated to the 
Ambassador in March that the recent threats would not deter 
his anti-corruption campaign. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
ACCUSATIONS AGAINST PINEDA PONCE AND CALLEJAS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (C) According to May 20 press reports, Cardinal Oscar 
Andres Rodriguez Maradiaga, Archbishop of Tegucigalpa (who is 
also rumored to be a potential successor to Pope John Paul II 
(ref B)) raised questions during a meeting of the National 
Anti-Corruption Council (CNA) that a corrupt political 
arrangement may have been negotiated between Liberal Party 
President Rafael Pineda Ponce, the former president of 
Congress who ran unsuccessfully against Ricardo Maduro for 
president in 2001, and former Honduran President Rafael 
Leonardo Callejas (1990-94), a Nationalist.  According to the 
Cardinal, who described his sources as \"faithful,\" Callejas 
influenced Nationalist Party judges on the Supreme Court to 
dismiss the case against the son-in-law of Pineda Ponce, 
Jorge Adolfo Chavez Hernandez, a former member of Battalion 
3-16, who has been accused of masterminding the 1998 murder 
of environmentalist and Catacamas (in the Department of 
Olancho) town councilman, Carlos Antonio Luna Lopez.  The 
Cardinal suggested that, in exchange, Pineda Ponce influenced 
Liberal Supreme Court judges to dismiss seven pending 
corruption cases against Callejas.  The Cardinal\'s 
accusations call into question the legality of both 
politicians\' actions as well as the credibility and 
transparency of the Supreme Court.  These press reports were 
confirmed by German Espinal, the Executive Director of the 
CNA. 
 
5. (U) (Note:  As stated in the Human Rights Report, in May 
and July 2002, police arrested Chavez and Jose Angel Rosa in 
the 1998 murder of Luna.  The arrests occurred after both the 
prosecuting attorney and judge in the case received death 
threats.  In May 2002 the local judge resigned from the court 
because of these death threats.  Former security official 
Jose Marcos Hernandez Hernandez and two other suspects still 
remain at large and one other suspect in the murder, Oscar 
Aurelio \"Machetillo\" Rodriguez Molina, remains in prison. 
End Note.) 
 
------------------------ 
REACTIONS OF THE ACCUSED 
------------------------ 
 
6. (C) On June 18, after weeks of avoiding a direct 
confrontation with the Cardinal, Pineda Ponce publicly 
challenged the Cardinal to present his evidence to a court. 
In a letter sent to Attorney General Roy Medina, Pineda Ponce 
urged Medina to require the Cardinal to present his 
information regarding the supposed political arrangement 
between Pineda Ponce and Callejas.  The same week, Chavez 
claimed his innocence in Luna\'s killing and accused the 
Cardinal of lashing out at Honduran politicians as part of a 
strategy for winning the papacy.  Callejas has not responded 
publicly to the Cardinal\'s allegations but noted his deep 
respect for the Cardinal as a moral leader.  The Cardinal has 
declined to comment on Pineda Ponce\'s challenge.  Espinal 
told EmbOffs that the Cardinal would present his testimony 
and evidence to the Attorney General\'s Office on June 26 
during a sworn deposition. 
 
 
--------------------------------------- 
THE CARDINAL\'S ANTI-CORRUPTION CAMPAIGN 
--------------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) As chair of the CNA, Cardinal Rodriguez is leading a 
campaign to implement a 20-year national anti-corruption 
strategy (refs C and D).  President Ricardo Maduro 
(Nationalist Party) ratified and endorses the work of the 
CNA, which receives funding from the World Bank, the 
Inter-American Development Bank, the United Nations 
Development Programs, as well as from several bilateral 
donors, such as USAID.  Last year, the Cardinal called for 
the creation of an international court to try corruption 
cases and to channel confiscated funds back into developing 
countries.  The Cardinal has urged Hondurans to acknowledge 
the depths of the corruption problem and to support an 
anti-corruption strategy buttressed by political will. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
CARDINAL CLAIMS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES APATHETIC 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) In a private meeting with the Ambassador in March, 
the Cardinal also expressed his desire that the international 
community employ stricter conditionalities on developing 
countries as a deterrent to corruption.  During the week of 
June 7, the Cardinal publicly charged developed countries 
apathetic toward what he considers to be an exorbitant debt 
burden and crushing interest rates in developing countries. 
The Cardinal deemed a lack of political will, and not a lack 
of funds, to be the chief impediment to resolving the debt 
problem in developing countries.  In particular, the Cardinal 
cited the multi-billion dollar commitment of developed 
nations to wage war in Iraq as an example of the availability 
of funds and political will to employ them. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
INFLUENCE OF CARDINAL GIVES COMMENTS ADDED WEIGHT 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
9.  (C) Comment:  Even though the details surrounding the 
Cardinal\'s statements on Pineda Ponce and Callejas have yet 
to be revealed, both the Honduran media and the public at 
large have embraced the story as truth.  Meanwhile, Pineda 
Ponce\'s response to the Cardinal represents a bold and risky 
political maneuver.  That Pineda Ponce chose to directly 
address the alleged criticisms speaks to the perceived power 
of the Cardinal\'s rhetoric to sting high profile figures.  A 
recent public survey rated Cardinal Rodriguez the third most 
powerful figure in Honduras, behind President Maduro and the 
Ambassador.  Meanwhile, this unfolding drama appears to have 
given voice to a Honduran public frustrated by rampant 
corruption and impunity.  It has also sparked a vigorous 
debate in the media about corruption in all major public 
institutions, especially the Attorney General\'s Office and 
the police.  Given the threats to the Cardinal\'s life, his 
high political profile within Honduras and possible candidacy 
for the papacy, both the allegations of pervasive 
narco-corruption and concerns over the Cardinal\'s physical 
security merit careful monitoring.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"9115","7/1/2003 19:54","03TEGUCIGALPA1542","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001542 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, AND WHA/CEN 
EMBASSIES FOR PAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PREL, MOPS, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTIONS ON DAN FISK\'S OP-ED, JUNE 30, 2003 
 
1. Op-ed by Rodolfo Pastor Fasquelle (former Minister of Culture 
in a Liberal Party administration) in San Pedro Sula-based 
liberal daily \"Tiempo\" (owned by former and future Liberal Party 
presidential candidate Jaime Rosenthal) on 6/30 entitled 
\"Honduras and the U.S.: Stick and Carrot II\".  \"I believe the 
U.S. has the right to ask us to help them improve their security, 
if they actually help us solve our most urgent problems.\" 
 
\"Mr. Fisk inappropriately uses the words `us\' and `we\' as if he 
was part of the collectivity he is referring to.  I find this 
condescending.\" 
 
\"U.S. policy doesn\'t have to be the best according to our 
interests, it is just what it is.  We need to go further, rebuild 
the Central American state, which will increase our chances to 
effectively face criminal governments dominated by a militarist 
and corrupt elite.  Only when we have a united Central American 
state we can sit down with Mr. Under-secretary to tell him that 
economic integration can go on.\" 
 
\"I agree with Mr. Fisk that it is key to dispose of any surplus 
personnel within our armies and all secret arsenals, even though 
it is paradoxical that this comes from the government that 
formed, trained and armed our armed forces. the most evident 
threat for Central America is not any terrorist organization, it 
is our hunger and structural hopelessness.\" 
 
\" I\'m delighted that the U.S. wants to support the political 
reforms we urgently need and I don\'t disagree with their 
prescription: demilitarization, training, coordination and 
reequipping police personnel to face the new challenges, among 
them fighting against corruption.\" 
 
2. Op-ed by Edgardo Dumas Rodriguez (former Minister of Security 
in a Liberal Party administration) in Tegucigalpa-based liberal 
daily \"La Tribuna\" on 6/30 entitled \"The military\'s raison 
d\'etre\". \" Definitely, Mr. Fisk describes an innovative vision of 
what our American friends think of how the Central American 
militaries should be constituted.\" 
 
\"Undoubtedly, we have made efforts whose results are obvious. 
It\'s up to us to decide if we are pleased and satisfied with 
them, or, if on the other hand. it\'s urgent to take the 
appropriate steps to overcome this crisis, to ensure auspicious 
and peaceful expectations by having security forces such as those 
proposed by Mr. Fisk.\" 
 
\"Finally, it\'s worthwhile reminding ourselves that the U.S. has 
always helped us to shape our armed forces.  Will they be willing 
to help us prepare the armed forces we need now?\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9119","7/1/2003 23:11","03TEGUCIGALPA1548","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02TEGUCIGALPA1861|02TEGUCIGALPA3276","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, EB, WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
USDA FOR FAS 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EAGR, EINV, ETRD, PHUM, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: LABOR/MANAGEMENT RELATIONS EXCELLENT AT STANDARD 
FRUIT (DOLE) IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 3276 
     B. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 1861 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Standard Fruit (Dole) and its union 
maintain good relations, with both sides saying that the two 
have worked closely together since Hurricane Mitch in 1998. 
In fact, Dole has announced an expansion of its investment in 
Honduras.  While the union has declined in numbers and 
strength, it remains a key player in Honduran labor, and is 
the base of the important FESITRANH federation which in turn 
controls the CTH confederation.  It is ironic that Standard 
Fruit, long criticized for its actions in this former \"banana 
republic,\" now is an excellent example of harmonious 
labor/management relations and the benefits foreign 
investment can bring to Honduras when both sides bring a 
constructive attitude to the table.  End Summary. 
 
Dole Management: No Problems with Labor Unions 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2. (U) Ambassador, Econ Counselor, AID Director, and LabAtt 
met with Gerald Brunelle, General Manager, and other top 
officials Dole\'s Honduran subsidiary Standard Fruit of 
Honduras and toured Dole\'s pineapple plantations, processing 
plants, and laboratories in La Ceiba May 15.  Dole officials 
said the Maya Division, which includes both Honduras and 
Guatemala, employed 5,500 workers who belonged to five 
different unions (the main union being SUTRASFCO).  Dole had 
approximately 769 salaried personnel and also contracted with 
independent producers.  Dole\'s Maya Division produces 10 
million boxes of bananas per year and independent banana 
producers 4-5 million boxes per year for Dole.  Dole also 
produces four million boxes of pineapples per year. 
Pineapple workers were mainly contract labor (in the past 
they had been unionized).  Dole recently announced an 
important expansion of investment in Honduras. 
 
3. (U) Dole officials said the company had excellent 
relations with its unions, especially SUTRASFCO, and noted 
that Hurricane Mitch had brought management and labor closer 
and had led to improved productivity at the company. 
Unionized workers receive some of the best pay and benefits 
for workers in Honduras (housing, medical care, etc.); 
non-unionized pineapple workers made considerably less (some 
only approximately USD 1/day). 
 
Labor Union Praises Dole and Calls for More Investment 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
4. (U) LabAtt met May 15 with the main Standard Fruit Company 
Workers\' Union (SUTRASFCO), led by President Carlos Lopez. 
SUTRASFCO is a key union in the Federation of Workers\' Unions 
of Honduras (FESITRANH), the base of power for Confederation 
of Workers of Honduras (CTH) Secretary General Dinora 
Aceituno.  (Note:  The CTH is one of three Honduran labor 
confederations and is affiliated with the International 
Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU).  End Note.) 
SUTRASFCO leadership confirmed that the union had had good 
relations with Dole ever since Hurricane Mitch in 1998, with 
the two sides working together to improve the company and 
labor/management relations.  The union, which has an upcoming 
election, is currently negotiating a new three-year 
collective bargaining agreement.  The contract will cover 
1,300 permanent workers, and for the first time will cover 
some temporary workers.  Like Chiquita\'s union (ref A), 
Dole\'s union leaders bemoaned the slow but steady decline in 
jobs at Dole, which in turn led to the relative decline of 
the union.  From 18,000 members in 1954 to 5,000 workers in 
1975 (when the railroad and the port in La Ceiba were 
nationalized), the union continued to decline, and lost 550 
jobs after the devastation of Hurricane Mitch. 
 
5. (U) While there are of course minor problems, union 
officials said they had no major problems with Dole.  The 
major problem was a lack of any other job opportunities in 
the La Ceiba area besides Dole.  With only a couple of 
maquilas in the area, union officials gave an impassioned 
pitch for increased private investment. 
 
Pesticide Court Case Continues to Block Settlement 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6. (U) Over the past two presidential administrations, the 
GOH has been coordinating tripartite negotiations for an out 
of court settlement of workers and ex-workers affected by 
DibromoChoropropane, or Nemagon, a pesticide used on Dole 
banana plantations in the 1960s and 1970s (ref B).  In a 1997 
judgment against Shell Oil Company, Dow Chemical, and 
Occidental Chemical Corporation, a U.S. court charged Nemagon 
producers USD 41.5 million for damages due to sterility of a 
few hundred Honduran workers, and another 25,000 workers in 
11 countries worldwide.  Most of the Honduran plaintiffs have 
already received payments as a result of this settlement. 
However, a larger number of Honduran workers suffering a 
wider array of claimed side-effects have been clamoring for 
some form of workers\' compensation from Dole.  A class action 
suit against Dole remains in the U.S. courts and has impeded 
any national resolution.  Despite efforts by a 
government-sponsored commission of management, labor, and 
government officials from the Ministries of Justice, Labor, 
and Health, and a desire by Dole to settle the lawsuit, the 
class action suit in U.S. courts has yet to be dropped by the 
workers.  This has impeded Dole from proceeding with an out 
of court settlement in Honduras.  SUTRASFCO officials said 
they understood Dole\'s position and hoped that a settlement 
could be reached. 
 
Standard Fruit a Positive Example 
--------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Comment.  It is somewhat ironic that it Standard 
Fruit, long criticized for its actions in this former \"banana 
republic,\" is now an excellent example of harmonious 
labor/management relations and the benefits foreign 
investment can bring to Honduras when both sides bring a 
constructive attitude to the table.  Not unique in their 
devastation from Hurricane Mitch, Dole and Chiquita both have 
invested to rebuild their Honduran operations in contrast to 
several Honduran banana companies that did not.  If workers 
drop their U.S. lawsuit, an out of court settlement of the 
pesticide case would then solve the only outstanding labor 
issue.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"9120","7/1/2003 23:13","03TEGUCIGALPA1549","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA606|03TEGUCIGALPA652","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, PM, EB, OES, AND L 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, PGOV, MOPS, ECON, EFIS, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: ONGOING MARITIME DISPUTE BETWEEN HONDURAS AND 
NICARAGUA MAY BE ON THE PATH TO RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 652 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 606 
 
1. (U) Nicaraguan and Honduran military authorities recently 
deemed ongoing territorial disputes between the two nations 
in the process of resolution, according to press reports. 
Nicaraguan GEN Javier Carrion articulated his commitment to 
resolving maritime disputes peacefully, as well as to 
fostering a constructive means of communicating disagreements 
between both countries.  In response, head of the Honduran 
armed forces, GEN Jose Barahona, affirmed that relations have 
improved in the region, due in part to the recent commitment 
of Central American countries to resolving maritime and land 
disputes through instruments of international mediation. 
 
2.  (U) The maritime disagreement between both countries 
stems from controversy over competing claims to maritime 
territory and their exclusive economic zones in the 
countries\' Pacific and Caribbean coasts.  One flash point is 
fishing rights.  Nicaragua has alleged that Hondurans have 
been illegally fishing in the Gulf of Fonseca, whose waters 
are shared by Nicaragua, Honduras and El Salvador. 
Diplomatic tensions came to a head in November 1999 when 
Honduras signed an agreement with Colombia in the Caribbean 
which Nicaraguan authorities claimed led to the usurping of 
130,000 square km of Nicaraguan maritime territory.  In 
response, Nicaragua imposed a 35 percent tariff on 
Honduran-made products and sued Honduras in the International 
Court of Justice.  Nicaragua finally revoked its retaliatory 
tariff on Honduran products in March of this year. 
 
3.  (U) General Carrion recently announced that Nicaragua 
would await the International Court of Justice\'s decision on 
the Caribbean maritime border dispute, expected in 2004. 
Likewise, General Barahona articulated his support for the 
process and his hope that international mediation would 
foster closer relations between the Central American 
countries. 
 
4.  (SBU) Comment:  The good news here is that there is an 
obvious channel of communication between the two military 
chiefs.  However, many members of the Honduran armed forces 
remain deeply suspicious of Nicaraguan intentions.  In 
addition, GEN Carrion\'s public commentary also highlights the 
need for a clearer delineation of maritime borders in the 
Gulf of Fonseca through the use of buoys.  Despite his 
positive stance, GEN Carrion warned that Honduran and El 
Salvadoran fishermen who crossed illegally into Nicaraguan 
waters would be detained.  Honduran officials tell EmbOffs 
that this is exactly the kind of Nicaraguan enforcement 
action in the gulf that normally exacerbates tensions.  End 
Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"9142","7/2/2003 16:39","03TEGUCIGALPA1559","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001559 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB, PM, INL, S/CT, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/02/2013 
TAGS: PTER, SNAR, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, ELAB, EAGR, EWWT, HO 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY HIGHLIGHTS INADEQUATE PORT SECURITY AT 
PUERTO CORTES; GOH FINALLY ADDRESSING ISSUE 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  On June 14, 2003, Honduras Desk Officer and 
PolOff met with Puerto Cortes Superintendent Antonio Cruz to 
discuss the problematic security situation at the port. 
Puerto Cortes is both the largest port in Honduras and on the 
Caribbean coast of Central America.  Port officials 
acknowledged the lack of security and cited insufficient 
resources as the major impediment to compliance with the new 
U.S. Maritime Transportation Security Act, which requires 
ports exporting cargo to the U.S. to meet specific security 
standards and International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
regulations.  Current security procedures at the port are 
virtually non-existent.  During the meeting and a subsequent 
impromptu press conference, DeskOff underscored the 
importance of complying with new U.S. security regulations 
and emphasized that the onus is on Hondurans to make the 
necessary changes.  Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza 
has designated Presidential Advisor Mauro Membreno as the GOH 
point person on this issue.  END SUMMARY. 
 
DeskOff/PolOff Meet with Puerto Cortes Superintendent 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2.  (C)  On June 14, 2003, WHA/CEN Desk Officer for Honduras 
and PolOff met with Puerto Cortes Superintendent Antonio Cruz 
and Vice Manager Fermin Boquin to discuss the problematic 
security situation at the port.  Port officials acknowledged 
the lack of security and cited insufficient resources as the 
major impediment to compliance with the new U.S. Maritime 
Transportation Security Act, which requires ports exporting 
cargo to the U.S. to meet specific security standards and IMO 
regulations.  More worrisome, current security procedures at 
the port are virtually non-existent.  During the meeting and 
subsequent impromptu press conference, DeskOff underscored 
the importance of complying with new U.S. security 
regulations and emphasized that the onus is on Hondurans to 
make the necessary changes. U.S.-donated counternarcotics 
canines, costing USD 35,000 apiece, are not currently being 
used to inspect outbound cargoes, and port managers were 
unable to enumerate in detail the specific procedures for 
inspecting containers.  A Power Point presentation delivered 
by port officials offered a laundry list of resources needed 
for compliance, implying that the U.S. should fund these 
requests.  When asked whether the U.S. was planning to fund 
the security modifications, DeskOff indicated that the U.S. 
would offer support of some kind but that the nature of the 
support had not yet been determined. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Puerto Cortes is both the largest port in Honduras 
and on the Caribbean coast of Central America.  It provides 
port services to companies from Guatemala, El Salvador and 
Nicaragua, while serving as a distribution and manufacturing 
site for the surrounding agricultural regions from which over 
1,800,000 containers on more than 1,700 ships were 
transported in 2002.  Puerto Cortes can dock up to ten 
vessels at once.  More than 1,000 ships travel from Puerto 
Cortes to the U.S. annually, and many others travel to 
Europe, Africa and South America.  Puerto Cortes yielded 
revenues of approximately USD 81.4 million in 2002. 
 
GOH Expresses Concern over Inadequate Port Security 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
4.  (SBU)  The unacceptable port security situation in Puerto 
Cortes finally captured the attention of the most senior 
levels of the Maduro government in late May.  Minister of the 
Presidency Luis Cosenza met with EmbOffs to ask for U.S. 
assistance in addressing the problem.  His request came in 
the wake of a sobering preliminary assessment (which included 
an estimated USD 1-3 million price tag for the minimum 
security improvements to meet the new legal requirements) 
from a private U.S. port security consultant who works with 
the International Maritime Organization.  Cosenza\'s request 
and designation of Presidential Advisor Mauro Membreno as the 
GOH point person on this issue are encouraging signs that the 
GOH is finally going to treat this issue as high priority. 
 
GOH Slow to Act But Headed in Right Direction 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (C)  Comment:  Cosenza and Membreno\'s willingness to take 
control of the issue is a very welcome sign of the serious 
political will needed to tackle this difficult issue. 
Membreno\'s reputation as a highly capable and well-connected 
political fixer renders him a good choice for the position. 
At the same time, Membreno is regarded as a charter member of 
the dark side of the Nationalist Party.  He will need those 
credentials in order to tackle vested interests within his 
own party, such as Vice President Diaz Lobo, and the port 
labor union if the GOH is to make the necessary changes for 
Puerto Cortes to be certified under the new U.S. Maritime 
Transportation Security Act.  The GOH finally seems to 
understand that fixing the port\'s security is not as simple 
as getting U.S. Customs to open an office at Puerto Cortes. 
This is critical since the new U.S. law will impose a 
complete shutoff of shipping to the U.S. from any port that 
is not certified by July 1, 2004.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"9172","7/3/2003 15:41","03TEGUCIGALPA1580","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03Tegucigalpa1487","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, EB/TPP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR DCHA/DG, EGAT, AND LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, ECON, EINV, PGOV, PREL, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT:  Minister of Labor Looking to Create Temporary 
Worker Program in Honduras Without Changing Labor Code 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 1487 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Minister of Labor German Leitzelar has 
proposed a three-year program that seeks to create almost 
132,000 \"temporary\" jobs in Honduras.  By doing so, 
Leitzelar is seeking to achieve incremental changes in the 
labor situation without confronting head-on the 
politically difficult issue of reforming the Labor Code. 
Businesses back his plan but unions, which at first 
supported the idea, have withdrawn their support delaying 
the planned request for congressional approval.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  (U) Minister of Labor German Leitzelar is seeking to 
achieve incremental changes in the labor situation without 
confronting head-on the politically difficult issue of 
reforming the Labor Code (reftel).  The Ministry of Labor 
(MOL) has already successfully modified Articles 43-45 of 
the labor law to make more flexible the law covering 
Hondurans working overseas.  The MOL is now planning a 
temporary worker program in Honduras named \"New Jobs for 
the People.\" 
 
3. (U) The idea of the program is to encourage the private 
sector to create additional jobs by carving out a three- 
year program for \"temporary workers\" in Honduras without 
having to amend the labor code.  In addition to creating 
new jobs, something desperately needed in a country with 
35 percent unemployment and widespread underemployment, 
the MOL hopes to combat the trend of the increasing shift 
to the informal sector (52 percent of the economically 
active workforce and seven out of every 10 new jobs, 
according to Minister Leitzelar).  Leitzelar also hopes to 
create jobs for young adults, citing the lack of jobs as a 
main factor in the growth of gangs.  The program seeks to 
create almost 132,000 temporary jobs over the course of 
three years. 
 
4. (U) Under the ambitious plan, employers: 
-- would not be allowed to fire existing workers to 
replace them with temporary workers, 
-- of businesses with 16 or more employees would not be 
able to have more than 30 percent of their workforce be 
temporary employees (however, new small businesses - 1-15 
workers - could be made up entirely of temporary workers), 
-- must pay workers at least the appropriate minimum wage 
(depending on the industry) and more if skilled labor can 
negotiate a higher wage, and some, but not all, bonuses 
and benefits usually required by law, 
-- must register with the MOL to inscribe their workers in 
the public health system and pay a fee of 10 lempiras (USD 
.58) per employee, and 
-- must provide training/education to these new workers. 
 
5. (U) According to a USAID consultant who has worked with 
the MOL on this and other projects, Honduras has one of 
the highest benefits costs for employees (65 percent of 
men\'s wages and 88 percent of women\'s wages).  Employers 
argue that these high benefit costs are a disincentive to 
the creation of new jobs and new businesses.  The 
advantage to the employer of the temporary worker program 
is that by not having to pay several bonuses/benefits 
(educational bonus, paid vacation, 13th and 14th month 
bonuses, contributions toward severance pay) that a 
permanent worker must receive, employers would pay 20 
percent less in benefit costs to temporary workers.  This 
in turn makes it more attractive for employers to create 
new jobs. 
 
6. (U) Funds generated from fee collection would be split 
among the three labor confederations (30 percent per 
confederation) and an unemployed workers organization (10 
percent).  The USAID consultant told EmbOffs that the MOL 
has requested USD 150,000 from the Ministry of Finance for 
administering this program, something that might be paid 
for by the World Bank. 
 
7. (SBU) Minister Leitzelar initially had the support not 
only from the private sector, but also from the three 
labor confederations (CGT, CTH, and CUTH), perhaps due to 
the fact that the labor unions would benefit from the fee. 
However, LabAtt has recently learned from Vice Minister of 
Labor Angel Escobar that the labor confederations have 
withdrawn their support, fearing the program threatens 
traditional jobs and benefits.  Escobar said that the 
program might have to be scaled back in size to recoup 
labor support.  Pending this possible adjustment, the GOH 
has delayed submitting the program to Congress for 
approval. 
 
8. (SBU) Comment:  Since long-term structural changes in 
the labor code are not politically possible in the short 
term, Minister Leitzelar is seeking to make changes on the 
margin and effectively enact incremental reform.  However, 
unlike the non-controversial changes in the law covering 
Hondurans working overseas, the temporary workers idea has 
proven to be somewhat difficult.  If Leitzelar can come to 
an agreement with the union confederations the passage of 
the program is almost assured in congress; without such a 
deal the plan may be dead.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"9173","7/3/2003 16:18","03TEGUCIGALPA1581","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 001581 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/ESPC, DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
TREASURY FOR C. KUSHLIS 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/02/2013 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, HO, EAGER 
SUBJECT: IMF PROGRAM APPEARS IN REACH IF/IF GOH ADOPTS 
CIVIL SERVICE REFORM;  IS USG PUSH POSSIBLE? 
 
REF: A. (A) TEGUZ 865 
     B. (B) TEGUZ 1141 
     C. (C) TEGUZ 494 
     D. (D) TEGUZ 10 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR L. PALMER FOR REASONS 1.5(B) AND (D) 
 
-------------------------- 
Summary and Action Request 
-------------------------- 
 
1. (C) For its entire year and a half in office, the Maduro 
administration has struggled to reach agreement with the 
IMF on a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) 
program that will put Honduras back on a growth track and 
allow badly-needed permanent debt relief to resume.   With 
the April adoption of a second tax package that should 
increase tax receipts by USD 300 million annually, the GOH 
made a major step toward an IMF agreement.  World Bank and 
IDB approval of projects to strengthen the Honduran banking 
system is another important milestone.  In the context of 
work on the banking sector, the GOH has issued a long 
analytical report on the new agricultural credit program 
laying out a persuasive case that the law limits and 
rationalizes (rather than expands) subsidies provided for 
agricultural financing.  The most important requirement now 
for an IMF program is enactment of a Civil Service 
Framework Law that will put a brake on the unsustainable 
growth in the central government\'s wage bill.  The IMF 
 
is urging measures that, as part of the creation of a 
professional civil service, would fold in the public sector 
teachers and medical workers into a single civil service 
pay structure.   However, President Ricardo Maduro and his 
top political advisors fear that change to the special 
statutes governing teacher and doctor compensation will 
provoke a strong, adverse political reaction; the President 
has not yet approved the submission of the bill to Congress 
(where it would indeed face a stiff fight).  In the 
meantime, Honduras\' failure to reach an IMF agreement has 
ended the technical deferral of Paris Club debt service 
payments, once again putting overdue loan payments to the 
U.S. into active status.  In late June, ExIm Bank took 
Honduras off-cover for public sector loans.  Lack of 
payment on overdue U.S. Department of Defense Loans in mid 
July and early September could trigger Brooke Amendment 
sanctions.  However, the GOH is not at liberty to pay only 
one official creditor under Paris Club rules. 
 
2. (C) Action Request: Maduro badly needs reassurance that 
(1) the civil service reforms (and the ensuing political 
fight) are indispensable, (2) the international community 
will support him if he does take this move, and (3) that an 
IMF agreement would likely be forthcoming quickly after 
passage of the law even if all IMF targets for reduction of 
the public sector wage bill are not completely met.  Given 
the importance of reaching an IMF agreement this summer, 
the critical nature of this long-awaited structural reform 
and the advances made in other areas, Post recommends a 
full court press by the Embassy and Washington agencies to 
provide this reassurance and urge that the Civil Service 
Framework Law (and the related elimination of the 
compensation provisions in the teachers and medical workers 
laws) be introduced to Congress immediately.  End Summary 
and Action Request. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Projections Show that Second Tax Bill Will Deliver Promised 
Revenue Increases 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
3. (C) As reported in ref A, on April 2, the Honduran 
Congress adopted a second fiscal package (the first was 
adopted in May 2002) designed to broaden the tax base, help 
reduce chronic budget deficits and move the government on 
the road to an IMF agreement.  Congress modified some 
politically difficult provisions in the government-proposal 
but increased taxes on tobacco and alcohol in order to 
replace the foregone income.  The target had been an annual 
increase of 3.5 billion lempiras (USD 202 million) - of 
which about 2 billion lempiras (USD 116 million) would be 
collected in the remaining months of 2003, but at the time 
of passage IMF staff were skeptical that these targets 
would be met by the revised bill. 
 
4. (C) Current GOH projections show that in fact the second 
tax bill should almost exactly meet its targets.  Tax 
revenue in 2003 is projected to rise from the baseline 
level of USD 1.1 billion (16. 0 percent of GDP) to the 
current 2003 projection of USD 1.23 billion  (17.5 percent 
of GDP) and then to USD 1.43 billion in 2004 (18.6 percent 
of GDP). 
 
5. (C) Combined with earlier austerity measures taken in 
2002 and 2003, the tax reforms should bring the central 
government\'s fiscal deficit down from 5.6 percent in 2002 
to an estimated 3.5 percent of GDP in 2003, as predicted. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Civil Service Law and Modification of Estatutos Still Key 
Sticking Point 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
6. (C) The most problematic issue remains: getting public 
sector wages under control.  The IMF mission has emphasized 
repeatedly the importance of enactment of a new civil 
service framework law that will provide the GOH with 
control over wage policy for all central government workers 
by superseding the salary provisions in the 
profession-specific laws (called estatutos) that were 
adopted in the mid-1980s.  The Fund has also urged the GOH 
to reduce the central government wage bill from 10.7 
percent to 10.1 percent of GDP in 2003 and reduce the wage 
bill of the entire public sector by one percent of GDP 
annually in 2004 and 2005. 
 
7. (C) Enactment of civil service reform was a key 
(unfulfilled) condition in the previous three-year PRGF 
agreement with the IMF, and has taken center stage in the 
negotiations that have been going on between the Fund and 
the GOH since early 2002.   Under the current regime, 
doctors and teachers have received high salary increases 
each year while non-unionized public sector workers have 
seen their salaries frozen.  The salary provisions in the 
teacher \"estatuto\" are particularly complex, with the 
various provisions on salary and benefits resulting in 
compensation increases at rates far above inflation.  This 
issue took on added saliency in July 2002 when the GOH 
reached an agreement with the majority of teachers to 
provide a 44 percent salary increase over four years 
(2002-2005), without affecting the concomitant increase in 
the benefits (called colaterales).   Among other aspects 
that rankled the IMF staff to no end, this agreement 
provided the teachers with two separate wage increases in 
2005. 
 
8. (C) As seen in previous Embassy reporting, the Maduro 
Administration has been promising to introduce the civil 
service bill for many months, but kept breaking that 
promise.  Behind the scenes, an intense debate was 
occurring over the extent to which teacher, doctor and 
nurse compensation would be covered by the new civil 
service rules.  The GOH wanted to include only the basic 
salary, while the IMF was adamant that all salary and 
benefits provisions in the \"estatutos\" would need to be 
eliminated if the law was to have its intended effect of 
reining in the growth of the wage bill.  The Fund staff 
also pushed for elimination of one of the scheduled teacher 
raises in 2005.  At the same time, the GOH was negotiating 
with the doctors to accept the revised pay structure. 
Although doctor and nurse salaries comprise only a small 
percentage of the government wage bill, their salary 
demands are so obviously out of line with regional norms 
that the GOH hoped they could be pressured (or shamed) into 
an agreement.  This strategy was not successful and the GOH has 
suspended negotiations for now. 
 
9. (C) Post understands that the IMF and the Finance 
Ministry have now worked out language for the Civil Service 
law that would eliminate all salary provisions in the 
teacher and medical worker statutes except for the hardship 
locality differential (called the zonaje) and the June and 
Christmas bonuses.  Teachers would be covered by the new 
law starting in June 2005 (allowing the government to avoid 
that second pay increase for 2005).  The law would call for 
establishment of civil service grades and pay scales within 
six months of enactment of the law.  Those government 
employees whose current salary exceeds the pay scale of 
their new civil service grade would forego future raises 
until such time as their salary was no longer above the 
cap. 
 
10. (C) This formulation for teacher compensation will be 
politically difficult to sell, but at least allows the 
government to avoid reducing any teacher salaries below 
their current level (almost inconceivable in the Honduran 
political climate).  The flip side is that maintenance of 
current teacher salary levels means that the government 
would have no room to provide any increases for other 
government workers in 2004.  This could mean a third year 
of a wage freeze for these other public sector workers, an 
unpalatable but probably necessary result of the current 
fiscal situation.  Low public sector salaries are one 
important cause of corruption and incompetence in GOH 
agencies. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
The Financial Sector and the Agricultural  Credits Law 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
11. (C) In its Article IV review of Honduras, the IMF Board 
noted the importance of addressing the extreme fragility of 
the Honduran financial system.  In late June 2003, the 
World Bank adopted an USD 11 million loan to address the 
weaknesses identified in the recently concluded Financial 
Sector review (FSAP).   Comment:  This push to analyze and 
address the deep problems in the financial sector is a GOH 
initiative (specifically by the current Banking and 
Insurance Commission President Ana Cristina de Pereira). 
It is a complicated task, and the difficulty of the task 
should not be underestimated.  But, the Maduro 
administration is making a far more serious attempt than 
any previous Honduran government.  End Comment. 
 
12. (C) The GOH appears to have been sincerely puzzled and 
shocked by the controversy generated in the IMF and USG 
over the adoption of Decree 68-2003, which consolidated the 
agricultural loans, interest rate subsidies, amnesties and 
other measures in three previous laws adopted by Congress 
during 2000-2002.  The government believes that the new law 
actually lowers the cost of its assistance to the 
agriculture sector substantially and limits its exposure. 
As previously promised, the Ministry of Finance and the 
Banking and Insurance Commission have developed a 32-page 
analysis of the four laws and their implications for 
government finances.  During the week of June 23, this 
analysis was sent to the IMF along with a computer disk 
containing the names of all the beneficiaries.  A copy of 
the paper, written in Spanish, is being faxed to State 
(WHA/CEN/Brett Makens) and Treasury; a fuller summary will 
be provided septel. 
 
13. (C) The previous three laws, adopted starting in 2000, 
were motivated by a wish to help farmers and the banks to 
overcome the financial losses suffered during and in the 
aftermath of Hurricane Mitch in late 1998 and the ensuing 
stagnation in the sector.   According to the GOH report, 
the measures provided interest rate subsidies for loans 
totaling USD 252 million, loan forgiveness of USD 39.6 
million, financed by bonds, and commitments to extend these 
benefits to an additional USD 83 million worth of loans. 
The previous decrees also authorized automatic guarantees 
for ag loans (50-70 percent) that represented an additional 
contingent obligation for the government, estimated at USD 
144.5 million. 
 
14. (C) Decree 68-2003 was developed to consolidate the 
committed fiscal resources into one mechanism, in order to 
rationalize the credit programs, avoid additional 
contingent liabilities, relieve pressure on the banks with 
large outstanding agricultural portfolios and encourage the 
provision of new loans to the Honduran ag sector. 
Delinquency in loan repayment and other high risk factors 
have resulted in a rapid contraction of agricultural 
lending by the Honduran financial system.  The GOH report 
notes that new agriculture loans accounted for 8.3 percent 
of bank lending in 1999 and only 4.1 percent in 2002. 
 
15. (C) The IMF staff working on the Honduran program 
reacted strongly and adversely in April to the news of 
Decree 68-2003, terming it a new subsidy program that 
benefited large, politically influential landowners that 
would have an immediate negative impact on government 
finances and the IMF program under negotiation.   The GOH 
report is an attempt to demonstrate that this program is 
not at all new and that the costs are actually lower than 
would be the case under the previous system.  The 
beneficiaries are limited to those individuals who already 
were entitled under the previous three decrees.  Note: A 
modification made by Congress in April to the bill would 
have made the benefits available to additional (unlimited) 
beneficiaries now and in the future; Econoffs heard in May 
from members of the Bankers\' Association that this news was 
resulting in widespread loan payment delinquency and new 
requests for debt forgiveness.  The government subsequently 
worked with the Congress to correct this issue in the final 
version of the law, before it was signed by the President 
and published.  End Note. 
 
16. (C) The tables below provide the government\'s estimates 
of the costs implicit in the earlier regime and the new 
one.   The cash cost of the various agricultural credit 
programs has been reduced slightly in nominal terms and 
significantly in present value terms. 
 
Financial Costs of Previous 
Scheme 
 
                       Nominal         Present Value 
                     -----------     ----------------- 
                    (USD million)      (USD million) 
 
Interest Subsidies         86                 65 
Interest on bonds          21                 13 
Transfers to BANADESA      33                 19 
Funding of FONGAC          28                 28 
Bond issue                 --                 17 
                       ------            ------- 
                          168                142 
 
Financial Costs of Current Scheme 
 
                       Nominal         Present Value 
                     -----------     ----------------- 
                    (USD million)      (USD million) 
 
Transfers to trust        98.0                 80.0 
Interest on bonds          9.6                  7.4 
Transfers to BANADESA     33.0                 19.6 
Funding of FONGAC         11.3                  -- 
Subsidies already paid    11.0                  -- 
                      --------             -------- 
                         162.9                107.0 
 
Note: The current exchange rate is 17.3 lempiras to the 
dollar. 
 
17.  (C) Why wasn\'t there better consultation with the IMF 
and USG?  The GOH explanation is that they did consult, but 
they really didn\'t see it as a new program with new fiscal 
costs.  The law was mentioned in passing by the Finance 
Minister to IMF Mission chief and IMF permanent rep early 
in the year.  Banking Commission President Ana Cristina 
Pereira indicates she had discussed it with members of the 
IMF-World Bank FSAP team, but the resident director of the 
World Bank program is not aware of these discussions (the 
FSAP included a large number of small teams working on 
different aspects of the financial sector).  President 
Maduro did not raise the issue during his meeting with US 
Treasury Secretary Snow, probably for the same reasons.  In 
response to complaints from Washington about the lack of 
consultation, the GOH is now doing its best to put as much 
information on the table as possible. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
The Implications for Debt Deferrals and Forgiveness 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
18.  (C) In the meantime, Honduras\' failure to reach an IMF 
agreement has ended the deferral of Paris Club debt service 
payments, once again putting overdue loan payments to the 
U.S. into active status.  In late June, ExIm Bank took 
Honduras off-cover for public sector loans.  The Embassy 
has informed the GOH that lack of payment on overdue 
Department of Defense Loans -- USD 12,187 in mid July 2003 
and USD 1,762,150 in early September 2003 -- could trigger 
Brooke Amendment sanctions.  Embassy also is exploring 
whether other overdue loans could trigger 620Q sanctions. 
The GOH is not at liberty to pay only one official creditor 
under Paris Club rules.  According to the GOH\'s accounts, 
outstanding debt service owed to the USG (Department of 
Defense, Eximbank and AID) totals USD 17.7 million   Of 
this amount, 8.1 million is over 6 months overdue and could 
trigger Brooke or 620Q sanctions. 
-------------------------------------- 
Can the USG Help Push This to A Close? 
-------------------------------------- 
 
19. (C) In candid conversations with the Ambassador and 
other USG officials, President Maduro and Minister of the 
Presidency Luis Cosenza (and their political advisors) have 
repeatedly emphasized (1) how difficult politically it 
would be to change the teacher and medical worker statutes 
and (2) how unfairly the IMF has treated the Maduro team, 
when the very policies that have caused the underlying 
fiscal problems were enacted by the two previous 
administrations without protest from the IMF at the time. 
For the last year and a half, while the macroeconomic team 
has conducted the difficult negotiations with the Fund, the 
top level of government has flailed around trying to get 
high-level donor pressure on the Fund to back down on some 
of its conditionality.  Many in the donor community 
(including members of the EU and international financial 
institutions) have expressed sympathy for the position. 
But none of these urgent requests for flexibility have 
helped soften the IMF position (recently confirmed during 
 
the Article IV consultations).  In addition, some have 
suggested that it might be best for the GOH to request a 
change in the IMF mission staff so that past differences of 
opinion do not continue to color future negotiations.  The 
GOH has asked the Embassy for its recommendations on this 
rather sensitive suggestion. 
 
20. (C) Comment: There is a lot of truth to the GOH claims 
that the underlying macroeconomic problems (such as the 
statutes, the web of special tax exemptions and the ag debt 
forgiveness programs, to name three) were inherited from 
previous administrations and that the IMF perhaps should 
have stood stronger against these policy lapses at the 
time.  However, the problems are real and, if left 
unaddressed, will continue to prevent the achievement of 
macroeconomic stability and growth.  President Maduro needs 
to get control over the public sector wage bill for the 
good of the country, as well as for the purposes of an IMF 
agreement.  Deep down, he knows this.  In addition to the 
harm caused to efforts to balance the budget and invest in 
the country\'s future, the statutes put the teachers and 
doctors in a privileged class of public servants, to the 
detriment of other public workers.  They must be changed at 
some point. 
 
21. (C) And, finally, the GOH has come a long way.  Post 
believes strongly that now is the time for the USG to give 
a little push.   Maduro badly needs reassurance from high 
level USG officials that (1) the IMF-suggested civil 
service reforms (and the ensuing political fight) are 
indispensable, (2) the international community will support 
him if he does take this move, and (3) that an IMF 
agreement would likely be forthcoming quickly after passage 
of the law even if all IMF targets for reduction of the 
public sector wage bill are not completely met.  Post seeks 
Washington agencies\' input and advice on whether this is 
appropriate and how best to achieve it.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"9217","7/8/2003 0:53","03TEGUCIGALPA1608","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA99","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001608 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR: L/LEI, DOJ/OIA 
FBI PLEASE PASS TO MIAMI LIAISON JUNIOR ORTIZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, CASC, HO (MORRIS ARNOLD FREDERICK) 
SUBJECT: EXTRADITION OF ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 00099 
 
1. SUMMARY: ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS HAS AN OUTSTANDING 
ARREST WARRANT IN THE U.S. FOR CONSPIRACY, ILLEGAL 
CONCEALMENT OF ASSETS, MAKING FRAUDULENT AND FALSE 
STATEMENTS, AND CONSPIRACY IN MONEY LAUNDERING. ON 
MARCH 18, 1992, MR. MORRIS OBTAINED HONDURAN 
CITIZENSHIP FRAUDULENTLY BY CONCEALING HIS U.S. 
CRIMINAL HISTORY, HOPING TO AVOID EXTRADITION, GIVEN 
THAT THE HONDURAN CONSTITUTION DOES NOT ALLOW 
EXTRADITION OF ITS NATIONALS. NEVERTHELESS, ON MARCH 
7, 1995, THE USG OFFICIALLY REQUESTED THE EXTRADITION 
OF ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS. ON AUGUST 16, 1996, 
HONDURAN SOLICITOR GENERAL REQUESTED REVOCATION OF 
MORRIS\' HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP. EVER SINCE, HIS CASE HAS 
BEEN APPEALED THROUGH THE HONDURAN COURT SYSTEM. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. CURRENTLY, MORRIS HAS THREE JUDICIAL ACTIONS 
PENDING IN THE COURTS: 
 
- AN APPEAL FILED BY MORRIS ON MARCH 25, 2002, WITH 
THE SUPREME COURT ARGUING THAT THE REQUEST FOR THE 
CANCELLATION OF HIS HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP SHOULD HAVE 
BEEN FILED BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL AND NOT BY THE 
ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
 
- AN APPEAL FILED BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL ON NOVEMBER 
29, 2002, WITH THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT OBJECTING THE RULING OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA.  THE SAN PEDRO 
SULA COURT HAD SUSPENDED THE CANCELLATION OF HIS 
NATIONALITY WHILE THE ACQUISITION WAS BEING 
CHALLENGED. 
 
- AN APPEAL FILED BY MORRIS ON MARCH 5, 2003, FOR 
INTERIM EQUITABLE RELIEF IN ORDER TO INSURE THE 
EXECUTION OF THE RULING RENDERED BY ADMINISTRATIVE 
COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA, ON OCTOBER 24, 2002, AND 
REJECTED BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL ON JUNE 9, 2003. 
 
 
3. ON JUNE 9, 2003, THE SOLICITOR GENERAL FILED A 
MOTION WITH THE COURT REJECTING MORRIS\' REQUEST FOR 
INTERIM EQUITABLE RELIEF.  ON JUNE 10, 2003, POST WAS 
ADVISED BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL\'S OFFICE OF THE MARCH 
5, 2003, MORRIS REQUEST FOR INTERIM EQUITABLE RELIEF 
IN ORDER TO INSURE THE EXECUTION OF THE RULING 
RENDERED BY THE SAN PEDRO SULA COURT. 
 
4. Post will continue to advise the Department of 
developments in this case as they arise. 
 
PAMLER 
"
"9248","7/8/2003 16:43","03TEGUCIGALPA1615","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03TEGUCIGALPA1109","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001615 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, INR/AN/IAA, EB, AND L 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/07/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, PREL, PINR, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ATTORNEY GENERAL OFFERS EXCUSES; 
AMBASSADOR DEMANDS RESULTS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1109 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1258 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1614 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer for Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  On June 26 Ambassador and DCM met with 
Honduran Attorney General (AG), Roy Medina, to discuss 
corruption in the Public Ministry (PM) and the lack of any 
serious effort to prosecute high-level criminal cases by the 
Attorney General\'s office.  This meeting came a day after 
Ambassador\'s meeting with President Maduro where similar 
issues were discussed (ref C).  AG Medina acknowledged 
shortcomings in the PM; however, he also indicated that 
faulty police work and ineffective judges were hampering his 
efforts to bring cases to trial.  Ambassador told Medina that 
the USG expected significant progress soon and that if it was 
not forthcoming, Post would reconsider the support it 
provides the PM, with a view toward suspending all USG aid to 
his office.  Narcotrafficking, money laundering, and other 
corruption issues were also discussed.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (S) On June 26 Ambassador and DCM meet with Honduran 
Attorney General (AG), Roy Medina to discuss corruption in 
the Public Ministry (PM) and the lack of any serious effort 
to prosecute high-level criminal cases by the Attorney 
General\'s office.  Ambassador specifically cited inaction on 
cases involving narcotraffickers, money launders, and other 
high profile individuals.  Ambassador noted that the PM had 
no difficulty prosecuting low-level criminal cases, but that 
in the Ambassador\'s nine months at Post, not one high-level 
case has been prosecuted.  Given the USG\'s disappointment, 
inaction at the PM, and the inertia that seems to have 
developed regarding high-profile cases, Ambassador put Medina 
on notice that the PM has until August 1 to demonstrate its 
commitment and deliver results, or Post would reconsider the 
support it provides the PM. 
 
3. (C)  As an example of the PM\'s unwillingness to move 
forward against high-profile individuals, Ambassador 
mentioned the case of Jose Israel Pineda Duarte (aka Paico), 
a well-known major narcotrafficker operating on the North 
Coast of Honduras (ref A).  Ambassador also made reference to 
an anonymous document delivered to the PM which contains 
allegations of illicit activity and corrupt officials (Post 
also has copy).  Medina queried Ambassador whether Post had 
done any investigations into the allegations.  Ambassador 
unequivocally stated that it was the job of the PM to 
investigate its own cases. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Public Ministry Inaction on Existing Cases 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) DCM noted that not one of the 160 money laundering 
cases before the PM had been acted upon.  Medina, in 
disbelief, asked an assistant to confirm the number. 
According to the PM there were 136 cases.  Medina expressed 
shock, chagrin, and embarrassment at the number of cases and 
indicated that the PM would begin to move forward on them. 
When asked by Ambassador about inaction on high-profile drug 
related cases, Medina had no response. 
 
5. (C) Medina offered to shake-up the organized crime unit in 
an effort to invigorate the PM, but professed that the PM 
lacked sufficient resources to effectively prosecute 
high-level cases.  Medina also claimed that faulty police 
work, and judges that summarily dismiss cases, were also to 
blame. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Corruption in the Public Ministry 
--------------------------------- 
 
6. (S) Ambassador expressed USG concerns over allegations of 
high-level corruption at the PM.  Medina indicated that if he 
became aware of any wrong-doing that we would dismiss the 
individual and assure that he/she went to jail.  Ambassador 
again reiterated that it was the job of the PM to investigate 
cases and that the PM had until August 1 to begin to deliver 
results. 
 
7. (C) Medina noted the limited time-frame the PM had to act, 
but said he was committed to moving forward on high-level 
cases and that his individual honor was on the line.  Medina 
vowed to get to the bottom of inaction at the PM and claimed 
that he would personally work to strengthen the institution. 
8. (C) When questioned by Ambassador as to why seized funds 
were not in accounts at the Central Bank, Medina claimed that 
under Honduran law, all funds must be placed in interest 
bearing accounts in the individuals name until the cases are 
resolved.  Medina assured Ambassador that the accounts were 
frozen and tamper proof. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Action (or Inaction) at the DLCN 
--------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Medina mentioned the recent shake-up at the Direction 
in the Fight Against Narcotrafficking (DLCN) and indicated he 
was considering offering Gustavo Alfredo ((Landaverde)) 
Hernandez the deputy position there (ref B).  He opined that 
Landaverde, as an outspoken critic of the GOH\'s counter-drug 
efforts, might be interested in working with the DLCN to 
improve the overall effectiveness of the institution. 
(Comment:  Post understands that Landaverde is considering 
accepting an advisory position at the PM after the AG asked 
him to help mend relations with the USG.  End Comment) 
 
10. (C) Medina indicated that he intended to augment the 
DLCN\'s force by adding another 30 officers to the current 
force of 27. Overall, the DLCN is authorized to employ 100 
agents. (Comment:  This effort is viewed by many to be too 
little, too late.  The DLCN has never been an effective tool 
for combating narcotrafficking.  Perpetually underfunded and 
undermanned, the DLCN has seen its scarce resources limited 
by the AG.  Simply adding another 30 officers to the payroll 
will do little to increase the unit\'s effectiveness.  End 
Comment)  Medina also told the new DLCN head that while the 
fight against corruption and drug traffickers was important, 
a priority at the PM was increasing its forensic medicine 
abilities. 
 
---------------------------------- 
A Time for Talk, a Time for Action 
---------------------------------- 
 
11. (S) Comment:  Complaints against the ineffectiveness of 
AG Medina are not new.  Either through incompetence (but 
probably due to corruption) the PM under Medina\'s leadership 
has consistently disappointed those looking for improvements 
in the GOH\'s ability to effectively fight high-profile 
criminals.  It remains to be seen whether Post\'s threat to 
withdraw support from the PM will have the desired effect, 
but if history is any precedent, Post is not optimistic. 
Post expects Medina to continue to obfuscate the issues and 
pass the blame, rather than face the heat of prosecuting 
high-level criminal cases.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"9254","7/8/2003 22:06","03TEGUCIGALPA1622","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1497","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, INL/LP, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/07/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SMIG, CVIS, HO 
SUBJECT: ANOTHER HONDURAN CONGRESSMAN BUSTED ON DRUG CHARGES 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1497 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco L. Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Yet another Honduran political figure was 
implicated in drug trafficking when he was arrested on July 6 
fleeing the scene of an airplane crash in the eastern 
department of Olancho.  National Party Deputy, Armando Avila 
Panchame, was arrested by the police for drug trafficking and 
attempted murder (for running his car through two police 
roadblocks.)  President Ricardo Maduro, President of the 
National Congress Pepe Lobo, and Attorney General Roy Medina 
-- all indicated congressional immunity would be lifted to 
pursue the prosecution of this deputy.  This arrest could 
prove to be a key test of the political and judicial 
systems, ability to attack the growing narcocorruption 
problem in Honduras.  END SUMMARY 
 
2.  (U) On Saturday, July 5, Honduran police authorities, 
responding to intelligence information, mounted an operation 
against a suspected drug trafficking airplane that crashed in 
the eastern Honduran department of Olancho.  The operation 
resulted in the arrest of nine individuals, including a 
member of the Honduran National Congress, Armando Avila 
Panchame, a Colombian, and a Venezuelan.  Unfortunately, 
there were no drugs seized or found; however police are still 
conducting a series of searches of the surrounding areas. 
Canine units, funded by a State International Narcotics and 
Law Enforcement (INL) program, did alert to the rpesence of 
drugs in the aircraft and vehicles.  The bold narco aircraft 
landing took place on a secondary paved roadway that was 
blocked by drug traffickers, vehicles, which had been 
modified to illuminate the makeshift runway with floodlights. 
 Trees along the roadway had also been removed with 
chainsaws.  Police recovered automatic AK-47 and M-16 rifles, 
200 rounds of ammunition, satellite phones, radio equipment, 
and night reflector vests at the location.  It appears that 
the aircraft successfully unloaded its cargo, but in its 
haste to depart as police descended on the scene it struck 
one of the vehicles that had secured one end of the 
improvised runway. 
 
3.  (SBU) There is some media speculation, based on public 
statements made by the son of the notorious (and currently 
incarcerated in the U.S.) drug trafficker Ramon Matta, that 
there was a confrontation between rival drug cartels.  The 
location of the drug delivery abutted a ranch owned by the 
Matta family.  Matta is claiming to have aided police by 
informaing them of the landing of the suspect aircraft and 
ythen shooting at it as it tried to depart.  He also said he 
permitted searches of his property for the missing drugs. 
(Comment: Police report no such cooperation and have said 
that the shots fired from the Matta group were a signal to 
the aircraft,s pilot that police were approaching.  There 
were bullet holes observed in the aircraft.  End Comment.) 
 
4.  (C) While no drugs were seized, Honduran Deputy Avila 
Panchame is charged with attempted murder for having run his 
vehicle through two police roadblocks. The statements of two 
police officers at those roadblocks accuse Avila Panchame of 
refusing to stop and charging through the roadblocks.  He is 
also being charged with drug trafficking.  The arrest of a 
member of Congress is keeping the spotlight on the extent to 
which narcocorruption is permeating Honduran institutions. 
President Maduro, President of the National Congress Pepe 
Lobo, and the Attorney General have all indicated 
congressional immunity will be waived in this case to pursue 
the prosecution of this deputy on the drug charges.  Under 
the Honduran Constitution, immunity for attempted murder or 
murder are exempt from any congressional immunity claim 
(Comment:  This incident is not the first time that Avila 
Panchame has come to the Embassy,s attention for possible 
involvement in drug trafficking.  Earlier in April of this 
year, the same vehicle in which he was traveling during this 
incident was observed by witnesses at the scene of an earlier 
suspected crashed aircraft.  In that incident police seized 
397 kilos of cocaine, but no arrests were ever made.  End 
Comment.) 
 
5.  (C) COMMENT:  This arrest could prove to be a key test of 
the political and judicial systems, ability to attack the 
growing narco-corruption problem in Honduras.  Avila Panchame 
is now the third Honduran political figure to be arrested on 
drug trafficking charges in the last year.  Coming on the 
heels of the June 20 arrest of Liberal Party Central American 
Parliament member Cesar Diaz in Nicaragua (reftel) and last 
summer,s arrest of a former deputy in Panama (both of whom 
were arrested in possession of heroin) the media is 
highlighting the mounting connections between international 
drug traffickers and Honduran political elites.  As reported 
septel, the Ambassador recently placed the Attorney General 
on notice that his office must produce some high-profile 
drug-trafficking and corruption prosecutions immediately or 
risk losing further U.S. support.  We will be monitoring 
developments in this case closely.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"9284","7/9/2003 20:12","03TEGUCIGALPA1625","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 001625 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
TREASURY FOR E. ILVETSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EFIN, EAGR, ETRD, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduran Government Paper on Agricultural Finance 
Reform 
 
REF: Teguz 1581 
 
1. As indicated in reftel, on June 30 the Finance Minister 
provided to Econcouns a 32-page analysis entitled \"Honduran 
Agriculture Laws,\" intended to answer IMF and USG questions 
on the rationale behind the April 2003 passage of Law 68- 
2003.  The document was prepared by the Finance Ministry 
together with Honduran Banking Commission President Ana 
Cristina de Pereira.   This cable provides a detailed 
English language summary of the paper.   The full Spanish 
language version has been faxed to WHA/CEN (Brett Makens). 
The paper makes the case that the government did the best it 
could, within legal strictures, to limit and manage the 
fiscal cost of a series of imprudent agricultural finance 
laws.  The paper also clarifies that the previous 
agricultural support programs, replaced by Law 68-2003, were 
already being implemented and having a significant effect on 
GOH finances.  Finally, the paper clarifies that the GOH 
understands that resumption of credit to the agriculture 
sector will be a slow process (given the moral hazard 
problems created by these various loan forgiveness 
programs). 
 
Begin Detailed English Language Summary. 
 
HONDURAN AGRICULTURAL LAWS 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Several laws that provided financial support to the 
agriculture sector were adopted by the GOH between 2000 and 
2003.  The objectives of these laws was to reactivate 
agricultural production, severely affected by the impact of 
Hurricane Mitch in late 1998 on the value of agricultural 
assets, the capacity of the sector to generate employment 
and income, and on the supply of exportable products. 
Damages from Hurricane Mitch in Honduras have been estimated 
by ECLAC at $2.6 billion (principally agricultural 
production and road and bridge infrastructure). 
 
Government assistance to farmers in these years rested on 
the assumption that the reactivation of agricultural 
production could be achieved by partially resolving the 
financial problems faced by farmers.  The measures taken by 
the government in this period included interest rate 
subsidies and forgiveness of some agricultural debt.   The 
implementation of these measures, however, had two important 
negative effects that doomed the laws to failure: 
 
1) An increase in debt levels resulting from the 
accumulation of interest payments that were capitalized into 
each loan.  This lowered the profitability of new investment 
projects. 
 
2) Each of these laws failed to achieve its expected goals 
and consequently increased the social and political pressure 
for new measures containing additional benefits, raising the 
fiscal cost, increasing the moral hazard, and perpetuating 
the problem instead of resolving it. 
 
At the same time, the debt reduction, interest rate subsidy 
and new credit programs provided to farmers involved high 
costs for the GOH.  Previously, the schemes were expanded in 
order to augment partial payments made by the GOH to the 
financial institutions on behalf of farmers, thus reducing 
the levels of debt (partial forgiveness of the principal). 
This last benefit was financed through the issuance of 
government bonds, sold on market terms. 
 
Given that the conditions of debt restructuring implied 
repayment schedules with long grace periods, the farmers 
could manage the interest payments during the grace period, 
helped by the interest rate subsidy financed by the 
government.  Nonetheless, the lack of viability of the 
mechanisms was made evident when the repayment schedule 
required the amortization of the principal. 
 
The lack of a definitive solution caused increasing fiscal 
commitments without achieving the desired result.  It also 
hurt the functioning of credit markets; in particular, bank 
credit for the agricultural sector declined in real terms. 
The agricultural sector\'s rate of growth and contribution to 
GDP has been declining steadily, with a consequent negative 
effect on the social situation.  Poverty in Honduras is 
concentrated in rural areas. 
Additionally, the Honduran financial system has suffered a 
worsening of the arrears in the credit portfolio and a 
reduction in the profitability of financial institutions, 
because of the increase of the nonproductive assets (bad 
debts and repossessed rural properties) as well as the lack 
of dynamism of new investment projects in the sector. 
 
Recognizing the need to resolve the problem in all its 
dimensions, the GOH has designed a new policy proposal that 
not only seeks to resolve in a definitive form the problem 
of the accumulated debt levels of farmers, but also to 
establish new rules of the game for participants in 
agricultural credit markets, trying to return discipline to 
the market and limiting the fiscal cost associated with the 
implementation of the new mechanism. 
 
THE CONTENT OF THE PREVIOUS AGRICULTURAL FINANCE LAWS 
 
Law 28-2000 
 
Law 28-2000 entered into effect on April 28, 2000.  It 
created a framework for the alleviation of the financial 
burden on farmers who were affected by natural phenomena and 
had loans in arrears.  The benefits were made available to 
borrowers with loans approved between June 1997 and January 
2000, either with resources from FONAPROVI or private banks. 
 
It established a fixed interest rate of 24 percent for 
direct bank loans and 19 percent for loans from FONAPROVI 
provided for the production of basic grains, vegetables, 
plantains, watermelon, and tubers and 24 percent for the 
remaining types of production.  Interest rate subsidies 
varied from 8-16 percentage points for loans in these 
categories and cattle projects, and 2 percentage points for 
other types of agricultural production. 
 
In addition, Law 28-2000 directed the government to provide 
loan guarantees from resources of the National Complementary 
Guarantee Fund (FONGAC) - a fund administered by FONAPROVI 
with resources transferred by the Ministry of Finance - for 
up to 70 percent of the amount of new loans provided by 
financial institutions for the rehabilitation of farms. 
 
Decree 28-2000 did not establish specific terms for the 
restructuring of farm debts.  But the PRODUCOM program, 
which functioned like a trust fund of the Ministry of 
Finance in FONAPROVI, authorized up to seven years with 18 
months\' grace period for the payment of rescheduled loans. 
 
The law also approved transfers to the state-owned National 
Bank of Agricultural Development (BANADESA) for 115 million 
lempiras, of which 15 million were to be used for the 
program of supervised credit, which channels small loans to 
the reformed campesino (organized small farmer) sector. 
 
Law 32-2001 
 
Law 32-2001 established the legal framework to authorize 
interest rate subsidies and reductions in the debt balance 
owed by farmers affected by natural phenomena, who had taken 
out loans for agriculture, forestry, cattle, beekeeping, 
poultry, aquaculture, fishing, agriculture mechanization 
services, irrigation, grain drying, or salt extraction. 
 
Loans approved after June 31, 2000 and beneficiaries of Law 
28-2000 were designated as eligible for the benefits of this 
law.  It provided interest rate subsidies ranged from 7 to 
16 percentage points for basic grains, vegetables, 
plantains, watermelon, tubers, cattle, and coffee and two 
percent for other types of crops. 
 
The law established a maximum amount for loan rescheduling 
of 4 million lempiras per borrower.  It also established a 
reduction in the capital balance for beneficiaries in one of 
the three following situations: 
 
1) Direct credits by banks, FONAPROVI loans, or other 
rediscounting sources, and savings and loan cooperatives, 
affected by natural phenomena and in arrears or due on 
December 31, 2000 and classified as loan risk category III 
or IV; 
 
2) Beneficiaries of Law 28-2000, and 
3) Borrowers from savings and loan cooperatives, under the 
same circumstances. 
 
Debt reduction of 50 percent was provided, up to a maximum 
level of debt forgiveness per borrower of five million 
lempiras. 
 
The law required the banks to provide new loans for the 
rehabilitation of farms, unless the farmers decided to forgo 
this financing in writing.  The farmer had to pay the 
interest owed, from January 1, 2001 through the date of 
presentation of the application. 
 
Of the 50 percent of debt relief, ten percent was financed 
by the banks and 40 percent by the GOH, through the issuance 
of 10-year bonds, with interest rates equivalent to the 
average deposit rate.  The law authorized up to 600 million 
lempiras in government bond issuance. 
 
Two additional mechanisms were established: 
 
1) For original loan balances of 300,000 lempiras and more 
that had financed production of basic grains in areas of 50 
manzanas or less, the law provided debt forgiveness of 40 
percent immediately.  An interest rate subsidy of five 
percentage points was authorized for the remaining loan 
balance. 
 
2) For loans by small producers of basic grains with loan 
balances of 50,000 lempira or less classified in loan risk 
categories III and IV, full debt forgiveness (90 percent 
paid by GOH and 10 percent by the banks) was provided. 
Loans classified as risk category V were to be bought by the 
Ministry of Finance with a discount of 80 percent. 
 
The GOH transferred the 115 million lempiras to BANADESA, as 
directed in Law 28-2000, and forgave the debt that BANADESA 
owed to the GOH. 
 
The law established an interest rate subsidy of 8 percent 
for growers of basic grains, to be paid with Central 
Government funds, independently of whether a guarantee was 
received from FONGAC. 
 
Law 128-2001 
 
Law 128-2001 modified various articles of law 32-2001.  It 
allowed benefits to accrue from the moment that the farmer 
signed the contract with a financial institution.  It also 
expanded the coverage to farmers who had received a loan 
before July 31, 2001, in order to pay a previous loan that 
had qualified for benefits under law 32-2001, and the 
borrowers from banks declared in forced liquidation. 
 
Law 128-2001 created the option of raising the ceiling for 
debt forgiveness from 5 million to 10 million lempiras in 
those cases in which there had been destruction of the 
productive asset. 
 
Law 81-2001 
 
Law 81-2001 approved the issuance of bonds by FONAPROVI of 
up to 1.2 billion lempiras at terms of 18 months, 10 years 
and 15 years in order to create lines of credit for working 
capital, capital goods and rediscounting of up to 70 percent 
the restructured credits in the previous three laws.  To 
qualify, the loans needed to be used for reactivation and 
rehabilitation of the agriculture sector.  The law provided 
interest rate subsidies of between four and eleven 
percentage points. 
 
Law 11-2002-E 
 
Law 11-2002-E added to the beneficiaries of the interest 
rate subsidies in 81-2002 the following products: 
machinery, equipment and parts; harvesting of pasture; 
construction;  planting; acquisition of livestock and 
poultry; and production of rhyzomes.  It extended the 
deadline for application of benefits to December 31, 2003. 
 
ESTIMATES OF THE COSTS OF THE PREVIOUS DECREES 
 
Interest Rate Subsidies 
The loans that have been covered by interest rate subsidy 
under the different decrees: 
 
Decree 28-2000                  L 1,417.1 million 
Decree 32-2001                  L 2,097.9 million 
Decree 81-2002                  L   848.7 million 
Total                           L 4,363.7 million 
 
During 2000-2002, 195.8 million lempiras in interest rate 
subsidies were provided.  These amounts were provided to 
farmers as reimbursements for interest payments already 
made; these reimbursements were deducted from the value of 
the trust fund.  In Decree 128-2001, the system was changed. 
After that, the farmer only paid the interest net of the 
subsidy, and FONAPROVI credited the account of the financial 
institution directly.  This broke the link between farmer 
compliance with payment obligations and the authorization of 
the GOH to continue authorizing subsidies. 
 
The total amount of interest subsidies authorized by the 
five previous laws was: L 1,494.4 million, of which L 195.8 
million was paid out during 2000-2003. 
 
Debt Forgiveness 
 
Estimates of costs incurred through the authorization of 
debt forgiveness (as of May 31, 2003) are: 
 
Total bond issue authorized           L 600   million 
Total bonds issued                    L 274.1 million 
 
One large bank, Banco Atlantida, received L 101.2 million in 
bonds (slightly above the 99.4 million authorized as a 
result of errors in program management).  All other banks 
are far under their limits. 
 
Guarantees 
 
The National Fund of Complementary Guarantees (FONGAC) has 
issued certificates to guarantee the payment of balances 
owed by farmers benefiting from the different laws.  After 
taking into account the deductions from the value of the 
trust fund for subsidy payments, there was a legal limit of 
issuance of L465 million in guarantees.  Of this amount, 306 
million were issued as of December 31, 2002 and another L 
175.7 million were authorized.  FONGAC\'s financial capacity 
to guarantee new loans thus has been totally exhausted.  To 
comply with the obligations for loan guarantees in the laws, 
the Central Government would need to make additional 
transfers to FONAPROVI.  The GOH estimates that this 
contingent liability is L2.5 billion lempiras. 
 
The total committed fiscal resources (estimated at the end 
of May 2003) over the period 2000-2019 is 2.9 billion 
lempira, with another 2.5 billion lempira in contingent 
liabilities for the loan guarantees. 
 
THE PROPOSED NEW POLICY 
 
The policy framework designed to resolve these earlier 
problems is based in the following assumptions: 
 
1. Lending to the agricultural sector is affected negatively 
by structural problems.   Credit risk does not depend on the 
capacity to pay of an individual but on generalized market 
risks such as climatic conditions, or the international 
price of an export crop like coffee. 
 
2. Social and political pressures have resulted in misguided 
policies focused on the reduction of debt levels instead of 
the search for income-generating alternatives.  The attempt 
at debt reduction was not successful because it did not 
materialize immediately and the system permitted the 
capitalization of interest, with the result that debt levels 
actually increased. 
 
3. The benefits have worsened the country\'s payment culture 
and degraded the quality of risk posed by the banks\' 
agricultural clients. 
 
4. The debt burden represents a tax on the profitability of 
future investments in the agricultural sector that provides 
disincentives to the renewal of agricultural activity. 
5. The lack of investment is reducing the supply of 
agricultural production, which in turn negatively affects 
employment, income and the social situation in rural areas. 
 
The new framework is contained in Law 68-2003.  It creates a 
financial mechanism to distribute losses and generate 
conditions that will spur growth in the agricultural sector. 
It supercedes all the previous laws and establishes a 
mechanism that treats all beneficiaries of the program 
uniformly. 
 
Law 68-2003 establishes a government trust fund, financed 
through annual transfers from the Central Government budget, 
of decreasing amounts, starting in 2003 and ending in 2012. 
The trust fund will have the ability to issue securities 
for: 
 
-- Acquisition of the portfolios restructured under decrees 
28-2000, 32-2001, 128-2001, 81-2002, and 11-2002-E.   The 
trust fund will provide debt reduction of 50 percent of the 
balance on the loan at the moment of its acquisition and 
will enter into contracts with the financial institutions 
for the recovery of the remaining 50 percent.  This will be 
done with a payment plan over 10 years and an interest rate 
of 8.725 percent. 
 
-- Payment of the net present value of the interest rate 
subsidies for rehabilitation and reactivation, authorized 
under the mentioned laws.  The GOH will use a discount rate 
of 8.725 percent to calculate the net present value.  The 
borrowers will need to pay the remaining balance of their 
loans, using the original terms. 
 
The law authorizes issuance of government bonds up to a 
maximum of 4 billion lempiras (with the bulk of the funds to 
be used for the purchase of the portfolio accounts 
rescheduled by financial institutions).  The interest rate 
to be paid on the bonds is 5 percent. The bonds will be 
issued for a ten-year period, with annual amortization that 
will be guaranteed (for 50 percent) by the financial 
institutions.  The remaining 50 percent will be guaranteed 
with the amounts paid by the GOH through annual transfers: 
 
Year                      Millions of Lempira 
 
2003                            347.3 
2004                            322.0 
2005                            241.5 
2006                            198.6 
2007                            173.6 
2008                            123.5 
2009                             93.6 
2010                             77.7 
2011                             63.8 
2012                             51.8 
------                        ------- 
Total                         1,693.4 
 
Through the investment of the resources received annually, 
FONAPROVI (the National Fund for Production and Housing) 
will generate the necessary resources to cover the interest 
and principal payments.  Thus, the sum of the GOH 
contributions will be lower than the guaranteed amount. 
 
The law repeals the guarantees authorized by the GOH in the 
previous laws for the financial institutions, for 
rescheduled loans and for reactivation and rehabilitation 
loans, including the certificates that had been issued by 
FONGAC. 
 
The decree establishes, in addition, conditions for new 
credits by financial institutions that will be rediscounted 
with FONAPROVI funds: 
 
a) detailed technical and financial evaluation of the loan 
b) crop insurance (covering risks like natural disasters) 
c) contracted marketing mechanism 
d) sufficient guarantees 
 
The law also allows financial institutions to arrange 
insurance or guarantees against price declines, for those 
loans that finance agricultural exports outside of Central 
America.  Embassy Note: These risk reduction mechanisms were 
strongly encouraged by the authors of the IMF-World Bank 
Financial Sector Appraisal (FSAP) for Honduras, completed 
earlier this year.  End Note 
 
The law ratified the creation of the Fund for the Small 
Producer, through GOH transfers to BANADESA (L140 million in 
2003, 130 million in 2004, and 130 million in 2005). 
 
The tables below provide the government\'s estimates of the 
costs implicit in the earlier regime and the new one: 
 
Financial Costs of Previous Scheme 
      (millions of lempira) 
                        Nominal       Present Value 
 
Int. Rate Subsidies       1,494           1,121 
Interest costs of bonds     363             230 
Transfers to BANADESA       575             340 
Recap.of FONGAC             482             482 
Bond for debt relief         --             298 
                         ------         ------- 
                          2,914           2,470 
 
Financial Costs of Current Scheme 
      (millions of lempira) 
 
                        Nominal        Present Value 
 
Transfers to trust        1,693            1,386 
Interest costs of bonds     166              129 
Transfers to BANADESA       575              340 
Int.subsidies paid          196 
                          -----            ----- 
                          2,630            1,856 
 
RESTRICTIONS ON THE DESIGN OF THE POLICY FRAMEWORK 
 
The GOH confronted limitations in trying to design the 
optimal solution to the problem. 
 
First, the repeal of the laws does not eliminate the rights 
authorized to the borrowers which were beneficiaries of each 
law at the time they took effect.  The majority of the 
beneficiaries already had received payments. 
 
All the legal consultations undertaken by the government 
concluded that it was impossible to apply a new legal 
framework retroactively.  This meant that even when the laws 
were repealed, the only gain was that new farmers could not 
benefit from these laws after the date of the repeal 
entering into force. 
 
For this reason, the government had to look for a financial 
mechanism that simultaneously applied the same level of 
fiscal resources already committed and still permitted the 
reduction of future contingencies, effecting an efficient 
distribution of the economic losses already incurred and 
help the farmers reactivate their operations. 
 
The second important restriction is the existence of deposit 
insurance in Honduras, which guarantees 100 percent of the 
deposits by the public in financial institutions that are 
members of the deposit insurance, until September 2003. 
After this point, the insurance will be limited to 50 
percent and later to USD 10,000 per depositor after 
September 2004. 
 
Thus, if the government were to have shifted totally the 
losses of the agricultural sector to the financial system, 
it would have led to an immediate recognition of the losses 
by these financial institutions.  This would have occurred 
in the context of a fragile financial sector with a limited 
capacity to generate profits and an ongoing process of 
financial sector consolidation.  The Government of Honduras 
did not consider it in its interest nor its financial 
capacity to undertake these risks. 
 
RECENT EVOLUTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR 
 
The amount of agricultural loans covered by the various 
previous laws represented 7.7 percent of the total loan 
portfolio of Honduran commercial banks and 44.6 percent of 
the agricultural loan portfolio (as of Febrary 28, 2003). 
The continual issuance of decrees during the grace periods 
of the loans kept these loans in low category 
classification, with low provisioning requirements, given 
that they still had not arrived at a period of amortization 
of the principal.  Only 4.3 percent of these refinanced 
credits were provisioned as of January 31, meaning that the 
losses came directly out of bank profits or capital during 
those periods, without eliminating the acquired rights by 
the borrowers. 
 
The mechanism created by Law 68-2003 permits financial 
institutions to gradually absorb the impact of their 
respective losses. 
 
New credit provided to the agricultural sector annually has 
fallen precipitously.  These declines were 5.9 percent in 
1999 and then 15.8 percent, 22.1 pecent, and 51.4  percent 
in 2000, 2001, and 2002.  New agricultural loans represented 
only 4.1 percent of the total credit issued by the banking 
system in 2002, down from 8.3 percent in 1998.  The decline 
in agricultural finance is one of the factors contributing 
the stagnation of agricultural production. 
 
Given the recent experience of the commercial banks with 
agricultural loans, no important reactivation of credit for 
this sector is expected in the next few years.  The 
introduction of new rules for the approval of agricultural 
credit will instead be the source of a process of natural 
selection of debtors and a channeling of credit through 
suppliers like agrochemical firms, agricultural service 
providers, concentrate factories, and agricultural 
processing firms. 
 
In the experience of other countries that have had similar 
problems, the change in the sources of credit for the 
agricultural sector have served to restore a payment culture 
and improve the administration of credit risk in the formal 
financial sector. 
 
In addition, this new situation implies the search for 
alternatives on the part of the GOH for the channeling of 
credit to the small producer, through the contracting of 
specialized technical assistance and within the framework of 
bank consolidation. 
 
End Detailed English Language Summary. 
 
Palmer 
"
"9316","7/10/2003 18:35","03TEGUCIGALPA1636","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JULY 9, 2003 
 
 
1.Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
7/9 entitled \"Narco trafficking and corruption\". \"Drug 
trafficking has a considerable corrupting power, so much that 
even the U.S. government has financed wars with funds coming from 
this illegal source, such as the fight against the Sandinistas 
during the `lost decade\'.\" 
 
\"Drug trafficking does not exclusively promote corruption within 
judicial institutions, public officials and politicians. It can 
also overturn the moral values of common and ordinary people who 
receive `aid\' from drug traffickers, no matter that such `aid\' 
comes from the demise of millions of young people victims of 
drugs and their tormented parents.\" 
 
\"Honduras still has time to avoid that the powerful tentacles of 
drug trafficking take advantage of the immorality and excessive 
ambition of a few, as well as the needs and reversed values of 
many. The fight against this current threat should concern all of 
us, without regard of social class.\" 
 
2. Op-ed by Edmundo Orellana Mercado (former Attorney General in 
a Liberal Party administration and Law Professor in the National 
University) in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/9 entitled \"Narco trafficking\". \"For some years now, our 
society has been threatened by one of the most devastating 
problems in modern times: narco trafficking. the environment in 
which narco trafficking operates the best is through corruption. 
Consequently, those societies who are headed by leaders inclined 
to corruption are easy victims.\" 
 
\"Then, we should not be surprised that our neighbors north of 
Bravo River are repeatedly warning us that the failure of 
Honduras\'s efforts on the fight against drug trafficking are 
caused by the corruption of our leaders. The consequences of 
ignoring those warnings could lead to the decertification of 
Honduras, which could have a serious cost for the country by 
reducing the international cooperation for Honduras.\" 
 
\"We should fight against narco trafficking and corruption 
relentlessly, in every front, and with all resources available. 
Otherwise, corruption will asphyxiate us, and as a result of the 
decertification we will be isolated from the world and suffering 
its consequences by ourselves.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9317","7/10/2003 18:36","03TEGUCIGALPA1637","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MBUCKLEY); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JULY 10, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
7/10 entitled \"Narco trafficking and violence\". \"Drug trafficking 
not only has the power to infiltrate the government and increase 
corruption, it is also an instigator of violence, as it has 
become evident in Colombia, Brazil or Mexico.\" 
 
\"An accurate manifestation of the violence generated by drug 
trafficking is hired assassinations. About this, the Minister of 
Security Oscar Alvarez, has declared that drug cartels are 
training gang members or `mareros\' to form an army of 
professional assassins in Honduras, to resolve the territorial 
conflicts and other disagreements derived from this illegal 
business.\" 
 
\"In Honduras, violence generated by drug trafficking has not 
reached the extent of other countries. To avoid this, it is 
essential the determination of all law enforcement and judicial 
institutions and the collaboration of the honest citizenship in 
general. we still have time, but it is urgent to take the 
appropriate measures.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9342","7/11/2003 16:34","03TEGUCIGALPA1642","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1534|03TEGUCIGALPA625|03VATICAN4582","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INR/B, DRL/IRF, 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/10/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, PHUM, HO, VA 
SUBJECT: A LATIN AMERICAN POPE?  CARDINAL RODRIGUEZ DEEMED 
PAPABILE, SPECULATION MAY AID HIS ANTI-CORRUPTION CAMPAIGN 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 625 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1534 
     C. VATICAN 4582 
 
Classified By: Political Section Chief, Francisco L. Palmieri; Reasons 
1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U)  Summary.  Pope John Paul II\'s increasing frailty has 
prompted discussion over potential successors to the papacy, 
among which experts have identified Cardinal Oscar Andres 
Maradiaga Rodriguez of Honduras as both a popular and 
geographically strategic candidate.  Despite the Euro-centric 
tradition of the papacy, some Vatican experts believe that 
the next pontiff may, in fact, be a Latin American.  Cardinal 
Rodriguez, Archbishop of Tegucigalpa is viewed as a strong 
choice among Latin American cardinals eligible for the 
position, both for his insider connections and international 
reputation as a champion of social justice and political 
transparency in his home country of Honduras.  In Honduras, 
because of this status, the media pays special attention to 
his public pronouncements.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Latin America: The Church\'s Fastest Growing Constituency 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
2.  (SBU)  While European and American church membership has 
sharply declined in recent years, the developing world (and 
Latin America, in particular) has experienced the opposite 
trend.  Today, home to more than half of the world\'s 
Catholics, Latin America has increasingly emerged as the new 
face of Catholicism in the 21st century.  Reflecting the 
rapid increase in church membership, the region is now 
represented by a powerful 22-Cardinal voting electorate for 
the papacy, which is the second largest regional voting block 
(next to Europe). 
 
3.  (SBU)  In addition to Cardinal Rodriguez, other strong 
candidates from the region identified in REFtel C and by the 
media include: Dario Catrillon Hoyos (74) of Colombia; Jorge 
Mario Bergoglio (66) of Argentina; Claudio Hummes (68) of 
Brazil; Norberto Rivera Carrera (61) of Mexico; and Alfonso 
Lopez Trujillo (67) of Colombia.  While many experts believe 
Rodriguez to be among the top few potential candidates, some 
have also indicated that the Cardinal\'s relative youth, at 60 
years of age, may prove a potential obstacle among an older 
voting electorate.  Additionally, the Cardinal\'s health is 
not 100 percent.  He allegedly suffers from diabetes, for 
which he apparently spent a month in a German hospital last 
fall.  Also, his life has been threatened repeatedly in 
Honduras.  (See REFtel A.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Speculation Draws Greater Attention to the Cardinal\'s Battles 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
4.  (C)  Comment.  Even though the timeframe for the next 
papal election is indeterminable, widespread media 
speculation among experts and the press regarding Cardinal 
Rodriguez\'s potential candidacy has nonetheless had an 
impact.  Voted the third most powerful public figure in 
Honduras (behind President Maduro and the Ambassador) earlier 
this year, the Cardinal has been featured even more 
prominently in the press recently.  Should the Cardinal 
emerge publicly as a contender for the papacy in the coming 
months, his high profile campaigns will likely receive 
increased moral and political weight.  Given the close 
relationship between the Ambassador and Cardinal Rodriguez, 
the Cardinal\'s popular moral authority represents an 
increased opportunity to rally additional Honduran support 
for many of our shared priorities, including fighting 
narco-corruption, violence and poverty.  At the same time, it 
is important to note that the Cardinal has, at times, 
criticized several U.S. policies, such as the War in Iraq, 
CAFTA, and the level of international assistance to the 
developing world.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"9343","7/11/2003 19:56","03TEGUCIGALPA1644","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE175664|03STATE184648","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001644 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR IO/UNP (NARANJO) AND IO/PPC (HUGHES) 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PPC (LOKKA) AND WHA/CEN 
USUN FOR ZAID 
NSC FOR DICARLO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/26/2013 
TAGS: PREL, AORC, PHUM, HO, UNGA, UN 
SUBJECT: 58TH UNGA: HONDURAN FM SEEKING APPOINTMENT WITH 
SECRETARY 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: A. STATE 184648 
     B. STATE 175664 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (SBU) On June 27, PolChief discussed the Government of 
Honduras\' (GOH) participation in the 58th United Nations 
General Assembly (UNGA) and U.S. UNGA policy priorities with 
Honduran Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Anibal Quinones 
(reftels).  Quinones indicated that Honduras looked forward 
to working closely with the U.S. government at the UNGA, 
especially on Iraq-related issues, cloning, and budget 
reform.  Honduras is slated to receive more than USD 40 
million from the UN HIV/AIDS Global Fund, which makes it the 
largest recipient in Central America. Honduras is also slated 
to be the UNGA Vice President of the Second Committee, where 
we expect to work closely with them on Second Committee 
reform and overall UN budget reform. 
 
2.  (C) While VM Quinones could only confirm the attendance 
of Foreign Minister Perez-Cadalso at this time, he asked if 
it would be possible to arrange a brief meeting between 
Secretary Powell and FM Perez-Cadalso at the UNGA.  He made a 
 
SIPDIS 
direct reference to Honduras being a member of the Coalition 
of the Willing, its recently approved troop deployment to 
Iraq and the ratification of the Article 98 agreement.  He 
subsequently told the Ambassador in a separate meeting that 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had been subject to some 
domestic political criticism on both issues and that the 
Maduro government would be very vulnerable to opposition 
party criticism during their troop\'s deployment in Iraq. 
 
 
3. (C) Comment: Post supports this request for a brief 
meeting between the Secretary and Foreign Minister.  Current 
military planning calls for the Honduran troops to be fully 
deployed to the field by September 1.  In addition to 
solidifying Honduran military participation in the 
reconstruction of Iraq, a brief meeting with the FM would 
also provide an opportunity for the Secretary to highlight 
the HIV-AIDS Global Fund\'s contributions in Latin America and 
to engage the Honduran government on the need for it to play 
a leading role in drafting a Cuba human rights resolution at 
next spring\'s UNHRC, now that they have won a seat on that 
body.  The meeting would also send a much-needed and strong 
political boost to the Maduro government and the MFA, both of 
which have been steadfast in support of key U.S. foreign 
policy objectives throughout this year.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"9345","7/11/2003 22:08","03TEGUCIGALPA1645","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001645 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, EPET, EINV, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: AES Attempts to Salvage 200MW Energy Contract and 
El Faro Project 
 
REF:  a) 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2872, b) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 02207, c) 02 
 
TEGUCIGALPA 02857, d) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 03184, e) 02 
TEGUCIGALPA 03273, f) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 03416, g) 02 
TEGUCIGALPA 03479 
 
THIS CABLE CONTAINS PROPRIETARY BUSINESS INFORMATION THAT 
SHOULD BE KEPT CLOSE HOLD. 
 
1. (SBU) AES Honduras\' efforts to salvage its 200MW energy 
contract, awarded and signed Christmas day, 2002 (ref g) 
despite having overcome an unfair government procurement 
process and political influence, may be reaching the end of 
the road this month.  Apparently, due to financial and 
management restructuring, the company leadership have 
directed staff to cease any spending on the El Faro project 
in Honduras and instead find partners willing and able to 
meet conditions of the contract.  Although a U.S. oil and 
gas company with substantial interest in the Central 
American region is currently studying potential partnership 
in the LNG-powered project, any final decisions are months 
away.  Closing of an interim deal and payment of the 
required performance bond by a potential local partner, the 
Larach Group, has been delayed by Larach\'s concerns over the 
liability of committing to a project of this size.  On July 
3, AES requested authorization for a contingency plan that 
allows the project to be scaled down and use bunker fuel if 
financing for the LNG plant is not forthcoming in the next 
six months.  On July 9, the GOH refused to grant this 
authorization.  The GOH is threatening to cancel the 
contract and begin legal proceedings by mid July if AES does 
not pay the five million dollar performance bond.  End 
summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
AES\' Battle to Build Project and Win Contract 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) For more than three years, AES has sought to build 
a regional 540 MW gas-turbine electric power project fueled 
with liquefied natural gas in Puerto Cortes.  The El Faro 
project was designed to provide power not only to Honduras 
but also El Salvador and other Central American countries. 
Throughout the process, AES requested and received extensive 
advocacy from the Embassy and US agencies in Washington. 
Post has treated this advocacy case as a priority because of 
the U.S. commercial interest, the important contribution of 
the project to lowering electricity costs in Honduras, and 
the potential for spurring investment and regional 
integration.  The Embassy has been in constant contact with 
decision-makers in the Honduran government at the highest 
level.  A contract to supply 200 MW of electricity by 2006, 
using natural gas, to the Honduran electric power utility 
ENEE was finally awarded in late 2002 and ratified in 
February. 
 
3. (SBU) To win this contract, AES had to overcome several 
obstacles including political influence stalling the 
processing of the project\'s environmental permit, several 
modifications to the bid specifications favoring local 
companies, six delays in the bid opening date (from January 
until July, 2002) and indications of an unfair evaluation 
process after the bid opening.  The \"winning\" local company, 
Lufussa was not disqualified despite the incompleteness in 
its offer related to transmission capacity.  The Ambassador 
and Embassy staff supported the company in insisting that 
the government acknowledge the flaws in the award process. 
This advocacy contributed to the government\'s eventual 
decision in early December 2002 to invalidate the tender and 
subsequently provide awards to both Lufussa (210 MW contract 
deliverable within two years) and AES (200 MW contract 
deliverable within four years) (Ref f, g).  Once the 
decision was made, the GOH rushed AES Honduras into a take- 
it-or-leave-it deal, insisting that the contract presented 
on December 24 be signed by December 27, without changes or 
time to send it in for corporate review, which AES Honduras 
President Carlos Pineda did.   Subsequently, the AES 
contract became a political football in the Honduran 
Congress, but eventually was approved, signed by the 
President in February and published in March. 
 
4. (SBU) In the meantime, AES Corporation in the US was 
undergoing financial and management restructuring.  A 
December settlement with creditors did not include any 
capital financing for the Honduras project.  Gas prices 
spiked in the run-up to the war in Iraq and have stayed 
relatively high since, complicating financing arrangements. 
AES\' newly appointed chief of the Central American region 
visited Honduras to explore the possibilities of switching 
to a coal-fired plant.  He concluded it was unfeasible both 
legally and politically (especially since the company had 
spent three years pushing the benefits of bringing gas to 
Central America).  The company then directed the manager of 
AES Honduras to find partners to assume the development 
costs of the project.  AES has emphasized in conversations 
with Econoffs that the company had lost confidence in 
Honduras and its investment climate. 
 
--------------------------- 
AES Strategy for Next Steps 
--------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Thus, since February, AES Honduras has sought to 
find both a local partner and an international energy 
company to buy into the project.  These deals have not 
closed as quickly as hoped, and the company appears to be 
running out of time. 
 
6. (SBU) One US oil and gas company, active in Central 
America, is seriously studying a major investment (with 
majority control) in the El Faro project, and has begun its 
own internal studies of the project.  The company would 
bring to the table sufficient funding for the project 
(avoiding the need for a financing package) and its own gas 
reserves.  Investment by this multinational, or one like it, 
would allow the El Faro project to proceed in its original 
form using LNG and meeting all specifications of the 
original emergency contract.  A final decision will not be 
forthcoming, however, until at least November 2003. 
 
7. (SBU) To meet the immediate needs of providing a 
performance bond and final paperwork for an operating 
permit, AES is negotiating to sell a large majority of its 
shares now (up to 90 percent) to the Honduran Larach Group. 
Larach has been interested in participation in El Faro for 
quite some time, but realization of the difficult financing 
prospects for the LNG terminal has delayed the completion of 
the deal.  Recent news of high gas prices and a violent 
kidnapping attempt in June of Luis Larach, one of the 
principal negotiators, also affected the timing. 
 
8. (SBU) To square the circle, on July 3, AES proposed to 
ENEE and the GOH that the government agree that the 
investors would have the flexibility to build a thermal 
plant based on bunker fuel, if financing for the entire LNG 
project could not be found in the next six months.  The 
proposal would give the comfort level to the Larach group to 
sign its deal with AES and put down the five million dollar 
performance bond immediately. 
 
------------- 
GOH Reactions 
------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Since March, President Ricardo Maduro, Minister of 
the Presidency Luis Cosenza and a number of presidential 
advisors have approached the Ambassador and other Emboffs 
with strong concerns about the delays in payment of the 
performance bond and news that AES was not planning on 
maintaining a significant interest in the project.  The GOH 
perceives, probably correctly, a big political risk that 
AES\' exit strategy will be seized upon by political 
opponents who have criticized Maduro for months for bowing 
to pressure (read interference) from the USG in ultimately 
supporting the AES project.  Note: GOH authorities are deaf 
to any suggestion that they brought these problems on 
themselves by badly mishandling the 2002 tender process, 
forcing an unfinanceable contract down AES\' throats over 
Christmas, or refusing to provide the flexibility that would 
allow the company time to bring in a multinational energy 
partner into the equation.  End Note. 
 
10. (SBU) By June, the government began sending letters to 
AES insisting on compliance with the contract and laying the 
groundwork for legal proceedings against AES for breach of 
contract.   In early July, AES received some encouragement 
to provide the details of the contingency plan for bunker 
fuel.  However, on July 9, a negative reply was received 
from the General Manager of ENEE. 
 
11. (SBU) Upon receipt of the letter, AES requested Embassy 
advocacy with President Maduro and his top advisors to 
reconsider the decision.  Without taking a formal position, 
Econcouns participated in a conference call with AES 
officials in Honduras and the U.S. late on July 9 to explain 
our understanding of the GOH\'s view of the picture and 
Embassy limitations in defending the company\'s decision on 
an exit strategy immediately after contract signature. 
 
--------------- 
Embassy Comment 
--------------- 
12. (SBU) This is not necessarily the end of the project, 
but the July 9 decision bodes badly.  The GOH apparently 
decided that if AES is exiting the project and proposing 
that a conventional thermal project be substituted for the 
gas version, there is no need for the GOH to respect its 
side of the contract, especially with other well connected 
domestic electricity producers willing to pick up the 
contract.  Time will tell over the next few weeks if the 
Larach Group investors can convince the GOH otherwise.  If 
the contract is lost and the GOH does sue AES Honduras, that 
will also complicate (if not doom) the efforts to continue 
attracting a sizable investor for the gas project itself. 
While the Embassy believes the July 3 AES proposal was 
probably the best possible given the exit-strategy decision, 
we do not recommend any formal advocacy for AES at this 
time. 
 
PALMER 
"
"9346","7/11/2003 22:43","03TEGUCIGALPA1652","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (BUCKLEY), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, JULY 11, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
7/11 entitled \"The situation in Iraq and our soldiers\". \"The 
death of three American soldiers yesterday confirms that the 
Iraqi resistance against the invasion is getting stronger, 
increasing the insecurity for foreign troops and the concern for 
Washington and London. This concern should also be shared by the 
Third World countries sending troops to Iraq, like Honduras.\" 
 
\"Beyond the moral and legal implications of contributing to the 
occupation of a sovereign territory after a war that wasn\'t 
approved by the U.N., sending our soldiers to Iraq considering 
the current circumstances is exposing those fellow countrymen to 
an unnecessary risk, backing a cause that it is far from being 
fair or humanitarian.\" 
 
\"Even accepting that we obviously depend on the world\'s 
superpower and that our governments are extremely willing to 
fulfill the wishes of Uncle Sam, even those that go against 
international law, this time we should wait that a civil 
government takes over in Iraq and the U.N. organizes a real 
pacification force before sending our troops. This will calm down 
the Iraqi resistance and provide the moral and legal 
justification to send our soldiers. Meanwhile, let the British 
and Americans pay the price of the invasion.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9374","7/14/2003 13:10","03TEGUCIGALPA1655","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR CI/OCS/WHA, CA/OCS/ACS AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC, HO 
SUBJECT: CONSULAR MEETING WITH HONDURAN CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
ON HAGUE CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION 
CASES 
 
 
1. SUMMARY: On July 10, 2003, Deputy Consul General and 
LES Consular Specialist met with the Interim Director of 
the Instituto Hondureno de la Ninez y la Familia (IHNFA), 
Attorney Luis Erasmo Elvir.  The IHNFA is the Designated 
Central Authority in Honduras for the Hague Convention on 
International Child Abduction. Consular reps presented 
IHNFA Director with a new Hague application and much to 
our dismay the IHNFA stated that the Hague Convention on 
Child Abduction could not be applied in Honduras because 
the GOH had not yet ratified the convention. END OF 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. On July 9, 2003, Post learned that IHNFA\'s Director, 
Attorney Maria Elena de Carbajal had resigned and that 
Attorney Luis Erasmo Elvir was currently Acting Interim 
Director.  We made an appointment with Attorney Elvin to 
submit a new application under the Hague for the return 
of Amcit Kevin Obed Berrios.  On July 11, 2003 at 2:00 
p.m., Deputy Consul General and LES Consular Specialist 
met with the Interim Director, Attorney Erasmo Elvir, and 
his legal assessors, Attorney Melissa Calix and Attorney 
Alba Cecilia Mena de Beln.  As we were submitting the 
Obed Berrios application, we were informed that the Hague 
Convention on Child Abduction could not be applied in 
Honduras because the GOH had not yet ratified the 
convention.  We were surprised to hear this from the 
IHNFA reps, since we had raised this issue with them back 
in July 27, 1998, and were under the impression that they 
understood the mechanics of the Hague Convention. 
 
3.  Once again, Consular reps explained that the 
applicability issue was settled in July 2001 when 
Ambassador Policarpo Callejas, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs Advisor, confirmed that since both Honduras and 
the USA are signatories to the Vienna Convention, the 
Hague Convention International Child Abduction is in 
force between the two countries.  The Vienna Convention 
Article 27 states that a country may not invoke the 
provisions of its internal law (ratification requirement) 
as justification for its failure to implement specific 
provisions of a treaty. 
 
4. The IHNFA reps provided us with a copy of a letter 
dated May 30, 2003 addressed to the President of the 
Honduran Congress, Porfiro Lobo, in which they requested 
that Congress define the applicability of the Hague 
Convention in Honduras.  Consular reps agreed to provide 
IHNFA with copies of all the documentation we have 
indicating that this issue has already been resolved.  We 
will also send, via appropriate Embassy channels, a 
letter to Mr. Lobo, with the same documentation, 
requesting a prompt response to IHNFA\'s original inquiry. 
It would appear that IHNFA is unwilling to apply the 
Hague without the expressed permission of the Honduran 
Congress, even though that permission is not required. 
Post will continue to actively pursue resolution of this 
matter, as we will continue to receive Hague applications 
and we wish to see them processed without undue delay by 
the GOH.  Post will advise the Department of any new 
developments as they become available. 
 
PALMER 
"
"9391","7/14/2003 21:53","03TEGUCIGALPA1666","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001666 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JULY 12, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Guillermo Castellanos Enamorado on Tegucigalpa-based 
moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 7/12 entitled \"Narco trafficking 
and Congressmen\". \"The cases of the member of the Central 
American Parliament detained in Nicaragua and the Honduran 
Congressman arrested in Olancho have brought forward once again 
the declarations made by the US Ambassador Larry Palmer, who 
stated that he hasn\'t seen any `powerful figure\' being prosecuted 
for any crime and that it is the duty of the proper authorities 
to investigate the authenticity of any report on drug 
trafficking\". 
 
\"Among the `powerful\' Mr. Palmer refers to, besides Congressmen, 
we can find ministers, high-ranking public officials, executive 
directors of decentralized institutions and other big fish that I 
have no idea of who can also be drug carriers for narco 
traffickers.\" 
 
\"How is it possible that such people can become members of 
National Congress or of that white elephant called the Central 
American Parliament? Even though we already knew that this 
institution has become the safe haven for the debris of the 
Central American political elites\". 
 
\"Anyway, I still wonder, how do these people sneak in? Is it 
possible that the political parties don\'t check and re-check the 
kind of people they include in their electoral ballots?\" 
 
\"For these and many more other reasons, it is urgent to approve 
the political reforms promised by the political parties during 
the last electoral campaign, to create effective mechanisms to 
avoid these scandals in the future.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"9392","7/14/2003 21:53","03TEGUCIGALPA1667","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON LIBERIA, JULY 14, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Carlos Alberto Montaner in Tegucigalpa-based moderate 
daily \"El Heraldo\" on 7/12 entitled \"Yankee, come home!\". \"The 
international public opinion wasn\'t prepared to witness the show 
put by countless demonstrators asking for a US military 
intervention in Liberia, to end the civil war that is tearing 
this country apart. They didn\'t ask for troops from the U.N., 
NATO, the Russians, the EU, much less from the Organization of 
African Unity. They want the gringos. How come?, because of their 
historical ties. Liberia was founded by a group of former 
American slaves that returned to their African motherland. We 
just have to find out if the U.S. has the will to take on this 
endeavor, so little after the Iraqi campaign.\" 
 
\"I certainly hope that the US leads an international force to 
bring peace to Liberia and in general to that particularly 
unstable African region. There\'s not much that can be done, and 
it would be absurd to create false expectations, but still 
there\'s a little hope: it appears that Liberia\'s neighbor 
country, Senegal, is slowly consolidating a democratic 
government. With a combination of luck, time and appropriate 
advice, this can be a leading example for this region. The US 
might just be the last hope for this poor people.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9419","7/15/2003 17:00","03TEGUCIGALPA1673","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE198145|03TEGUCIGALPA1015","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001673 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/CBA SMITH-NISSLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, ETRD 
SUBJECT: TEGUCIGALPA, HONDURAS - DUE DILIGENCE FOR THE 
SECRETARY OF STATE\'S 2003 AWARD FOR CORPORATE EXCELLENCE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1015 B. SECSTATE 198145 
 
1. (U) Post appreciates State\'s further consideration of 
Citibank, Banco de Honduras for this year\'s Secretary\'s Award 
for Corporate Excellence.  We blieve this corporation is 
deserving of the award for its outstanding demonstration of 
corporate citizenship, community development, and equal 
employment practices.  Post offers the following responses to 
ref b: 
 
A)  We are unaware of any possible downside or embarrassment 
caused by the selection of Citibank, Banco de Honduras should 
it be chosen. 
 
B)  Banco de Honduras receives administrative support from 
Miami, and indirectly supports job creation in U.S. companies 
that serve as clients. 
 
C)  Citibank, Banco de Honduras is a financial institution 
which works with all US based companies located in Honduras, 
providing various financial services and financing 
development projects in Honduras which lead to increased U.S. 
exports.  One current example is Citibank\'s syndication of 
financing of a 210MW electricity generation project being 
completed by a Honduran company.  The project is likely to 
spur U.S. exports of both capital goods and services. 
 
D)  The labor conditions in the bank are considered 
excellent.  There is a strong sense of teamwork within the 
institution as many employees contribute time and personal 
financial resources to Citibank, Banco de Honduras\' many 
philanthropic activities (ref a).  The workers are not 
unionized.  The compensation plan is extremely competitive 
for the local market. 
 
2. (U) Please do not hesitate to contact post\'s economic 
officer in charge of commercial affairs, Nicholle Urdaneta at 
011-504-236-9320 ext. 4634 or urdanetanm@state.gov should you 
have any further questions. 
Palmer 
"
"9449","7/16/2003 17:17","03TEGUCIGALPA1686","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE141419","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001686 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO USITC FOR D.F. LEAHY 
STATE PASS USTR FOR CENTAM/CARIB DIRECTOR 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/IPC 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EINV, EIND, KTEX, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN TEXTILE INDUSTRY DOWNTURN HIGHLIGHTS USITC 
CARRIBEAN BASIN INVESTMENT SURVEY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 141419 
 
1.  Post submits the following report in response to reftel 
request for the biennial report of the U.S. International 
Trade Commission (USITC) on the Caribbean Basin Economic 
Recovery Act (CBERA), as required by section 215(a) of the 
CBERA. 
 
2.  Summary: The slowdown and sluggish recovery of the U.S. 
economy during 2001 and 2002 continue to have a depressing 
effect on the Honduran maquila sector, and the future is 
clouded by fears of being unable to compete with China and 
other Asian producers after quotas are removed in 2005. 
While CBTPA benefits have been crucial to the establishment 
of the maquila industry in Honduras, the industry is now 
hoping for improved market access and rules of origin under 
CAFTA to provide opportunity for future growth.  During the 
period covered by this survey, total investment in the 
sector increased, passing 1.5 billion in 2002, but total 
employment in the industry fell by 15 percent from 2000 to 
2002.  In 2002, 13 maquilas closed in Honduras as a result 
of the slowdown in the U.S. economy and management problems. 
Of those 13 companies, eight were U.S. companies.  End 
summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Honduran Maquila Association Statistics 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3.  The Honduran Maquila Association (AHM) is an active 
industry advocacy group based in the North Coast city of San 
Pedro Sula.  It represents 217 (roughly 90 percent) of the 
apparel assembly operations in Honduras, and is the primary 
source of statistical information for this industry.  Rather 
than attempting to collect data directly from individual 
companies, as we did two years ago with very incomplete 
results, we have this year relied on statistics from the 
AHM.  Investment statistics for 2002 are still preliminary 
and incomplete, but do provide a general picture. 
 
4.  Investment: According to AHM records, in 2002, the 
maquila industry totaled just over USD 1.56 billion of 
accumulated investment, up from 1.421 billion in 2001 and 
1.237 billion in 2000.  A detailed breakdown of investment 
by country of origin was not available; however, U.S. 
companies own 40 percent of the maquilas in Honduras. 
Honduran companies are the next largest owner with 31 
percent of all operations, followed by companies from Korea 
with 15 percent, Hong Kong with 4 percent and Taiwan with 2 
percent.  Total accumulated foreign investment in the sector 
was roughly USD 830 million in 2002, up from USD 750 million 
in 2001 and USD 650 million in 2000.  The AHM predicts 
investment growth of ten percent per year, which would bring 
total accumulated investment in the industry to USD 2.08 
billion by 2005.  Note: Four knitting operations and several 
investments in full package apparel operations were 
initiated during this period in response to enhancements 
included in the U.S. program.  End note. 
 
5.  The Central Bank reports that new FDI in Honduras in 
2002 totaled USD 219 million, of which USD 76 million (35 
percent) was in the maquila industry.  This is down from USD 
296 million of FDI in 2001, of 101 million (34 percent) was 
in the maquila industry. 
 
6.  Employment: Employment in the industry has been in 
decline, from 126,000 employees in 2000, to 110,083 in 2001, 
to 107,398 in 2002, a 15 percent drop over two years.  This 
decrease occurred despite the estimated creation of 10,000 
new jobs from 2001 to 2002.  AHM also estimates that the 
industry supports 535,000 direct dependents (assuming a 
ratio of five dependents to every one worker) and 1.07 
million supplier and service beneficiaries (based on a ten- 
to-one ratio).  In 2002, women comprised 67 percent of the 
maquila workforce, down slightly from 72 percent in 2000, as 
the diminishing stigma of working in apparel assembly 
factories leads to increasing male participation. 
 
7.  Thirteen maquilas closed in 2002, though 11 new maquilas 
opened during the same period.  Of the 13 closings, eight 
were U.S. companies, while only three of the new ventures 
were U.S. originated.  These numbers represent a lower 
turnover rate than in 2001, when 35 maquilas closed and 30 
maquilas opened in Honduras.  Since 1998 there have been no 
geographical restrictions for the establishment of a Free 
Trade Zone (FTZ) in Honduras.  Instead, any company may 
apply for FTZ status so long as they are producing for 
export.  The companies with FTZ status are still 
overwhelmingly concentrated at the north coast and near San 
Pedro Sula, with some operations in Tegucigalpa. 
 
8.  Exports: In 2002, Honduras ranked as the third-largest 
supplier of textiles and apparel to the U.S. market. 
Honduras ranks first among Central American and CBI 
countries in textile exports to the U.S.  Total exports from 
the Honduran maquila industry totaled USD 2.439 billion in 
2002, a slight increase over previous figures of USD 2.344 
billion in 2001 and 2.362 billion in 2000. 
 
9.  Note: The decline in employment and stagnation in 
exports are especially striking when viewed in historical 
context.  From 1994-2000, the value of maquila sector 
exports grew on average at a rate of 25 percent per year, 
compared with just 2 percent per year from 2000 to 2002. 
Likewise, during the 1990\'s employment in the Honduran 
maquila sector enjoyed tremendous growth - from only 9,000 
workers in 1990, to 55,000 in 1995, and then to its peak of 
126,000 in 2000.  At that time, industry officials predicted 
that employment would reach 250,000 by 2005.  These figures 
have since been adjusted to account for the U.S. economic 
downturn, which has affected the receipt of production 
contracts in the Honduran maquila sector.  Current estimates 
place the predicted number of employees in the maquila 
sector at 143,000 for the year 2005, though even this 
estimate assumes (somewhat optimistically) a ten percent 
annual rate of employment growth.  End note. 
 
----------------- 
Industry Concerns 
----------------- 
 
10.  According to AHM, CBERA makes the country more 
attractive to drawback factory investment, construction and 
expansion of industrial parks, and importation of tax free 
textile machinery, equipment, and accessories.  However the 
slowdown of the U.S. economy impacts significantly the 
Honduran textile and apparel sector by reducing purchase 
orders and lowering revenues. 
 
11.  The future effects of the CBERA program will 
undoubtedly be influenced by the results of the ongoing 
negotiations for a Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA).  The market access discussions represent a pivotal 
topic of discussion for the Honduran economy.  A key point 
in the CBERA program, rules of origin, is an essential 
component of the CAFTA negotiations for the maquila 
industry.  Under the current agreement, some maquilas cannot 
obtain the U.S. components required to meet U.S. standard 
requirements.  For example, manufacturers of brassieres 
cannot access all of the required components from U.S. 
suppliers.  Thus, the maquilas hope for a more flexible 
rules of origin regime under CAFTA.  Another problem 
regarding the CBERA program is certain exclusion provisions. 
The provision excluding socks was mentioned by an industry 
official as a limiting factor of the CBERA program\'s 
potential benefits. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
12.  The maquila sector\'s poor performance during the period 
covered by this report (2001 and 2002) plainly demonstrates 
the sector\'s dependence on the U.S. economy.  No matter how 
beneficial the preferences under CBERA, the sector cannot 
maintain 1990\'s-style growth when the U.S. economy is 
stagnating.  Looking to the future, there are serious 
industry concerns about competition with China once textile 
quotas are removed in 2005.  Without immediate duty free 
treatment, maquila owners are concerned about their 
competitiveness in a non-quota driven market.  One industry 
official noted the flight of factories will be a given.  He 
noted a conversation with a prominent client who commented 
that the company would transfer at least 30 percent of its 
business to Asia if the CAFTA agreement does not provide a 
sufficiently attractive incremental market access, to allow 
the industry in Honduras to compete with Asia.  Proximity to 
the U.S. is important, but it is not enough.  End comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"9450","7/16/2003 21:25","03TEGUCIGALPA1689","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE174496","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001689 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IPC: Susan Wilson 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KIPR, ECON, ETRD, HO 
SUBJECT:  HONDURAS: WIPO COPYRIGHT TREATIES ARE IN EFFECT 
 
REF: STATE 174496 
 
1.  On July 10 EconOff delivered reftel demarche to 
Marvin Discua, head of the GOH\'s Intellectual Property 
Rights office.  Discua confirmed that Honduras became 
party to both the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty on May 20, 2002.  He 
further explained that under Honduran law, such treaties 
are self-executing, and that no additions or changes to 
national law are necessary for the treaties to acquire 
the full force of law.  While in some cases the GOH will 
write rules to provide for the clear implementation of a 
treaty, Discua stated that, in his opinion, the WCT and 
WPPT were already sufficiently clear, and writing an 
additional layer of rules was not necessary.  He said 
that there have been no problems with the implementation 
of the treaties. 
 
2.  Comment: Post has received no complaints from U.S. 
companies operating in Honduras pertaining to the issues 
covered by the two treaties.  EconOff forwarded reftel\'s 
recommendation that `self-execution\' of the treaties 
should be considered insufficient, but Discua made clear 
that the GOH does not believe there is further 
legislative work to be done on this issue.  End comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"9482","7/17/2003 17:23","03TEGUCIGALPA1695","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001695 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON FBI PARTICIPATION IN INVESTIGATIONS OF 
MASSACRE IN EL PORVENIR, JULY 16, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/16 entitled \"FBI agents investigate the massacre in El 
Porvenir\". \"The Deputy Minister of Security Armando Calidonio 
confirmed that a team of FBI agents has been in Honduras for some 
days investigating the killings in El Porvenir\'s penal farm.\" 
 
\"Calidonio declared that this team arrived in the country as a 
result of a special request from President Maduro and the 
Minister of Security Oscar Alvarez, and they are also 
investigating other criminal acts. Also, he stated, `The FBI 
agents are helping us in the investigation because we need to 
perform a highly professional work, we don\'t want to rush into 
false conclusions\'.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9483","7/17/2003 17:24","03TEGUCIGALPA1696","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001696 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JULY 16, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/16 entitled \"DEA searches for cocaine unloaded in Olancho\". 
\"Agents of the DEA are participating in the search of the cocaine 
that, according to police sources, was transported on the plane 
that landed in San Esteban, Olancho a week ago.\" 
 
\"In this investigative and search task also participates the 
Joint Information Center, main liaison of the DEA with Honduran 
police authorities which provides information to US antinarcotics 
authorities.\" 
 
2. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 
7/16 entitled \"British tourist finds cocaine in Utila\". \"While 
walking on the Utila beaches, a British tourist found several 
packages containing 50 kilos of cocaine last Monday.\" 
 
\"Antidrug police confirmed that the cocaine was `highly pure\'. up 
to this moment, no one has been arrested as suspect on this case, 
and the police is still patrolling this region looking for 
similar packages.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9484","7/17/2003 17:27","03TEGUCIGALPA1697","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IMMUNITIES, JULY 16, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/16 entitled \"No way of winning\". \"Let\'s see how things work in 
Honduras: if the Honduran politicians don\'t put the ball through 
the basket they lose, and if they do it they lose too. A group of 
Congressmen got together after receiving a great deal of 
criticism, and in a moment of despair or irritation they decided 
to take away immunities from everybody. It\'s worth to point out 
that this has just been an announcement, there\'s nothing official 
yet, but as usual the decision making in Honduras is like a 
pendulum, moving back and forth.\" 
 
\"This has been the case on the issue of immunities. The 
Constitution includes a broad definition of it, pretending to 
embrace everything, but it has resulted on a continuous abuse of 
this privilege, until the bubble burst. Once it burst, they 
decided to take an extreme measure: eliminate immunities for 
everybody.\" 
 
\"We believe it\'s necessary to limit immunities exclusively to 
perform the duties of key public officials. It shouldn\'t be too 
broad to protect civil servants from civil lawsuits or criminal 
prosecution.\" 
 
2. Article in San Pedro Sula-based daily \"Tiempo\" on 7/16 
entitled \"The elimination of immunity will only benefit 
criminals\". \"Olban Valladares and Toribio Aguilera, Congressmen 
representing the Innovation and Unity Party, declared that the 
elimination of immunities will only benefit organized crime, 
narco trafficking and a group of 12 untouchable entrepreneurs who 
have become rich through illegal activities.\" 
 
\"They insisted that the abolition of immunities will affect many 
public officials, such as Congressmen, judicial agents, 
prosecutors, judges, members of the Superior Court and other 
officials of the Executive branch.\" 
 
\"They believe it\'s essential to adjust the immunities law, to 
protect the officials of the Judicial, Executive and Legislative 
branch, and the Public Ministry during their duties as civil 
servants.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9486","7/17/2003 21:54","03TEGUCIGALPA1702","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, DRL/PHD, AND EB/TRA 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/17/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KJUS, ASEC, HO, KRCM 
SUBJECT: LARGEST DRUG BUST IN HONDURAN HISTORY YIELDS 
APPROXIMATELY 2,000 KILOS OF COCAINE 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer for Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  On July 16 Honduran authorities seized 
approximately 2,000 kilos of cocaine hidden in a secret 
compartment aboard the \"Broad Fire Leader,\" a Cayman Islands 
flagged vessel that had departed Panama July 11.  The vessel 
docked at French Harbor, Roatan, a small Bay Island port not 
normally associated with international commerce.  The police 
arrested six Honduran nationals; two crew members and four 
other individuals associated with the operation.  This 
seizure is being touted as the largest in Honduran history. 
It raises the total amount of cocaine seized this year in 
Honduras to almost 4,000 kilos.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (C) On July 16 Honduran authorities seized approximately 
2,000 kilos of cocaine hidden in a secret compartment aboard 
the \"Broad Fire Leader,\" a Cayman Islands flagged vessel with 
registration number 731916 that had departed Panama July 11. 
The vessel was docked at French Harbor, Roatan, a small port 
not normally associated with international commerce. 
According to press reports, police were alerted to the 
presence of the vessel by an anonymous phone call.  Police 
spokesman Leonel Sauceda stated that the special 
investigative police, known as the DGIC had prior knowledge 
concerning the ship\'s illicit activities.  Authorities 
arrived on the scene at approximately 0600 but did not board 
the vessel until 0700.  (Comment:  In fact, the Embassy TAT 
passed intelligence information to the INL funded joint 
intelligence center (CEINCO) that then forwarded the 
information to the DGIC. End Comment.) 
 
3. (C) The ship\'s manifest stated that its cargo of beer, 
tires, and electronic goods was intended for a local Honduran 
business, but authorities soon determined the business did 
not exist.  Due to foot-dragging by Public Ministry 
prosecutors, however, police did not actually search the 
vessel until approximately 1730, over 11 hours after the fist 
call had been placed to the District Attorney\'s office. 
Police then brought in drug sniffing dogs which alerted 
authorities to the existence of drugs on the ship.  A cursory 
observation of the vessel suggested a secret compartment 
below the main hold.  A search of this compartment yielded 92 
packages of cocaine totaling approximately 2,000 kilos. 
 
4. (U) Police immediately arrested the ship\'s two captains, 
Danley Miles Woods (38) and Edmund Kickson (49), both 
Honduran nationals and residents of Roatan.  Police later 
arrested four other Honduran nationals associated with the 
operation: Ricky McKensi (24); Ferry McKensi (26); Chrisman 
Lee McKensi (18); and Orny Johnson (19) 
Palmer 
"
"9513","7/18/2003 21:33","03TEGUCIGALPA1709","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001709 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (JGREENBLATT); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JULY 18, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/18 entitled \"Overwhelming\". \"The Central American presidents 
agreed in their latest summit in Guatemala on a common position 
to move forward on the CAFTA negotiations, and to establish a 
common ground to start negotiations for a free trade agreement 
with the EU.\" 
 
\"The Guatemalan President inaugurated the summit warning that the 
Central American integration `is a crucial step, and 
globalization will overwhelm us if we are divided\'.\" 
 
\"If we have advanced in this matter, we hope it happens likewise 
regarding other integration issues. This experience should teach 
us that we shouldn\'t wait to have a crisis that could have easily 
be avoided if the presidents had provided their political backing 
since the beginning of the negotiations.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9514","7/18/2003 21:33","03TEGUCIGALPA1710","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JULY 18, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
7/18 entitled \"Tough fight against narco trafficking\". 
\"Undoubtedly, drug trafficking in Honduras is considerable, as 
shown by the recent drug seizures that have evidenced the 
determination of police authorities against this criminal 
activity that is destroying the lives of millions of young people 
around the world.\" 
 
\"The seizure of more than 2 tons of drugs in the Bay Islands this 
week was a hard hit against drug trafficking, and according to 
the Minister of Security Oscar Alvarez, it demonstrates the 
determination of the Honduran authorities to continue in the 
fight against narco trafficking.\" 
 
\"For that reason, we encourage the police, prosecutors and judges 
to keep their upfront fight against narco traffickers, and don\'t 
give in to their power and financial resources.\" 
 
2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/18 entitled \"80 prominent people are being investigated for 
drug trafficking\". \"Roy Medina, the Honduran General Attorney 
affirmed that more than 100 tons of drugs come through Honduras 
destined to the US, according to the information provided by US 
anti-drug agencies to the US Embassy in Honduras.\" 
 
\"Medina stated that it\'s evident that a large amount of drugs go 
through Honduras even though it\'s impossible to determine exactly 
how much, but he acknowledged that US Ambassador Larry Palmer is 
well informed about this issue.\" 
 
\"Medina said, `we are determined to stop drug trafficking and 
that\'s why we have strengthened our investigation work. Among 
those being investigated, there are 80 renowned narcos that will 
be brought to justice when our investigation is through\'.\" 
 
\"About the seizure of 2,000 kilos of cocaine in Roatan after a 
serious warning from the US Embassy, Medina noted, `I believe 
it\'s just a coincidence, it isn\'t a direct response for what the 
US Ambassador has recently said\'.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9515","7/18/2003 22:03","03TEGUCIGALPA1712","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001712 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUG TRAFFICKING, JULY 17, 2003 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
7/17 entitled \"National security and narco trafficking\". \"Drug 
trafficking and organized crime which have recently established 
criminal networks in Honduras, closely related to criminal bands 
in Colombia, have evidenced that the Honduran state doesn\'t 
enforce law and neither does it have control over its territory 
and its population, particularly in the departments of Olancho, 
Gracias a Dios and Colon.\" 
 
\"It\'s a fact that the society and the state are being threatened. 
the notion of national security that involved a blatant violation 
of fundamental human rights in the past should be reoriented 
toward its true meaning: the defense of the common well being, 
protect the population\'s health and life, the environment and 
social cohesion which are being seriously jeopardized by the 
advance of the globalization of crime.\" 
 
2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
7/17 entitled \"Gigantic cocaine seizure\". \"Police authorities 
seized about 2,300 kilos of cocaine in a freighter near Roatan.\" 
 
\"The Minister of Security Oscar Alvarez said that this seizure 
proved once more that the current authorities are determined to 
fight against drug trafficking.\" 
 
\"For months, the US Ambassador Larry Palmer has highlighted the 
scarce results Honduras has achieved in the fight against drug 
trafficking, and a few days ago he affirmed that the country was 
on the way to become a narco state. Alvarez stated, `we are 
sending a clear and compelling message that drug traffickers 
shouldn\'t dare to turn Honduras into a narco state, and I\'m sure 
that we are still far from this situation\'.\" 
 
\"Alvarez said that he had talked to the US Ambassador Larry 
Palmer, expressing his satisfaction because President Maduro is 
proving his will to directly fight against this threat.\" 
 
3. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
7/17 entitled \"The Public Ministry is investigating the ten most 
important narcos\". \"Roy Medina, head of the Public Ministry, 
confirmed that ten leaders of the narco trafficking cartels 
operating in Honduras are being investigated by this 
institution.\" 
 
\"Medina affirmed, `We are already getting some results, everyone 
knows about the case in San Esteban, Olancho where we arrested 
nine people, including a Congressman and we are also 
investigating the case of the cocaine shipment found in Utila 
this week. however, until we finish the prosecution process, we 
will disclose the names of those responsible of these acts\'.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9516","7/18/2003 22:03","03TEGUCIGALPA1713","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001713 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (JGREENBLATT); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JULY 17, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/17 entitled \"The ball\". \"The Central American presidents will 
meet in Guatemala to analyze the progress of CAFTA negotiations 
and to follow up on an initiative presented by Spanish President 
Jose Maria Aznar, who said in a meeting held in San Salvador last 
week that the ball to start the negotiations for a free trade 
agreement with the EU is in Central America\'s court.\" 
 
\"They will also talk about what they should have discussed before 
CAFTA negotiations kicked off, the need to present a common 
proposal to the US. After the show they put during the 
Tegucigalpa Round of negotiations, where they were unable to move 
forward as a result of the discrepancies between the Central 
American negotiation teams, the presidents were required to step 
up to provide the necessary political backing for their 
negotiators.\" 
 
\"We anticipate positive results from this presidential summit, 
considering that these meetings are frequent but we don\'t see any 
results. We especially expect some progress on the regional 
integration process. We\'ll see if Central America hands the ball 
over to President Aznar.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"9587","7/22/2003 17:08","03TEGUCIGALPA1722","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUGS, JULY 21, 2003 
 
1. Op-ed by Julio Escoto in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" entitled \"Trapped\". \"When did the US get trapped by 
drugs? Definitely during the 1960s and 1970s with the hippie 
generation and after the Marines got back from Vietnam, when the 
Americans got a chance to experience the horror of war and the 
deceit of their political class. Then, drugs became the spiritual 
leaders of that generation, tired of unfulfilled promises and 
fragile leadership.\" 
 
\"Drugs aren\'t unknown to the American culture, they have always 
been part of the menu of that growing empire. However, there is a 
slight difference: in previous decades drugs addiction was a 
discrete activity, now it isn\'t. According to the DEA, there are 
about twenty million Americans smoking marijuana in a regular 
basis, forty million have tried cocaine at least once and no less 
than seven million have tried crack, amphetamines, LSD or other 
chemical or natural drug.\" 
 
\"The figures are overwhelming, the drug business is the most 
profitable activity in the US. That is why the Colombian, 
Mexican, Israeli, Turkish and Russian mobs have made the US a 
paradise to sell drugs. As a result, Mexico and Central America 
have become the natural route to transport drugs to the US. It\'s 
believed that about 60% of the cocaine sold in the US has passed 
through this region.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9588","7/22/2003 17:08","03TEGUCIGALPA1723","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (JGREENBLATT), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON IMF, JULY 21, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
7/21 entitled \"IMF\". \"This is the fifth time this administration 
announces a national dialogue, but it has never taken place. Now 
it has come the time to get prepared to negotiate with the IMF.\" 
 
\"Despite the previous economic measures taken by the government, 
there was no agreement with the IMF. Meanwhile, other serious 
problems came about, such as the escalation of violence, 
organized crime and drug trafficking, and the economy doesn\'t get 
going and unemployment becomes unbearable. Consequently, it is 
essential to have a national dialogue because it\'s imperative to 
reach an agreement with the IMF in a short term.\" 
 
\"We hope this time the national dialogue isn\'t just a 
manifestation of good intentions. By now, the President should 
know that things get much better every time he takes care of them 
by himself.\" 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"9590","7/22/2003 19:26","03TEGUCIGALPA1724","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03STATE207638|03TEGUCIGALPA1243|03TEGUCIGALPA1309","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001724 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, NEA, WHA, WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2013 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PREL, PGOV, SP, PL, HO 
SUBJECT: STATUS OF HONDURAN TROOP DEPLOYMENT TO IRAQ 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1243 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1309 
     C. JUNE 15 INFO MEMO FROM DR. S. ZAKHEIM TO 
        SECRECTARY OF DEFENSE 
     D. STATE 207638(ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer for Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (S) SUMMARY:  Training continues for the all volunteer 
Task Force Xatruch (TFX), the 370 soldier contingent Honduras 
plans to deploy to Iraq by mid-August.  The task force is 
composed of 35 officers and 335 enlisted soldiers. TFX will 
deploy as part of the Spanish Brigade in the Polish Division 
and will operate in the vicinity of An Najaf.  TFX will work 
side-by-side with local police to patrol this major smuggling 
zone.  This area has been pacified and the biggest expected 
threat TFX might face will be organized crime elements.  Task 
Force officers informed PolMilOff that the unit\'s training 
was nearing completion and moral was high.  Equipment and 
sustainment needs continue to be a major concern, that could 
delay the deployment of the Task Force.  Also, due to the 
fact that TFX will deploy through Kuwait, a Status of Forces 
Agreement (SOFA) with the Government of Kuwait must be 
completed before GOH forces enter the theater of operations. 
END SUMMARY 
 
------------------- 
Task Force Xatruch 
------------------- 
 
2. (S) Training continues for TFX, the 370 soldier contingent 
Honduras plans to deploy to Iraq mid-August.  The task force, 
composed of 35 officers and 335 enlisted soldiers, is 
comprised of volunteers from throughout the Honduran Armed 
Forces (HOAF).  TFX will deploy (with the other Central 
American forces) as part of the Spanish Brigade under the 
Polish Division and will operate in the vicinity of An Najaf. 
 TFX will work side-by-side with local police to patrol this 
major smuggling zone.  This area has been pacified and the 
biggest expected threat TFX might face will be organized 
crime elements.  The breakdown of TFX is: 
 
1 Command and Control Unit with 13 Officers and 7 Enlisted; 
1 Infantry Company with 5 Officers and 101 Enlisted; 
1 Infantry Company with 5 Officers and 100 Enlisted; 
1 Military Police Company with 5 Officers and 77 Enlisted; 
1 Support Company with 7 Officers and 40 Enlisted. 
 
3. (C) TFX is commanded by COL Carlos Andino Cobos who 
recently returned from a survey trip to the deployment zone 
in Iraq.  COL Andino reports that his biggest concern is the 
morale of his troops after arriving in Iraq.  Apparently, the 
deployment zone near An Najaf does not offer any type of 
diversion when units are off duty.  (Comment:  The Honduran 
contingency will be deploying without any means to provide 
rest and recreational activities for its troops; alcohol is 
also not permitted.  Also, a senior military officer 
expressed his concerns that the HOAF has not developed a 
mechanism for TFX soldiers to have even periodic telephone 
contact with their families back home during the deployment. 
The Hondurans will be quartered in housing vacated by 
departing U.S. Marine units with practically no conveniences 
left behind.  Boredom will surely be a problem and COL Andino 
fears that none of his soldiers will volunteer to stay past 
the planned six month deployment due to the significant 
hardships they will face.  End Comment) 
 
4. (SBU) The HOAF reports that of the 35 officers slated to 
deploy to Iraq, over half have served as part of the UN 
peacekeeping mission to the Sinai.  Also, for the first time, 
Honduras will deploy six women as part of its contribution to 
the international peacekeeping effort.  The primary mission 
of these women will be to function as interlocutors with the 
women of Iraq, thus respecting local customs. The planned 
deployment of TFX will be for six months.  HOAF officials 
have indicated a second volunteer task force will be readied 
to replace TFX at the end of the six month deployment. 
 
5. (SBU) On July 7 PolMilOff visited Honduran military base 
at Tamara to review the progress of TFX.  Base commanders and 
TFX officers all reported good progress and high moral, 
although one officer noted that the young age of many of the 
enlisted soldiers could potentially be problematic due to 
their inexperience.  Nine members of Joint Task Force Bravo 
(JTF-B) were also present as observers to verify that TFX 
members are able to complete the 33 assigned principal tasks 
(and the many subsets below them) necessary before the 
deployment can go forward.  JTF-B personnel reported good 
progress by the Honduran troops toward these goals. 
 
6. (SBU) While the training of TFX is proceeding on schedule, 
sustainment and equipment needs continue to be a challenge. 
TFX members still do not know exactly how they will deploy to 
Iraq or how their other logistical needs will be met.  Prior 
to any deployment, the GOH must also complete a SOFA 
agreement with the Government of Kuwait (ref D).  The GOH is 
working hard toward the completion of a SOFA in order to have 
the agreement in place before the end of July.  The current 
target date for the arrival of TFX to Iraq is sometime in 
mid-August with the stand-up of the force projected for 
September 1. 
 
-------------- 
Vetting of TFX 
-------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Post understands the necessity to vet TFX members 
for human rights abuses due to the fact that the unit will be 
receiving USG funding.  This process is moving forward and 
should be completed soon.  In the interim, the HOAF assured 
Post verbally that none of the members of TFX participated in 
the incident at the El Porvenir prison where 68 people were 
killed, many purportedly at the hands of GOH security forces 
(ref B). 
 
--------------------- 
Political Environment 
--------------------- 
 
8. (C) Honduras, under the leadership of President Maduro, 
was an early member of the Coalition of the Willing, and 
remains a supporter of the U.S. position on Iraq.  The HOAF 
is also interested in increasing its participation in 
international peacekeeping missions, although at this point 
without significant USG assistance this is not a foreseeable 
option.  While the deployment of TFX to Iraq has not 
generated much public debate, apart from the usual 
denunciations of the Bloque Popular (a coalition of leftist 
activists), if TFX were to sustain even minimal casualties, 
public opinion could turn rapidly against Honduran 
participation in the reconstruction of Iraq. 
 
9. (U) On July 16 the National Innovation and Unity Party 
(PINU), a minor opposition party in the national congress, 
announced it is planning to introduce a resolution to block 
the planned troop deployment due to concerns about the 
security situation in Iraq.  PINU members also pointed to the 
fact that U.S. forces have yet to discover any weapons of 
mass destruction, which they charge undermines the legitimacy 
of U.S. forces in Iraq.  However, their main fear remains the 
risk of Honduran casualties.  This effort, which has little 
chance of success, is politically inspired to further place 
responsibility for the troop deployment squarely on Maduro\'s 
Nationalist Party. 
 
10. (C) Comment:  The GOH is hoping for generous USG military 
assistance for its participation as a member of the Coalition 
of the Willing, one of the first countries to sign and ratify 
an Article 98 agreement, and as a nation willing to send its 
troops to Iraq.  HOAF officials are well aware that some of 
their neighbors receive FMF assistance and are looking for 
similar funding based on Honduras\' overall support of the USG 
foreign policy objectives.  A high ranking GOH official 
privately questioned Honduras\' knee-jerk support of U.S. 
international objectives, and if U.S. military assistance 
does not materialize, the critics may grow louder and wider 
among GOH officials. End Comment 
 
Palmer 
"
"9591","7/22/2003 19:26","03TEGUCIGALPA1725","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001725 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D   COPY>>>>>Classified by/reasons added>>Classified by/reason added"
"9629","7/23/2003 21:46","03TEGUCIGALPA1740","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SNAR, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: NEW HONDURAN LEGISLATION SEEKS TO CURB ARMS 
TRAFFICKING AND VIOLENCE 
 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On July 2, the Honduran National Congress 
added Article 332 to the Honduran Penal Code.  This article 
calls for the collection of assault weapons and stricter 
punishment for trafficking and possession of outlawed 
weapons.  Article 332 comes at a time when Ministry of Public 
Security reports show that possession of assault weapons and 
their use in violent crime has been increasing steadily over 
the past several years in Honduras. END SUMMARY 
 
------------------ 
Origins and Trends 
------------------ 
 
2. (U) On July 2, the Honduran National Congress added 
Article 332 to the Honduran Penal Code.  This article calls 
for the collection of assault weapons and stricter punishment 
for trafficking and possession of outlawed weapons.  As 
reported by the Honduran press, approximately 82 percent of 
all deaths in Honduras are caused by firearms (of which 90 
percent are from AK-47s).  Even more alarming are reports 
that 80 percent of these victims are minors. 
 
3. (U) The availability of AK-47s and other automatic assault 
weapons in Honduras stems largely from the Contra period of 
the 1980s.  While estimates vary, it is believed that between 
400,000 and 500,000 arms illegally circulate in Honduras, of 
which 200,000 are AK-47s.  In addition to the lack of 
effective laws and regulations surrounding the trafficking 
and possession of arms, it is very easy and inexpensive to 
acquire them.  Press reports state that an AK-47 can be 
purchased at the El Salvadoran and Nicaraguan borders for as 
little as USD 20.  Furthermore, a recent trend has shown an 
increase in drugs-for-arms exchanges occurring among 
traffickers. 
 
----------- 
Article 332 
----------- 
 
4. (U) The newly passed Article 332 of the Honduran Penal 
Code makes the possession of the following arms illegal: 
AK-47s, Falks (FAL and FAP), UZI sub-military machine guns, 
M16s, M60s, Galils, G3s, Beretas, M21s, and any other 
fabricated arms.  The collection and destruction of these 
items is slated to begin with a 90 day arms-for-money 
exchange program.  Those persons turning over weapons will 
receive approximately USD 68 per item and will not face any 
criminal charges.  Another aspect of Article 332 calls for 
harsher punishment for those possessing and/or trafficking 
illegal weapons.  Such actions will carry a six-to-nine year 
prison sentence and possible fines of between USD 580 and USD 
1,162.  (COMMENT: It is hoped that this new legislation will 
give a boost to earlier attempts by the National Arms 
Registry (RNA) to register personal small firearms.  Under 
current law, each Honduran citizen is allowed up to five 
weapons, a large amount for a country facing such high rates 
of violence. END COMMENT) 
 
5. (U) President of Congress, Pepe Lobo, has called for all 
members of Congress to set an example by turning over their 
own personal weapons.  (COMMENT:  Currently, many political 
figures and prominent businessman hire private security 
personnel, the majority of which use AK-47s.  It is likely 
that certain private security companies and individuals will 
be given waivers from the new law.  END COMMENT) 
 
----------------------------- 
A Step In the Right Direction 
----------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) COMMENT: Congressional passage of Article 332 is a 
positive step towards reducing the trafficking and possession 
of automatic assault weapons such as the AK 47.  It remains 
to be seen, however, whether the government of Honduras has 
the political fortitude, and makes available the necessary 
resources, to fully enforce this new legislation.  According 
to government statistics, the number of homicides increased 
in 2002 despite the military\'s augmentation of the police 
force, and the homicide closure rate in Honduras remains at 
only one to two percent.  Moreover, in recent months the 
local media has given extensive coverage to stories involving 
assault weapon related violence.  Violent crime is a high 
profile public issue.  If this legislation proves effective 
in reducing homicides and arms trafficking, President 
Maduro\'s Administration will have won a significant 
legislative success at a time when public confidence in the 
Administration\'s ability to deliver on campaign promises of 
increased public security is faltering.  END COMMENT 
Palmer 
"
"9630","7/23/2003 22:29","03TEGUCIGALPA1742","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1309|03TEGUCIGALPA861","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001742 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, STATE FOR WHA/PPC, DRL/PHD, DRL/IL, 
INL/LP, INR, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT ON LA CEIBA PRISON MASSACRE 
FAULTS POLICE, ARMED FORCES, AND PUBLIC MINISTRY 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 861 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1309 
 
Classified By: Political Section Chief, Francisco Palmieri; Reasons 1.5 
 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  Summary.  (SBU) On July 9, Human Rights Commissioner for 
Honduras, Ramon Custodio, presented the results of the 
Commission\'s investigation into the April 5 massacre of 68 
prisoners at the El Porvenir Prison, located outside of the 
Caribbean port city of La Ceiba.  The report supported 
allegations that elements of the police and military were 
involved in the deaths of prisoners, charging that security 
forces executed unarmed gang members who attempted to 
surrender to authorities (Reftel B).  The report states that 
the 25 individuals who burned to death (23 Mara-18 members 
and 3 female visitors) witnessed the execution of other 
inmates who had surrendered, and thus, may have chosen to 
remain in their burning cells, rather than face summary 
execution.  The report alleges that prior to the arrival of 
military and police forces, only 10 of the 68 deaths had 
occurred.  It charges that nearly all of the remaining deaths 
can be attributed to police and military forces. 
Furthermore, the report implicates the police in a cover-up 
of the executions committed by military and police units, 
while also faulting the Public Ministry\'s shoddy forensics 
testing and mishandling of the crime scene.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
The Violence Begins 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2.  (C)  According to the report, the violence began when 
between five and ten Mara-18 gang inmates brandishing 
firearms, shot and killed several prison \"trusties\" (non-gang 
member inmates charged with enforcing discipline in the 
prison).  (Note:  The report suggests as a possible motive 
for the attack, that gang members may have sought retribution 
for a prison raid on April 3 in which trusties and prison 
security confiscated 4 machetes, 16 knives and 8 firearms 
from cells 2 and 6, where gang members resided.  \"Trusties\" 
and prison security authorities then sentenced gang members 
to 48 hours of solitary confinement.  The report notes that 
the gang members were released from isolation the morning of 
the massacre.  Furthermore, the report also places blame on 
an unauthorized transfer of 30 Mara-18 inmates from a federal 
prison at Tamara to El Porvenir on February 6, 2003, which 
may have disturbed the balance of power between gang and 
non-gang members, leading to conflict. Separately, 
conventional wisdom here is that this importation was a 
showdown between different prison elements over control of 
the drug trade in the prison.) 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Police, Military Forces Arrive, Chaos Ensues 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C)  The report contends that when prison security units 
arrived, only five individuals had been killed.  Shortly 
after prison security deemed the area under control, numerous 
different police and military forces arrived, including the 
Preventive Police Special Forces (COBRA), elements of the 
First Battalion of Marine Infantry, Tourist Police, prison 
police, and members of the Fourth Infantry Battalion, who 
were apparently confronted by a mob yelling for the police to 
kill Mara-18 gang members.  According to the Commission\'s 
report, security forces entered the prison and opened fire on 
unarmed gang members and either condoned or encouraged the 
remaining trusties to kill those gang members who lay wounded 
throughout the prison courtyard.  Subsequently, the 
\"trusties,\" set fire to the cellblocks where the majority of 
gang members resided.  Some witness testimonies indicate that 
kerosene from the prison kitchen was used to ignite the fire, 
while others point to the use of gasoline. 
 
4.  (C)  The report further contends that police and military 
authorities then ordered inmates in cellblocks 2 and 6 to 
surrender.  The prisoners surrendering, who were unarmed and 
with hands in the air, were then summarily executed by armed 
security agents, who have since alleged that they were 
following orders from \"trusties.\"  Autopsy reports confirm 
eyewitness testimonies that police units were responsible for 
the deaths of unarmed prisoners.  Direct testimony also 
exists implicating a COBRA in the killing of an unarmed, 
wounded man. 
 
--------------------------------- 
25 Burn to Death, Others Executed 
--------------------------------- 
 
5.  (C)  The report states that, according to witness 
testimonies, most of the gang members were not involved in 
the violence and voluntarily returned to their cells once 
shooting began.  Gang members who retreated to their cells 
left cellblock doors open with the exception of cell block 6, 
whose door was partially obstructed, trapping prisoners 
inside.  The report suggests that many of the remaining 
inmates witnessed or heard the executions of those who had 
surrendered, and subsequently chose to remain in their 
burning cellblocks, rather than face execution.  22 inmates 
and 3 female visitors burned to death as the fire consumed 
two contiguous cell blocks. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Crime Scene Contaminated, Investigation Incomplete 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6.  (C)  According to the report, the integrity of the crime 
scene was compromised by prison \"trusties\" and police who 
moved bodies and \"tampered\" with evidence prior to the 11AM 
orders from Commissioner Henriquez not to contaminate the 
crime scene.  Additionally, the report outlines a litany of 
criticisms of the Public Ministry\'s investigation.  Bodies 
prematurely removed from the crime scene were left to 
decompose in the heat for days before being analyzed by 
forensic experts.  Limited forensics testing was conducted to 
determine the cause of death of most victims, and no analysis 
was done of the carbon dioxide levels in the blood of the 
deceased (to determine if the cause of death was fire).  Most 
of the bullets were not removed from the bodies of the 
deceased.  Consequently, without the requisite forensic 
analyses, x-rays or comprehensive ballistics tests, the exact 
cause of death of most victims was never adequately 
determined. 
 
7.  (C)  The autopsies that were conducted largely document 
external, rather than internal lesions, indicating only a 
superficial examination of the bodies.  To date, 15 bodies 
remain in the San Pedro Sula morgue and have yet to be 
officially identified, nor has any fingerprint testing been 
employed as a means of identification.  According to the 
report, ballistics investigators failed to identify the types 
of arms used during the riot, and thus, were unable to 
determine the exact cause(s) of death. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Public Ministry Faulted For Incomplete Investigation 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
8.  (C)  The report also directed criticism at the Public 
Ministry for its failure to execute a swift, thorough and 
proper investigation.  The report urges the Public Ministry 
to expedite the four cases it has developed against specific 
individuals involved in the violence and to clarify the 
charges it intends to bring against the individuals. 
Additionally, the report calls for new ballistics tests, 
autopsy reports and asks the Minister of Security to present 
prosecutors with a complete list of all individuals present 
during the killings.  Additionally, the report recommends a 
revamping of the discipline system in the prison and the 
elimination of the role of prison \"trusties.\"  The report 
asks police to identify the trusties killed and investigate 
all of the parties involved.  Finally, it criticizes the 
Director of MOPS Special Preventative Services for ordering 
the premature and unauthorized relocation of Mara 18 gang 
members from the prison to other prisons on February 6. 
 
9.  (C)  Comment.  The Honduras Human Rights Commission is a 
well respected institution that works closely with Post on a 
number of issues.  The Commission\'s findings support the 
Honduran Internal Security Council\'s May 9 report that 
assigned responsibility to GOH security forces for the vast 
majority of the deaths at El Porvenir prison on April 5.  The 
Commission\'s report, however, arrives at much more damaging 
and far-reaching conclusions, including the identification of 
the specific military units that were involved.  It remains 
to be seen exactly what corrective and prosecutorial measures 
the GOH plans to pursue regarding the incident, apart from 
the mere window dressing of changing the prison warden. 
Unfortunately, the extreme unpopularity of gang members, who 
are seen by the Honduran public as the source of much of the 
violence plaguing Honduras today, is unlikely to evoke 
broader public outcry on human rights grounds.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"9659","7/24/2003 21:40","03TEGUCIGALPA1757","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, INR/B, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: MORE HONDURAN CONGRESSMEN ACCUSED OF CRIMINAL 
ACTIVITY 
 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  The Honduran Public Ministry (PM) announced 
last week that it has begun legal proceedings against two 
more Honduran elected officials.  On July 10, Attorney 
General Roy Medina announced that his office will bring 
charges against alternative National Party (PN) Congressman 
Melvin Tomas Regalado for aiding the November 2002 escape of 
a man sentenced to nine years in prison for armed robbery. 
Similarly, Assistant Attorney General for the Environment, 
Juan Francisco Gonzalez, said that Liberal Party (PL) 
alternative Congressman Mauro Caballero was being 
investigated for destruction of the environment in a 
protected area.  The PM plans to ask the Honduran Supreme 
Court to lift each officials\' immunity in order to prosecute 
their cases. END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------------------- 
Regalado Accused of Aiding Jail Break 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) The PM announced last week that it is beginning legal 
proceedings against two more Honduran elected officials.  In 
the case of alternative PN Congressman Melvin Tomas Regalado, 
Attorney General Roy Medina asked the Supreme Court to set 
aside the congressman\'s immunity and issue a warrant for his 
arrest.  Regalado is accused of aiding the escape of Amilcar 
Antonio Portillo, sentenced to nine years in prison for armed 
robbery.  According to the Public Ministry, Portillo walked 
away from the Central Penitentiary on November 15, 2002 after 
Regalado presented a letter to prison officials on National 
Congress letterhead authorizing his release for the weekend. 
An ex-director of the Preventative Special Services (the law 
enforcement branch responsible for the prison system) and the 
former head of the Central Penitentiary are already being 
held without bail awaiting trial for their part in the escape. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Caballero Accused of Damaging the Environment 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) On July 10, Assistant Attorney General for the 
Environment, Juan Francisco Gonzalez, submitted a report to 
Attorney General Medina recommending that the Public Ministry 
ask the Supreme Court to lift the immunity of Liberal Party 
(PL) alternative Congressman Mauro Caballero, and issue him a 
court summons.  Caballero is accused of deforesting an area 
around a lagoon on his property in Villanueva, Cortes that 
had been designated as a protected area.  Following the 
announcement, the local press published numerous photographs 
of the area in question, complete with felled trees, a dried 
up lagoon bed, and dead turtles.  Juan Carlos Caballero, the 
son of the accused, told local media that it is his family\'s 
property and that they could do whatever they wanted with it. 
 
4. (SBU) COMMENT:  The legal proceedings against Regalado and 
Caballero indicate that the PM has finally begun to move 
against high-profile individuals, something that Post has 
been urging for some time.  These positive steps, coupled 
with increased public pressure stemming from the recent 
arrests of Central American Parliament Representative Cesar 
Diaz and National Congress Deputy Armando Avila Panchame on 
unrelated narcotrafficking charges, will help keep pressure 
on lawmakers to keep their promise to repeal Honduras,s 
immunity laws.  It also demonstrates some progress on the 
Maduro Administration\'s pledge to end impunity and apply the 
criminal justice code more uniformly. END COMMENT 
Palmer 
"
"9688","7/25/2003 14:59","03TEGUCIGALPA1761","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001761 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/PHD, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KJUS, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CONGRESS LOOKS TO REPEAL IMMUNITY FOR 
PUBLIC OFFICIALS 
 
REF: STATE 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On July 9, 2003, leaders of the major 
political parties in the Honduran National Congress announced 
their intention to repeal the general immunity granted 
congressmen and other high ranking public officials under the 
Honduran Constitution.  The initiative comes after the recent 
arrests of two elected Honduran officials on charges of 
narcotrafficking.  Initially, no congressmen or other 
government officials spoke out against the proposed change to 
the Constitution, but in the days since the announcement a 
number of public office holders stated that repealing all 
forms of immunity would be counterproductive. END SUMMARY 
 
------------------ 
The Process Begins 
------------------ 
 
2. (U) On July 9, 2003, leaders of the major political 
parties in the Honduran National Congress announced their 
intention to repeal the general immunity granted congressmen 
and other high ranking public officials under the Honduran 
Constitution.  During a joint press conference, leading 
members of the National Party (PN), the Liberal Party (PL), 
and the Christian Democrat Party (DC) said Congress will 
repeal Article 200 and Section 14 of Article 205.  These two 
portions of the Honduran Constitution grant a long list of 
public officials immunity from criminal prosecution, and from 
other requirements placed on the general population. 
 
------------ 
The Articles 
------------ 
 
3. (U) Article 200 of the Honduran Constitution grants 
members of the National Congress immunity from court summons, 
all manner of searches (i.e. house, vehicle, etc...), 
detentions, lawsuits, and court judgments.  Section 14 of 
Article 205 extends these immunities to the President, 
presidential appointees, members of the Supreme Court, 
members of the National Elections Tribunal, and a long list 
of other political appointees.  A bill to repeal these two 
portions of the Constitution has already been sent to the 
Rules Committee for review. 
 
---------------------- 
Voices For and Against 
---------------------- 
 
4. (U) The President of the National Congress, Porfirio Lobo 
Sosa (PN), said that the PN, PL, and DC are firm in their 
decision to repeal immunity, and that he expects the other 
political parties to follow suit.  Speaking on Frente a 
Frente, a politically focused morning television show, the 
Vice President of Congress, Ramon Velasquez (DC), said 
repealing these two portions of the Constitution would make 
public officials and the average citizen equal before the 
law.  PL Secretary General, and member of Congress Jamie 
Rosenthal said that by repealing these sections of the 
Constitution, Honduran members of the Central American 
Parliament would also be stripped of their immunity. 
President Ricardo Maduro, Supreme Court President Vilma 
Morales, and other high-profile individuals, such as Cardinal 
Oscar Andres Rodriguez, also voiced their support for a 
repeal of immunity immediately following the congressional 
leadership\'s press conference. 
 
5. (U) However, not all Honduran officials concur.  The first 
public official to question the repeal initiative was 
Assistant Attorney General Juan Arnaldo Hernandez of the 
embattled Public Ministry.  He said that certain government 
agencies and public officials will always need immunity, 
because without it they would become mired in 
politically-inspired litigation.  Minister of Public Security 
Oscar Alvarez said that Congress should carefully study the 
implications of lifting immunity, because those combating 
narcotrafficking need some form of protection.  Similarly, 
President of the Honduran Court of Claims (the court 
responsible for hearing cases against the government), Renan 
Sagastume, told the press that public officials should retain 
immunity which relates to their official duties.  Even 
President Maduro, who had initially voiced unconditional 
support for the initiative, tempered his stance by saying 
presidential immunity should be limited to cover only those 
actions directly related to official duties. 
 
----------------- 
On the Right Path 
----------------- 
 
6. (SBU) COMMENT:  The initiative to repeal public 
officials, immunity is a significant step in the right 
direction for efforts to end the abuse of state power in 
Honduras.  It also demonstrates just how radioactive the 
issue of Congressional immunity has become.  On one hand, the 
public condemnation that accompanied the recent arrests of 
two Congressmen on unrelated narcotrafficking charges has 
made it impossible for the National Congress to ignore calls 
for reform.  On the other hand, some elements of the Congress 
want no real reform to take place.  The initiative to repeal 
all immunity for all government officials is the result of 
these two competing desires, because while outwardly 
appealing to public sentiments, the proposal is so 
problematic from a democratic-governance point of view that 
it is unlikely to become law.  Even so, given the current 
political climate, some type of reform will likely be 
enacted. END COMMENT 
Palmer 
"
"9762","7/29/2003 20:56","03TEGUCIGALPA1792","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 001792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D  COPY ////ADDRESSEED Bogota ADDED//// 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/30/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, ASEC, CO, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN AUTHORITIES SEIZE APPROXIMATELY 525 KILOS 
OF COCAINE 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires Roger D. Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  On July 28 Honduran authorities seized 
approximately 525 kilos of cocaine from a Colombian go-fast 
boat that was forced to beach near the remote northern 
coastal region of Limon, Colon.  The vessel was first 
interdicted by the Honduran Navy at approximately 17:45, some 
nine nautical miles off the Honduran coast.  Preliminary 
reports indicate that as the Colombian vessel attempted to 
escape, crew members opened fire on the Honduran Navy. 
Honduran Navy personnel returned fire, apparently mortally 
wounding one Honduran crew member.  The Honduran Navy pursued 
the vessel to the shore where they were able to arrest two 
other Colombian crew members while two other unidentified 
individuals escaped.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (S) On July 28 Honduran authorities seized approximately 
525 kilos of cocaine from a Colombian go-fast boat that was 
forced to beach near the remote northern coastal region of 
Limon, Colon.  The vessel originally departed Colombia\'s 
Caribbean coast on July 27 and was tracked to Honduras by USG 
assets.  On July 28 JIATF-S provided TAT Honduras information 
regarding the location of the vessel; TAT Honduras then 
relayed the information to Honduran authorities. 
 
3. (C) Government of Honduras (GOH) authorities then deployed 
all of their navy assets from Puerto Castilla, Colon in an 
effort to interdict the vessel.  A Honduran Navy patrol boat 
made contact with the vessel at approximately 17:45, some 
nine nautical miles off the coast, at which point it 
apparently instructed the intruding go-fast to surrender for 
boarding.  In an effort to escape, the vessel\'s crew then 
reportedly opened fire on the Honduran patrol boat.  Honduran 
Navy personal returned fire and pursued the go-fast, 
eventually forcing the vessel to beach. 
 
4. (C) The go-fast reportedly had a crew of five.  Of those: 
one was mortally wounded in the fire-fight; two were brought 
into custody; and two unidentified individuals escaped after 
the vessel beached.  Initial reports named the deceased as 
Tito Montes, a Honduran national and possible brother or son 
of well-known Honduran drug trafficker Carlos Montes who was 
recently released from a Honduran jail.  The two other 
individuals taken into custody were Manuel Salvador Guzman 
Miranda and Blas Guzman Miranda, both Colombian nationals. 
 
5. (S) TAT Honduras reports that this particular load was 
possibly owned by Rodrigo Cadena, a high-ranking AUC 
Colombian paramilitary officer.  Apparently when the vessel 
departed Colombia it was believed to be carrying 
approximately 1,600 kilos of cocaine.  It is thought that the 
missing kilos may have already been off-loaded (in a possible 
drugs-for-arms deal) before the go-fast returned to sea for 
refueling. 
 
6. (U) This latest seizure brings the total amount of cocaine 
seized this year in Honduras to approximately 4,500 kilos. 
This is more than double what has been seized in the last 
three years combined. 
Pierce 
"
"9850","8/1/2003 22:30","03TEGUCIGALPA1833","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03Tegucigalpa143","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001833 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/T/SV (CAPONTE); IIP/G/WHA (JMANES; CBARONE); 
WHA/PDA (OHILTON) 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/CAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: EVALUATION OF U.S. SPEAKER ON SOCIAL INCLUSION AND 
MULTICULTURALISM: RICARDO RENE LAREMONT, TRACKER #18034 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 143 
 
SUMMARY:  Dr. Ricardo Rene Laremont, Chair, Department of 
Sociology, State University of New York at Binghamton, 
lectured on Social Inclusion and Multiculturalism to six 
separate audiences in three cities in Honduras July 21-25, 
2003.  His presentations ranged on topics such as the Harlem 
Renaissance, the role of the U.S. Supreme Court in 
transforming society, affirmative action, legal practices in 
support of social inclusion and the creation of a culture of 
non-violence.  The program was  covered by the national 
medial. END SUMMARY. 
 
A) Description of the Activity: Dr. Rene Laremont conducted 
a successful four-day speaker program in Honduras giving 
presentations showing by specific, concrete examples how 
civil society in the U.S. brought about social change, the 
important role artists play in a country\'s development, the 
fact that access to power comes through education, and how 
the U.S. legal system has helped transform society.  Dr. 
Laremont also participated in a TV talk show, gave several 
radio interviews, and was guest of honor at a small lunch 
hosted by the APAO with columnist. 
 
B)   Date: July 21-25, 2003 
     Fiscal year: FY-03, Third Quarter 
 
C) Justification and Objective: To keep audiences focused on 
the importance of listening to communities carefully in 
developing programs of poverty reduction.  In societies like 
Honduras where 80 percent live in poverty, Laremont stressed 
the importance of civil rights, the role of civil society in 
strengthening democracy, and racial and ethnic diversity. 
 
D) Tracker No. 18034; MPP Goals: MPP Theme: Democracy; Human 
Rights, and Mutual Understanding. 
Audience reached:  Approximately 1,200 participants at six 
different conference venues, including representatives of 
the civil society and Garifuna NGOs; academic and cultural 
contacts; members of the Honduran Bar Association; students 
and professors from the law school at the National 
Autonomous University of Honduras; high school students and 
teachers; members of the media and general public.  Dr. 
Laremont\'s appearance on an early morning TV program with 
nationwide audience and impromptu radio interviews reached 
hundreds of thousands more. 
 
E)  Result/Impact: Excellent. 
 
The post fully met its objectives for this program.  Dr. 
Laremont informed national audiences on how the U.S. deals 
with religious, racial and ethnic minorities in a 
multicultural society and the importance of community 
participation in public policies.  Dr. Laremont spoke from 
his numerous investigations and own experience on how 
citizen participation leads to the transformation of 
society. The post had originally requested the speaker 
program to commemorate African-American Heritage Month, but 
postponed it to accommodate to Dr. Laremont\'s schedule.  In 
the meantime, we successfully programmed U.S. filmmaker 
Dennis Watlington for African-American Heritage Month. 
 
On the afternoon of his arrival in Tegucigalpa, Ambassador 
Larry Palmer and the DCM briefed Dr. Laremont on the 
political and social conditions in Honduras.  That evening 
at the National Art Gallery, he initiated his series of 
programs participating in the roundtable discussion \"The 
Voice of the Excluded: Harlem, New York: A Case.\"  He 
discussed how the Afro-Cuban movement and the Harlem 
Renaissance blended in America.  He emphasized the 
importance artists play in forming a national identity and 
their role as political activists.  The program also 
featured Dr. Tulio Mariano Gonzalez, Vice President of the 
National Development Bank and Garifuna leader, and Dr. 
Gloria Lara, cultural anthropologist and former Fulbright 
grantee, as panelists.  The IRC director prepared a 
PowerPoint presentation with audio featuring renowned 
players of the Harlem Renaissance. 
 
The following day, Dr. Laremont participated in the early 
morning national TV program \"Frente a Frente\" where he 
discussed the role civil society plays in protecting civil 
rights and how the U.S. has promoted an inclusive society. 
The other invited guest was Dr. Ramon Romero, civil society 
advisor to Honduran President Maduro. 
 
On his second program day, Dr. Laremont spoke to a group of 
students and professors of the law school at the National 
Autonomous University of Honduras on how the U.S. Supreme 
Court has dealt with issues of race and class in the 19th 
and 20th centuries.  He expanded on how the social demands 
of the time lead to changes, including new anti-terrorism 
laws in the U.S. That evening, he addressed members of the 
Honduran Bar Association on this topic and referred to 
specific cases where the Supreme Court has been sensible to 
political pressure. CG John Jones also participated and 
invited the Honduran lawyers to take action and see that the 
law protects all Hondurans not just the wealthy and pointed 
to the difference between \"immunity\" and \"impunity.\" 
 
The following day, Dr. Laremont spoke on \"Social Inclusion 
and Legal Structures: Multiculturalism\" at a conference co- 
sponsored by the UNDP\'s \"Forum for the Strengthening of 
Democracy.\"  He discussed how nationalism is easy in a 
homogenous society but difficult in countries with different 
ethnic groups and how one can contribute to unite a society. 
He said nationalism doesn\'t have anything to do with the 
economy and that lack of resources is not an excuse to not 
work towards democracy.  He also spoke on the issue of 
voluntary and involuntary migration and how America became a 
diverse society. 
 
That afternoon, Dr. Laremont traveled to La Ceiba on the 
north coast for a program co-sponsored by ODECO, an NGO 
working on the development and empowerment of the Honduran 
Garifuna community. Dr. Laremont met with a group of elders 
at the Garifuna community of Corozal where they discussed 
land-titling problems.  In the evening, he adapted his 
standard presentation to an audience of high school 
students, representatives from the Garifuna community and 
civil society leaders.  He emphasized the need to organize 
communities for any movement to be successful. 
 
The last leg of the program was in San Pedro Sula, Honduras\' 
second largest city and industrial capital, where he was 
guest of honor at a luncheon hosted by the APAO with media 
columnists. In the evening, he gave his presentation on the 
Afro-Cuban movement and the Harlem Renaissance in the nearby 
city of El Progreso.  This program enabled the post to co- 
sponsor an event for the first time with the Cultural 
Foundation of El Progreso. 
 
Throughout his program, Dr. Laremont addressed the issues of 
the role of the civil rights movement in changing laws and 
practices in the U.S. and how the U.S. became a 
multicultural society; how education contributes to build a 
more equalitarian society; how societies can move from 
inclusive practices to exclusive societies; and how Mohandas 
Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr. successfully employed non- 
violent means to achieve their goals to make social changes. 
 
The post highly recommends Dr. Laremont for future programs. 
An expert in his field, he invariably adapted his 
presentations to his audience.  His warm personality, fluent 
Spanish, familiarity with the multi-ethnic communities in 
the region enabled him to discuss a wide range of topics 
with his audiences. 
 
F) Non-USG Sources of In-country Funding/In-kind Support and 
Amount: Some of the host institutions provided venues free 
of charge. 
 
G) Quality of U.S. Support and IIP Offices Involved: 
Excellent.  Post would like to thank IIP/T/SV Carmen Aponte 
for proposing Dr. Laremont, who proved to be just the right 
person to meet our program objectives. 
 
Palmer 
"
"9907","8/5/2003 22:01","03TEGUCIGALPA1849","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001849 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; USTR 
AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOs, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, AUGUST 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/2 entitled \"The crucial issues will be discussed in future 
rounds\". \"The sixth round of CAFTA negotiations came to an end 
with progress in some regulatory issues of the treaty, but the 
negotiators couldn\'t reach an agreement on some key issues that 
will be discussed in the next three rounds.\" 
 
\"The negotiators have already concluded negotiations in two 
chapters: electronic trade and customs procedures and trade 
facilitation, but there was no consensus around the most 
sensitive issues, such as agricultural products, textiles, 
patents and trade sanctions related to labor and environmental 
violations.\" 
 
\"The US was clear that their positions will be flexible, but it 
also wants reciprocity in access to Central American markets. On 
this issue, the lead US negotiator Regina Vargo said, `we want 
reciprocity and also some flexibility. although we don\'t 
necessarily mean reciprocity in the sense of exchanging one thing 
for another.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/4 entitled \"Progress of CAFTA\". \"The most positive result from 
the sixth round of the CAFTA negotiations was that the isthmus 
kept the unified position it should have had from the beginning, 
after the Guatemalan reconsideration. The negotiations themselves 
progressed on some regulatory principles, but the discussions on 
key issues were left for the last three rounds.\" 
 
\"Meanwhile, the Bush administration celebrated the Congressional 
ratification of the FTA with Chile, the first the U.S. has signed 
with a South American country, which improves the possibility of 
achieving the goal of establishing a free trade agreement region 
in the Americas by the year 2005.\" 
 
\"We hope that in the seventh round of negotiations, the US goes 
further than the `flexibility\' shown last week, to progress on 
the most sensitive issues such as agricultural products, textiles 
and patents. In the interim, the Central American negotiators 
should work together and stay alert because it\'s up to them to 
sign a good or bad agreement with the utmost and unique global 
superpower.\" 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"9908","8/5/2003 22:02","03TEGUCIGALPA1850","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON IMF, AUGUST 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Roberto C. Ordoez in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily 
\"La Tribuna\" on 8/4 entitled \"What does the Fund want?\". \"The 
last Letter of Intent of the Honduran government with the IMF was 
signed by the Carlos Flores administration. In September 2001, 
the IMF unilaterally broke the agreement when they proved that 
none of the promises we made to tighten our belt had been 
fulfilled. The current administration has been unable to sign any 
Letter because, according to key public officials, the figures 
the IMF used to reach the last agreement were inaccurate, which 
is yet to be proved.\" 
 
\"The omnipotent IMF is the key to opening the gates of 
international funding.  Without their blessing, there\'s no debt 
relief or new loans. What it wants is to reinvent the 
governments. It\'s the only way to please it, because our current 
governmental model is about to collapse, but with a bureaucracy 
that still wants a large piece of the budget.\" 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"9909","8/5/2003 22:02","03TEGUCIGALPA1851","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001851 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON IMF, AUGUST 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Roberto C. Ordoez in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily 
\"La Tribuna\" on 8/4 entitled \"What does the Fund want?\". \"The 
last Letter of Intent of the Honduran government with the IMF was 
signed by the Carlos Flores administration. In September 2001, 
the IMF unilaterally broke the agreement when they proved that 
none of the promises we made to tighten our belt had been 
fulfilled. The current administration has been unable to sign any 
Letter because, according to key public officials, the figures 
the IMF used to reach the last agreement were inaccurate, which 
is yet to be proved.\" 
 
\"The omnipotent IMF is the key to opening the gates of 
international funding.  Without their blessing, there\'s no debt 
relief or new loans. What it wants is to reinvent the 
governments. It\'s the only way to please it, because our current 
governmental model is about to collapse, but with a bureaucracy 
that still wants a large piece of the budget.\" 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"9910","8/5/2003 22:03","03TEGUCIGALPA1852","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001852 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; USTR 
AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOs, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO, PA, ETRD, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, AUGUST 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/2 entitled \"The crucial issues will be discussed in future 
rounds\". \"The sixth round of CAFTA negotiations came to an end 
with progress in some regulatory issues of the treaty, but the 
negotiators couldn\'t reach an agreement on some key issues that 
will be discussed in the next three rounds.\" 
 
\"The negotiators have already concluded negotiations in two 
chapters: electronic trade and customs procedures and trade 
facilitation, but there was no consensus around the most 
sensitive issues, such as agricultural products, textiles, 
patents and trade sanctions related to labor and environmental 
violations.\" 
 
\"The US was clear that their positions will be flexible, but it 
also wants reciprocity in access to Central American markets. On 
this issue, the lead US negotiator Regina Vargo said, `we want 
reciprocity and also some flexibility. although we don\'t 
necessarily mean reciprocity in the sense of exchanging one thing 
for another.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/4 entitled \"Progress of CAFTA\". \"The most positive result from 
the sixth round of the CAFTA negotiations was that the isthmus 
kept the unified position it should have had from the beginning, 
after the Guatemalan reconsideration. The negotiations themselves 
progressed on some regulatory principles, but the discussions on 
key issues were left for the last three rounds.\" 
 
\"Meanwhile, the Bush administration celebrated the Congressional 
ratification of the FTA with Chile, the first the U.S. has signed 
with a South American country, which improves the possibility of 
achieving the goal of establishing a free trade agreement region 
in the Americas by the year 2005.\" 
 
\"We hope that in the seventh round of negotiations, the US goes 
further than the `flexibility\' shown last week, to progress on 
the most sensitive issues such as agricultural products, textiles 
and patents. In the interim, the Central American negotiators 
should work together and stay alert because it\'s up to them to 
sign a good or bad agreement with the utmost and unique global 
superpower.\" 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"9911","8/5/2003 22:51","03TEGUCIGALPA1857","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001857 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUGS, AUGUST 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Marlin Oscar Avila in Tegucigalpa-based moderate 
daily \"El Heraldo\" on 8/2 entitled \"Drug trafficking and 
corruption\". \"Drug trafficking has never been a secret in 
Honduras. The considerable rise of organized crime can only occur 
the way it has up to now with the complicity of the authorities, 
not only from the police but also from the country\'s powerful 
elites. The increase in drug production and trafficking has grown 
even more with the predominance of free markets in our globalized 
world.\" 
 
\"In Central America, we have doubts about the credibility of our 
authorities, particularly our Congressmen, who have been accused 
of being involved with international drug trafficking networks. 
However, the people\'s doubts are not limited to the Congressmen 
who are now detained for their apparent participation in this 
dirty business. They have reached the belief that some electoral 
campaigns have been financed with dirty or laundered money coming 
from private banks or other sources.\" 
 
\"The recent hits against organized crime, both in Nicaragua and 
Honduras, have given us a little hope that things may improve in 
favor of our democracy. There\'s no doubt that Nicaraguan 
President Enrique Bolanos is making a commendable effort to fight 
corruption. Also, President Maduro is having some success against 
the cocaine cartels, even though in the struggle against 
corruption, we can\'t say he\'s been successful so far.\" 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/4 entitled \"Honduras requests helicopters\". \"The Honduran 
Minister of Defense Federico Breve stated, `The US must 
acknowledge that Honduras is fighting drug trafficking, thus it 
should provide more logistical support including the donation of 
helicopters. At the beginning of the Maduro administration, the 
US offered six helicopters, but Honduras had to pay US$ 4.1 
million for them. We need them urgently, but we just can\'t pay 
for them\'.\" 
 
\"Breve added, `I think we are demonstrating our determination 
with everything we\'ve done this year, for instance, the quantity 
of cocaine we\'ve seized this year is really a record for 
Honduras. This is commendable, and I believe it has to be 
acknowledged by the US\'.\" 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"9912","8/5/2003 22:51","03TEGUCIGALPA1858","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001858 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUGS, AUGUST 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Marlin Oscar Avila in Tegucigalpa-based moderate 
daily \"El Heraldo\" on 8/2 entitled \"Drug trafficking and 
corruption\". \"Drug trafficking has never been a secret in 
Honduras. The considerable rise of organized crime can only occur 
the way it has up to now with the complicity of the authorities, 
not only from the police but also from the country\'s powerful 
elites. The increase in drug production and trafficking has grown 
even more with the predominance of free markets in our globalized 
world.\" 
 
\"In Central America, we have doubts about the credibility of our 
authorities, particularly our Congressmen, who have been accused 
of being involved with international drug trafficking networks. 
However, the people\'s doubts are not limited to the Congressmen 
who are now detained for their apparent participation in this 
dirty business. They have reached the belief that some electoral 
campaigns have been financed with dirty or laundered money coming 
from private banks or other sources.\" 
 
\"The recent hits against organized crime, both in Nicaragua and 
Honduras, have given us a little hope that things may improve in 
favor of our democracy. There\'s no doubt that Nicaraguan 
President Enrique Bolanos is making a commendable effort to fight 
corruption. Also, President Maduro is having some success against 
the cocaine cartels, even though in the struggle against 
corruption, we can\'t say he\'s been successful so far.\" 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/4 entitled \"Honduras requests helicopters\". \"The Honduran 
Minister of Defense Federico Breve stated, `The US must 
acknowledge that Honduras is fighting drug trafficking, thus it 
should provide more logistical support including the donation of 
helicopters. At the beginning of the Maduro administration, the 
US offered six helicopters, but Honduras had to pay US$ 4.1 
million for them. We need them urgently, but we just can\'t pay 
for them\'.\" 
 
\"Breve added, `I think we are demonstrating our determination 
with everything we\'ve done this year, for instance, the quantity 
of cocaine we\'ve seized this year is really a record for 
Honduras. This is commendable, and I believe it has to be 
acknowledged by the US\'.\" 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"9959","8/7/2003 14:15","03TEGUCIGALPA1863","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03TEGUCIGALPA1778","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001863 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, IO, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/07/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINS, PINR, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: REPLACING PEREZ-CADALSO: HONDURAS SEEKS NEW 
FOREIGN MINISTER 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1778 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1108 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias, former 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, is being sworn in this week as 
the president of the National Autonomous University of 
Honduras (UNAH).  In order to make himself eligible for the 
position, Perez-Cadalso officially resigned as Foreign 
Minister on July 22, and Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Anibal Quinonez is now serving as the acting Minister. 
However, it is far from clear whether Quinonez will remain at 
the helm of the Foreign Ministry on a permanent basis.  Rumor 
has it that others, such as Ramon Medina Luna, President 
Ricardo Maduro\'s National Security Advisor, and Oswaldo Ramos 
Soto, an influential member of the National Congress, are 
also in the running for the position. END SUMMARY 
 
------------- 
Perez-Cadalso 
------------- 
 
2. (U) Guillermo Perez-Cadalso, former Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, is being sworn in this week as the president of the 
National Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH).  On July 
22, in order to make himself available for the position, 
Perez-Cadalso presented his resignation to President Ricardo 
Maduro, who had appointed him Minister of Foreign Affairs in 
January 2002.  Perez-Cadalso was not pressured into quitting, 
and has actually coveted the position of UNAH president for 
some time.  The presidency of the university carries with it 
more domestic prestige, and Perez-Cadalso is an academic at 
heart, having led the UNAH\'s Law Department during the 1980s. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Quinonez and Other Possible Replacements 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Anibal Quinonez is the Honduran Vice Minister for 
Foreign Affairs, and current acting head of the Ministry. 
Born January 7, 1950, he received a undergraduate degree in 
law from UNAH and a Master\'s degree in International 
Relations from the University of El Salvador in Argentina. 
Quinonez entered the Honduran Foreign Service in 1973, and 
served in Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, France, and Israel. 
In 1981 he was named Ambassador to Uruguay and served 
simultaneously as Non-Resident Ambassador to Paraguay until 
1983.  During his time in Uruguay, U.S. EmbOffs in Montevideo 
described him as a friend and admirer of the U.S.  Quinonez 
was named Ambassador to Japan in 1985, and during his 
nine-year stay in Tokyo he also served as the Non-Resident 
Ambassador to South Korea, Philippines, Thailand, and 
Singapore.  From 1995 to 1998 Quinonez served as the 
Director-General of Foreign Policy, and was named to his 
current post in 2002.  He has been an excellent contact of 
the Embassy in this position.  Quinonez is married and has 
four children. 
 
4. (S) Other names rumored to PolOffs as being in the running 
for the Minister position are Ramon Medina Luna and Oswaldo 
Ramos Soto.  Medina Luna was also mentioned at the beginning 
of President Maduro\'s term as a possible Minister of Foreign 
Affairs before being named National Security Advisor.  He is 
an experienced professional with considerable expertise in 
economic development and regional trade.  (Medina Luna is 
married for a second time; his wife is Nicaragua.  He has 
grown children from a previous marriage).  Ramos Soto being 
considered as a possible successor to Perez-Cadalso is a bit 
more surprising.  In April 1988 he allegedly incited a crowd 
that later burned down the Embassy annex after U.S. 
authorities captured (with Honduran Government approval) a 
Honduran narcotrafficker.  Ramos Soto, then president of the 
UNAH, claims that he neither proposed nor approved of the 
action; he contends he merely told the students who became 
the nucleus of the mob that he believed the U.S. action was 
illegal.  More recently, Ramos Soto raised eyebrows this 
spring when he used his position as the head of the National 
Congress\' Commission on Constitutional Issues to advocate 
giving the Congress, rather than the Supreme Court, the power 
to interpret the constitution (ref B). 
 
5. (C) COMMENT:  While Quinonez would be a good choice, and 
Medina Luna acceptable, it would be difficult to work with 
Ramos Soto, who is from the \"dark side\" of the National 
Party, and about whom there are allegations of significant 
corruption.  The Maduro Administration seems to be in no 
hurry to name a replacement to Perez-Cadalso 
(correspondingly, GOH attendance at UNGA is still in flux). 
Recently rocked by the defection of the Christian Democrats 
from the ruling coalition (ref A), grumbling within his own 
National Party, the resignation of Maduro confidant Cesar 
Batres, and the ominous departure of the First Lady on a trip 
to Spain (septel), attention within the Administration is 
focused primarily on damage control.  Post will continue to 
monitor progress on any permanent replacement and will report 
accordingly.  END COMMENT. 
Pierce 
"
"9969","8/7/2003 20:52","03TEGUCIGALPA1868","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 001868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE FOR PM, INL, EB, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/07/2013 
TAGS: OVIP, MARR, MASS, MOPS, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR CJCS GENERAL MYERS\' VISIT TO 
HONDURAS AUGUST 13 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires Roger D. Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, nearing 
the half-way point of his constitutionally mandated single 
four-year term, faces numerous challenges in one of the 
poorest and most corrupt countries in the Western Hemisphere. 
 His Administration has been stalled on its domestic agenda 
since June of last year and has mustered little progress as 
it tries to reconcile its ambitious goals to its 
straitjacketed financial situation.  Bilateral relations 
between the U.S. and Honduras are excellent; Honduras was the 
first country in the Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an 
ICC Article 98 Agreement with the United States.  Honduras\' 
support for the international counterterrorism effort is 
steadfast and the Government of Honduras (GOH) is sending 
troops to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  The 
United States and Honduras have maintained a long-standing 
close relationship framed by such events as the establishment 
of the banana plantations in the late 1800s, the Contra wars 
of the 1980s, and reconstruction efforts in the wake of the 
October 1998 fury of Hurricane Mitch.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Key Issues in Bilateral Relationship 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) The central themes in our bilateral diplomatic efforts 
in Honduras are combating international crime by 
strengthening governance and attacking corruption, assisting 
American citizens, fostering economic development, promoting 
regional stability, promoting trade and investment, and 
combating terrorism.  However, the underlying difficulty to 
realizing USG objectives is improving the administration of 
justice and rule of law.  President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
government is rhetorically committed on all of these issues, 
but has made very little substantive headway in addressing 
the myriad problems Honduras faces.  While Maduro has also 
spoken out strongly on tackling corruption, he faces 
formidable challenges from entrenched economic and political 
interests in moving his agenda forward. 
 
------------------------------- 
Status of the Maduro Government 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) President Maduro is facing increasing criticism from 
the political opposition over his government\'s policies and 
continued dissatisfaction from his own party\'s Members of 
Congress because of his Administration\'s technocratic style. 
The Honduran Congress is a focal point of political 
opposition to his policies.  It is a corrupt institution 
riddled with avaricious politicians, and Maduro\'s National 
Party does not control a majority of the unicameral body. 
Maduro recently lost his coalition partner, the Christian 
Democrats, who had given Maduro a majority in Congress.  The 
ongoing problems within his own party are serious and 
threaten his broader political agenda, which will require 
legislation to advance.  Continuing political negotiations 
will be needed to manage this situation.  Maduro\'s personal 
life also intruded into the political sphere.  His October 
2002 wedding to a Spaniard was criticized by many Hondurans 
who viewed the President as distracted by his personal life. 
A recent public squabble has not helped the situation. 
 
4. (SBU) The President\'s standing has remained stalled at a 
low point since June 2002.  Faced with slow progress in his 
efforts to promote regional economic integration, Maduro\'s 
team is pinning its hopes that a U.S.-Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA) can serve as a catalyst to regional 
economic cooperation.  Maduro is also beginning to hear wider 
disillusionment among the Honduran public as violent crime 
levels are increasing once again despite his initial \"zero 
tolerance\" law and order campaign.  Notwithstanding his 
crackdown on street crime, criminal investigations are 
usually inadequate and case closure rates, in particular for 
homicides, remain very low. 
 
---------------------------- 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
5. (SBU) Maduro is a good and reliable friend of the U.S. on 
counterterrorism.  His government hosted a major U.S. 
military counterterrorism exercise in March 2002 and has 
quickly responded with freeze orders to all U.S. requests 
regarding suspect terrorist bank accounts.  No terrorist 
assets have been found in Honduran financial institutions, to 
date.  The GOH still needs to take the following concrete 
steps: designate a national coordinator for counterterrorism, 
file its national report in accordance with United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 1373, and most of all, 
sign and/or ratify the five outstanding international 
conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions (1971 and 2002) 
against terrorism.  It is also of vital importance for 
Honduras to improve security at its maritime ports, 
particularly Puerto Cortes. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
6. (C) The GOH is in general supportive of key USG foreign 
policy goals and is a member of the Coalition of the Willing. 
 In support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, the GOH will deploy 
some 370 troops to the vicinity of An Najaf as part of the 
Spanish Brigade operating under the Polish Division.  The 
troops are currently scheduled to depart Honduras for Spain 
on August 10-13.  After approximately a week in Spain, they 
will deploy in conjunction with the other Central American 
units from El Salvador, Nicaragua, and the Dominican Republic 
through Kuwait to Iraq.  Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) 
negotiations are still ongoing between the GOH and the 
Government of Kuwait (GOK).  In the interim, The GOK has 
given the GOH authority to transit Kuwait under the blanket 
USG SOFA, however this is not an ideal solution. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Bilateral Political/Military Issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) In January of 1999, the constitution was amended to 
abolish the position of military commander in chief of the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF), thus codifying civilian 
authority over the military.  Honduras now has a civilian 
Minister of Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint Staff who 
heads the HOAF.  Civilian control is well accepted by the 
HOAF, and the transition to civilian control has resulted in 
greater transparency and fiscal accountability.  The current 
MOD, Fred Breve, enjoys a good relationship with the HOAF 
military leadership, but the Office of the Minister of 
Defense still lacks a staff that could provide institutional 
memory and continuity between the change in political 
administrations. 
 
8. (C) Honduras was the first country in all the Western 
Hemisphere to sign and ratify an Article 98 Agreement with 
the USG.  President Maduro, despite domestic political and 
some regional opposition, has also consistently supported 
overall USG foreign policy objectives, particularly U.S. 
efforts to create a stable and peaceful Iraq.  President 
Maduro and his military advisors are very aware that 
Nicaragua and El Salvador have received FMF funds and 
question why Honduras, even though it has been a staunch 
political and military supporter in the region, has not 
received any funds for many years. 
 
9. (SBU) In January of 02, Honduras formally requested 6 
UH-1H helicopters through the EDA program.  However, due to 
changes in US law, the cost of 6 EDA helos rose from about 
USD 700,000 to USD 4.2 million - an amount the GOH was unable 
to afford.  The original LOA expired some three months ago. 
This week, however, MOD Breve renewed his request for UH-1H 
helicopters, and also asked if there was way to get them 
either free (ie under section 516 as grant aid at no cost to 
the GOH), or at an extended payment plan, i.e. 15 years.  The 
AMB and country team strongly support any assistance in this 
area as a principal use for these helos is to support 
counternarcotics operations.  The current Honduran fleet of 
UH-1H helicopters is in poor condition with a limited life 
expectancy. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Soto Cano Air Base - Joint Task Force Bravo 
------------------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Five hundred fifty-eight U.S. service men and women 
and eight civilian DOD employees are stationed at Honduras\' 
Soto Cano Air Base under the auspices of SOUTHCOM as Joint 
Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment and will enable our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster relief, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
 
------------------- 
Cerro La Mole Radar 
------------------- 
 
11. (C) In 1993, the U.S. entered into an agreement with the 
GOH regarding the maintenance of the radar located at Cerro 
La Mole, under which the U.S. military agreed to pay 75 
percent of maintenance costs up to USD 400,000 per year.  The 
U.S. has paid nothing under the agreement, (OSD/CN has stated 
that the USG cannot fund radars operated by foreign 
nationals) and the issue affects relations between the U.S. 
and Honduran militaries.  The Embassy has sought guidance 
from DOD and State on how to resolve U.S. obligations, and 
recommended that the U.S. either replace the radar with a 
solid state version (TPS-78) or with another TPS-70 
transferred from counterdrug programs.  When operational, the 
radar  provides a view of the Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador 
border areas and the Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific Ocean.  A 
functioning radar in this location could greatly enhance 
Honduran capability to intercept and track illegal flights. 
The MOD and CHOD have agreed to share all data from this 
radar with the US and with its neighbors.  Additionally, this 
radar would be the first step in eliminating the 10 mile \"no 
fly\" (without advance notice) corridor between the Honduran 
and Nicaraguan border - currently a safe haven for illegal 
flights. The AMB and country team strongly support current 
efforts to have the radar in Venezuela (currently being 
dismantled) be made available for EDA for Honduras in 
December of this year. 
 
------------------ 
F-5\'s for MANPADS? 
------------------ 
 
12. (C) Honduras maintains a fleet of aging F-5\'s as part of 
its overall defense structure, providing Honduras with the 
most lethal air force in the region.  Honduras has been under 
some regional pressure to give up or reduce its fleet of 
F-5\'s as a consolation to Nicaragua who is also being 
encouraged to give up, or significantly reduce, its stock of 
Man Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS).  Honduras has 
resisted these efforts, suggesting that its fleet of F-5\'s 
should be de-coupled from any discussion of MANPADS, which 
are a potential terrorist weapon. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Brooke Amendment - GOH Facing Possible Sanctions 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
13. (C) Honduras faces the possibility of mandated Brooke 
Sanctions in September if three DOD loans totaling USD 1.73 
million are not paid in full.  This debt is over a year old 
and once Brooke Sanctions are invoked, no new or pending USG 
assistance is permitted to proceed, including programs 
administered by USAID, DOD, and State.  These sanctions do 
not affect existing assistance efforts already obligated by 
these agencies.  The GOH is fully aware of the consequences 
of falling under Brooke Sanctions but is not clear at all 
how, or if, the GOH will be able to repay the loans before 
the September 3 deadline.  The situation is further 
complicated because under the Paris Club rules, the GOH is 
not allowed to pay only one official creditor. 
 
----------------------- 
Counternarcotics Issues 
----------------------- 
 
14. (C) Honduras\' geography places it squarely in the middle 
of a major illegal drug transshipment zone and the Embassy 
estimates that between 80-100 tons of cocaine transit the 
country annually on its way to the U.S. market.  Honduras\' 
airspace is regularly violated by drug traffickers, who also 
use go-fast boats to transit their cocaine through the 
region.  Heroin and marijuana are likewise transited through 
Honduras on a lesser scale.  Recently, the Embassy has 
noticed a significant increase in drugs-for-guns bartering 
between Colombian traffickers and local Honduran smugglers. 
 
15. (C) Honduras has been under heightened USG pressure to 
increase its effectiveness on counternarcotics issues after 
disappointing results in 2001 and 2002.  This effort appears 
to have born fruit.  The GOH has seized approximately 3,750 
kilos of cocaine this year (more than the previous four years 
combined).  While seizure rates have expanded significantly 
this year, endemic corruption in the Public Ministry and the 
police continue to hamper long-term efforts to increase the 
rule of law and reduce the amount of drugs transiting the 
country. 
 
16. (C) Under pressure from the USG to interdict more drugs, 
in April the Honduran Air Force shot-down an intruding 
Colombian aircraft carrying approximately 942 kilos of 
cocaine, killing the plane\'s two Colombian crewmembers. 
SOUTHCOM temporarily suspended sharing of air-track 
information pending reconfirmation from the GOH that Honduras 
has a \"no shoot-down\" policy.  The Embassy has since received 
such assurances and the GOH has stated that the incident was 
an aberration.  Honduras is fully aware that under U.S. law, 
the USG is not allowed to share tactical air-track 
information with countries that employ a shoot-down policy. 
SOUTHCOM has since restored sharing air-track information 
with the GOH. 
 
-------------- 
Anticorruption 
-------------- 
 
17. (C) U.S. policy against corruption struck a nerve in 
Honduras, especially any mention of our visa revocation 
authorities.  Politicians in Congress and certain business 
elements feel the U.S. is attacking them.  Maduro appears 
committed to addressing corruption, even if it will cost him 
political support within his party.  The Supreme Court 
President is also on board.  However, individual judges 
remain susceptible to offers of bribes and the Attorney 
General is unwilling to prosecute high-profile cases.  Given 
the scope of the problem, any public discussion about the 
country\'s pervasive corruption is a positive development. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
18. (SBU) The Supreme Court is developing into an independent 
branch of power, unlike all of its predecessor courts since 
democracy was restored in 1982.  It is pro-reform in 
orientation and fighting for its prerogatives.  A key 
emerging issue is whether it can become a fully independent 
and co-equal branch of political power, consistent with the 
separation of powers provision in the Honduran Constitution. 
The established political order is fighting that prospect 
with all its might.  In fact, the Congress seized the 
political opportunity to introduce legislation that would 
amend the constitution to give itself the power to interpret 
the constitutionality of the laws it passes.  The Supreme 
Court ruled in May that the proposed amendment was 
unconstitutional, which sparked a tense confrontation between 
the Supreme Court and Congress.  Congress, however, refrained 
from any precipitous action and the issue has since receded. 
 
---------------------------- 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
19. (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27, 2002, President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
out-of-control crime situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 
soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The public 
responded enthusiastically.  However, despite the initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides, continues at a high rate. 
Public support is fading and the campaign needs some visible 
victories to restore confidence in the government\'s program. 
The USG is helping the Maduro government establish an 
anti-kidnapping unit, increase intake/training of police 
recruits, create a model tourist police force, boost its 
counternarcotics efforts, and expand the frontier police. 
The country\'s geographic position makes it an obvious 
strategic transit point for narcotics trafficking, alien 
smuggling operations and other organized crime activities. 
 
20. (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults since 1998, have been a source of 
serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to take 
steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases.  There 
are serious problems with child labor in several industries, 
particularly melon, coffee, and sugar cane (but not the 
maquila) sectors, and trafficking in persons of 
women/children for prostitution in the U.S. and children for 
commercial sexual exploitation in Central America.  USAID and 
Peace Corps have both been involved in HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
21. (SBU) At least 600,000 Hondurans, both legal and illegal, 
live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration issues high 
on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of Honduras is 6.5 
million.)  There is deep appreciation for the USG\'s extension 
of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) in the U.S. and interest 
in possible congressional action on the proposed Nicaraguan 
Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA), which 
would give immigration parity for Hondurans.  With 
approximately 18,000 American citizens residing in Honduras 
and many thousands visiting Honduras annually for tourism and 
business, American Citizen Services are a key part of the 
Embassy\'s work.  Since 1995, 34 American Citizens have been 
murdered in Honduras.  There has been little progress on 
these cases and to date, only two convictions have been made. 
 However, in the last year the GOH has increased cooperation 
with the Embassy on the remaining cases, including 
establishing two prosecutors to further the GOH\'s effort. 
Also, little progress has been made on extradition cases 
involving American Citizens residing in Honduras who are 
wanted for felonies in the United States. 
 
-------------- 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
22. (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three Central 
American land neighbors and its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  Its land and maritime 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast is a particularly 
difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
ruling laid out shared areas of control in the Gulf of 
Fonseca and established the land border between Honduras and 
El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow to implement 
the ruling.  In September 2002, El Salvador requested a 
revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling.  Honduras has responded to 
this request and opposes any revisions to the original 
ruling.  In the interim, the Organization of American States 
(as a neutral third party) is providing both nations 
technical assistance to help them implement the ICJ\'s ruling. 
 
23. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.  In the past, the dispute has threatened to derail 
trilateral counternarcotics operations.  Honduras provoked 
Nicaraguan retaliation when it signed a maritime treaty with 
Colombia recognizing the 15th parallel as its maritime border 
in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an ICJ case over the maritime 
border and more importantly in 1999 slapped a punitive 35 per 
cent tariff on Honduran goods.  This tariff remained in place 
until April of this year despite a Central American Court of 
Justice ruling that it is illegal.  Only after Honduras 
responded with a retaliatory tariff, threatening Nicaraguan 
exports, did Managua back down.  Tensions still exist between 
the GOH and Nicaragua, hampering regional integration and 
couternarcotics efforts. 
 
----------------- 
Economic Overview 
----------------- 
 
24. (SBU) Honduras, with a per-capita income of only USD 950, 
is the third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere ahead 
of only Nicaragua and Haiti.  The Honduran economy is growing 
slowly, with real GDP growth of only two-and-a-half percent 
in 2002 and 2003.  Low world coffee prices also continue to 
inhibit growth in rural areas.  Inflation, at double-digit 
levels in the late 1990s, has decreased and is now relatively 
stable at about 8 percent per year, while the currency is 
depreciating at a rate of about 6 percent per year.  The 
economy continues to be dominated primarily by agriculture, 
particularly the production of coffee, bananas and cultivated 
shrimp.   However, the in-bond apparel assembly industry 
(maquilas) has grown dramatically over the past decade and 
now employs over 100,000 people.  Remittances from Hondurans 
living overseas, primarily in the United States, continue to 
grow rapidly (up 15 percent in the first six months of 2003) 
and have become the most important source of foreign 
exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras\' largest trading partner and 
the roughly 150 U.S. companies that do business in Honduras 
constitute the largest block of foreign direct investors. 
While many social indicators are improving, two-thirds of all 
Hondurans live in poverty and average educational levels are 
very low. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Stubborn Fiscal Deficits Endanger IMF Program/Debt Relief 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
25. (C) President Maduro inherited a stagnating economy and 
seriously deteriorated government finances from the previous 
administration.  During its first 18 months in power the 
Maduro administration has passed two fiscal packages (in May 
2002 and April 2003) designed to broaden the tax base, help 
reduce chronic budget deficits, and move the government on 
the road to an IMF agreement.  However the IMF is still 
concerned about persistent fiscal deficits, and an IMF 
agreement is highly unlikely until the Congress passes major 
civil service reform legislation.  The Maduro Administration, 
however, is hesitant to push these needed reforms because 
they will fundamentally alter the salary structure of 
teachers and medical workers who currently benefit from 
special legislation which gives them annual salary increases 
well above inflation.  Teachers particularly are a powerful 
special interest group that if agitated could destabilize the 
government.  Moreover, Maduro\'s lack of congressional support 
for civil service reform has also hamstrung his efforts. 
 
26. (SBU) Multilateral and bilateral donor disbursements (USD 
140 million) will be held up until a new IMF program is in 
place.  There is also pressure on GOH Paris Club debt service 
payments (USD 100 million per year), and the completion point 
for debt reduction under the Highly Indebted Poor Countries 
initiative (HIPC - worth USD 900 million) continues to slip 
back further.  If unaddressed, this fiscal situation could 
also impact Honduras\' eligibility for Millennium Challenge 
Account grants. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
27. (SBU) President Maduro, who has identified CAFTA as his 
government\'s principal trade objective, is a strong supporter 
of regional economic integration.  The historically weak 
Ministry of Trade and Industry got a late start in preparing 
for this year\'s CAFTA negotiations, but has added staff and 
been an active participant in the negotiations so far. 
Latent protectionism exists in the private sector, especially 
agriculture, but the general attitude toward a free trade 
agreement in Honduras is guardedly positive.  The textile and 
apparel industry in particular believes that some type of 
free trade agreement is the only way that the Honduran 
apparel sector can survive the elimination of quotas in 2005 
and compete with Asian manufacturers.  As such, it is the 
strongest supporter of CAFTA. 
 
------------------------------ 
U.S. Investment Faces Problems 
------------------------------ 
 
28. (SBU) Maduro\'s Administration understands the need to 
increase foreign (and domestic) investment to spur economic 
growth, but so far has placed its emphasis on the more 
immediate problems of political and judicial reforms, the 
fiscal deficit, and needed improvements in security, 
education and health.  The government identified tourism, 
agribusiness, and forestry as important sectors that could 
create much-needed jobs.  While some efforts to promote 
tourism have paid off, little headway has been made in the 
other sectors. 
 
29. (SBU) Much needs to be done to declare Honduras \"open for 
business.\"  Maduro needs to find a way to get his cabinet 
(and the prickly legislative and judicial branches) to make 
meaningful changes that will resolve key problems such as: 
poor and expensive infrastructure; a weak legal system; 
threats to personal security; weak education and health 
conditions; land tenure problems; and opposition to large 
foreign investments by well-connected vested interests. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Money Laundering and Bank Failures 
---------------------------------- 
 
30. (C) Strengthened money laundering legislation, with an 
anti-terrorist financing clause, was passed in early 2002, 
and the GOH followed up rapidly with creation of a Financial 
Information Unit (FIU) for investigation of financial crimes. 
 Currently, over 150 potential cases of money laundering are 
under investigation.  However, without greater participation 
from the slow and corrupt Public Ministry, responsible for 
prosecuting such cases, results will be minimal. 
 
31. (SBU) Weakness of the financial system remains a key 
concern.  The GOH took over the two most troubled banks in 
May 2002 (one has since been closed), arranged for the 
absorption of a third undercapitalized bank, and is actively 
promoting mergers among the remaining 20 private banks. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
32. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  Our Peace Corps program, with more than 220 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY03 budget of USD 45 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula. 
Pierce 
"
"10005","8/8/2003 19:21","03TEGUCIGALPA1873","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001873 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON MILITARY SPENDING IN CENTRAL AMERICA, 
AUGUST 8, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" on 8/8 
entitled \"Central America will analyze reduction in military 
budgets\".  \"The Central American Ministers of Interior, Foreign 
Affairs and Defense will meet in Managua, Nicaragua next week to 
discuss a possible reduction in military spending in all Central 
American countries.\" 
 
\"During a visit to Honduras, the Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Norman Caldera stated, `we\'ll meet to discuss ways to 
strengthen our relationships, to solve any disputes we may have 
and to decide how we\'re going to use the resources originally 
budgeted for military spending in other needs like education and 
health\'.\" 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"10008","8/8/2003 23:04","03TEGUCIGALPA1880","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1778","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001880 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, EUR/WE, EB, AND INR/B 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/08/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, EINV, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: COMMENTS OF FIRST LADY AND \"DARK SIDE\" 
CONGRESSIONAL REBELS WEAKEN HONDURAN PRESIDENT MADURO 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1778 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  On August 5, a Casa Presidential 
spokesperson told reporters that President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
wife, Aguas Ocana, had returned to her native Spain for an 
indefinite period of time on personal business.  Local media 
had reported on the departure the previous day, speculating 
that Ocana\'s trip was related to a controversy sparked by 
disparaging comments she made to the press about Maduro\'s 
ex-fiancee, and current Minister of Culture, Mireya Batres. 
While Minister Batres has so far chosen not to respond 
publicly to the remarks, Cesar Batres, her father, resigned 
his position as legal advisor to the President on land issues 
after the insults were published in several nationally 
circulated newspapers.  The bad publicity and loss of a 
valued advisor and close personal friend comes at exactly the 
wrong time for the Maduro Administration, which was stung a 
week earlier by press coverage of the discontent within the 
President\'s own National Party (PN).  END SUMMARY 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
First Lady Travels to Spain After Controversy 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) On August 5, a Casa Presidential spokesperson told 
reporters that President Ricardo Maduro\'s wife, Aguas Ocana 
had returned to her native Spain for an indefinite period of 
time on personal business.  The media had been told that 
President Maduro himself would be addressing them on the 
matter, but a spokesperson briefly spoke on the subject 
instead, saying only that the reasons for the trip were 
\"strictly personal.\"  NOTE:  When Ocana left two days 
earlier, she took along two Honduran toddlers, Ledy 
Jacqueline, 3, and Kevin Jousue, 2, whom she was given 
protective custody over earlier this year after they were 
abandoned to an orphanage.  The biological parents have since 
tried to reclaim the children, and questions were raised 
about her legal right to take them out of the country.  The 
Attorney General\'s office investigated, however, and found 
that Ocana had followed proper procedures.  END NOTE 
 
3. (C) It is widely speculated, and EmbOffs have been told by 
sources within the administration, that President Maduro and 
Ocana\'s estrangement was exacerbated by Ocana\'s public 
remarks.  On July 18, La Tribuna newspaper published a 
lengthy interview with the First Lady, in which she said that 
Maduro made a mistake by appointing Mireya Batres, his 
ex-fiancee, as Minister of Culture, Arts, and Sports.  Maduro 
made the appointment over 18 months ago, when he first came 
into office.  Ocana said that it was not a well thought out 
decision, and that she had \"never brought someone from the 
past into the present,\" implying that something other than 
job qualifications were behind Batres, appointment.  Though 
Minister Batres said she would not respond publicly to the 
comments, the remarks sparked a media frenzy, and Cesar 
Batres, Mireya\'s father, subsequently resigned his post as 
legal advisor to President Maduro on land issues.  NOTE:  See 
paragraphs nine and 10 for bio information on Mireya and 
Cesar Batres.  END NOTE. 
 
4. (C) EmbOffs have also been made aware of a reportedly 
significant disagreement between Maduro and Ocana over the 
disbursement of a large aid package from the Government of 
Spain.  Apparently, upon receiving the aid, Minister of the 
Presidency, Luis Cosenza, disbursed the money as he saw fit. 
Upon discovering this, Ocana, under the impression that the 
aid money would be disbursed under her discretion to 
particular NGO\'s that she had targeted, solicited the support 
of Maduro to override Cosenza.  Reportedly, Maduro refused to 
intervene on her behalf, leading the First Lady to reportedly 
fall into a \"rampage.\"  COMMENT:  Post has heard rumors to 
the effect that Maduro and Ocana were not getting on well. 
These latest incidents may have been the straw that broke the 
camel\'s back.  However, it is too early to tell if some kind 
of reconciliation is still in the offing.  END COMMENT 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Congressional \"Dark Side\" Rebels Attack Maduro 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5. (U) The less than flattering media attention surrounding 
Ocana\'s departure comes on the heals of the airing of dirty 
laundry within President Maduro\'s PN which occurred the week 
before.  On July 29, Rodolfo Irias Navas and Celin Discua 
Elvir, both members of Congress and leaders of the PN\'s more 
traditional faction, known colloquially as the \"dark side,\" 
publicly announced that PN legislators are upset with 
President Maduro and his cabinet for not paying enough 
attention to problems in their home districts.  Together, 
they are leading a movement within the PN that threatens to 
withdraw support for President Maduro\'s cabinet and other 
appointed officials, and to rescind the permission given to a 
number of members of Congress that allows them to hold other 
public offices without officially giving up their 
congressional seat. 
 
6. (U) Irias, from La Ceiba and head of the National 
Congress\' Committee on Energy and Fuel, took the lead on 
attacking President Maduro and his cabinet in the local 
press.  He said that President Maduro is responsible for the 
ruptured alliance with the Christian Democrats (DC) (reftel), 
and that his government has ignored calls from party members 
to initiate projects that would benefit their home districts 
and shore up electoral support for the PN.  The head of the 
PN block in Congress, Celin Discua Elvir, said that many 
members of the party were angry because Maduro and his 
cabinet do not suffer the consequences of ignoring the 
party\'s core voting blocks, but members of Congress, who have 
more contact with the people, are being punished.  Even 
Majority Whip of the National Congress Juan Orlando 
Hernandez, who represents a more progressive element within 
the PN, told local media that a high level of dissatisfaction 
exists within the PN because Maduro\'s government has not 
carried out development projects at the local level. 
 
7. (C) In a recent meeting with Charge, Johnny Handal, 1st 
Vice President of the National Congress, echoed these 
comments, adding that discontent was indeed widespread.  In 
his view, an \"imperial\" Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza was to blame.  Members of the Administration almost 
never meet with the PN leadership, preferring to meet only 
with trusted individuals instead; phone calls from others 
reportedly are not returned. 
 
8. (U) In retribution, rebellious PN legislators have 
targeted certain members of Congress now serving at other 
posts within the executive branch.  Among those whose 
permission to serve in a position other than congressional 
deputy could be rescinded are Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza, Minister of Finance Arturo Alvarado, Minister of 
Government and Justice Ramon Hernandez Alcerro, and Maduro\'s 
private secretary Ricardo Alvarez.  These officials represent 
the technocratic class within President Maduro\'s 
administration, and do not have a strong traditional 
political base. 
 
-------------- 
Damage Control 
-------------- 
 
9. (C) COMMENT:  The DC\'s split with the PN was a blow to 
President Maduro\'s ability to make good on numerous campaign 
promises (reftel).  Now, Maduro seems to be in danger of 
alienating a large section of his own party.  Ocana\'s 
departure to Spain comes at a time when many Hondurans 
already feel the President is preoccupied with personal and 
political issues at the expense of national priorities.  The 
road ahead for Maduro will not be an easy one.  He will have 
to commit considerable time, energy, and political capital to 
shore up the support needed within his own party, perhaps 
even going as far as reaching out to PN members of Congress 
with whom he has clashed in the past in order to secure 
support for critical legislation.  That said, Maduro has 
little ability to fund the type of pork barrel projects PN 
members of Congress are demanding.  END COMMENT 
 
------------- 
Mireya Batres 
------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Born on January 3, 1962, Mireya Batres Mejia 
received her undergraduate degree in education and 
linguistics from the University of Concordia in Montreal, 
Canada.  She also received a Master\'s in Education from the 
University of Alabama, and worked as a teacher at the 
American School in Tegucigalpa.  In 1998, Batres represented 
Honduras at the Central American Games, winning three bronze 
medals in racquetball.  Batres was formerly engaged to 
President Maduro.  The two met through Batres\' ex-husband 
Mario Galiano, and dated for more than three years before 
separating in 2001, while Maduro campaigned for the 
presidency.  Immediately after taking office in January 2002, 
President Maduro appointed Batres as Minister of Culture, 
Arts, and Sports.  Batres is fluent in English, French, and 
Italian, and has three children. 
 
------------ 
Cesar Batres 
------------ 
 
11. (SBU) Cesar Augusto Batres Galeano, born October 29, 1934 
in the department of Lempira, is the father of Mireya Batres, 
President Maduro\'s ex-fiancee and current Minister of 
Culture.  Batres received a degree in law from the National 
Autonomous University of Honduras in 1957, and has served in 
various official capacities since the early 1950s.  In 1972, 
Batres served as the Minister of International Relations, and 
in 1977 he directed the Central American Economic Integration 
Bank.  In the late-1970s and again in the mid-1990s Batres 
represented Honduras on international commissions tasked with 
resolving the Honduras-El Salvador border dispute.  Despite 
Maduro\'s connection to his daughter, in 2000 Batres sat on 
the three-person arbitration panel which ruled that Maduro 
could run in the 2001 presidential election, even though he 
was born in Panama.  Batres served as a legal advisor to 
Maduro during his election campaign, and stayed on after the 
election as the President\'s advisor on land issues.  He was 
not effective in achieving progress in long-stalled American 
citizen land and investment disputes.  Batres has worked for 
several law firms over the years, and currently practices 
with Batres and Associates.  Batres is married with five 
children (including Mireya).  Batres is a long-time Maduro 
confidant and trusted advisor.  His public break with Maduro, 
ostensibly over Ocana\'s public comments, comes as a political 
and personal blow to Maduro. 
 
Pierce 
"
"10064","8/12/2003 22:33","03TEGUCIGALPA1904","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, INL/LP, AND DRL/PHD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CONGRESS VOTES TO CRIMINALIZE GANG 
MEMBERSHIP 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On August 8, the Honduran National Congress 
approved a bill banning membership in street gangs and other 
groups that associate for the purpose of committing crimes. 
The bill prescribes prison terms for those convicted of being 
gang members, with sentences ranging from three to 12 years 
depending on the individual\'s level of involvement and 
seniority.  Congress unanimously approved the bill, 
reflecting the overwhelming popular sentiment that the 
Government do something about gang-related street crime, 
which in recent years has reached epidemic proportions. 
President Ricardo Maduro publicly applauded Congress for 
approving the bill, and there seems to be nothing standing in 
the way of this legislation entering into force.  However, 
questions persist as to how effective this law will be, and 
potential concerns for the right to free association in 
Honduras if abused.  END SUMMARY 
 
---------------------------- 
A Popular Bill Passes Easily 
---------------------------- 
 
2. (U) On August 8, the Honduran National Congress approved a 
bill banning membership in street gangs and other groups that 
associate for the purpose of committing crimes.  The bill, an 
amendment to Article 332 of the Penal Code, sanctions 
\"penalties of nine to 12 years of confinement and fines of 
10,000 to 20,000 lempiras (USD 575-1,150) for bosses and 
leaders of groups that associate with the intention of 
committing (crimes).\"  The bill also calls for rank and file 
gang members to be sentenced to a third of the amount of 
prison time given bosses. 
 
3. (U) The bill passed in the National Congress without a 
single vote in opposition, and President Maduro seems 
enthusiastic about signing it into law.  He said, \"As soon as 
it is published in La Gaceta (the Honduran equivalent of the 
Federal Registry), we will go immediately to the streets and 
do what the Honduran people demand.\"  President of the 
Supreme Court Vilma Morales did not raise any constitutional 
objections to the bill, but said that the nation\'s 
penitentiary system would have to be revamped to accommodate 
the eminent wave of new prisoners. 
 
--------------------- 
A Fix or a P.R. Move? 
--------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) COMMENT: While the exact number is unknown, it is 
widely speculated that there are around 30,000 active gang 
members nationwide, primarily in the major urban centers of 
Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.  Moreover, most of the 
violent crimes committed in Honduras are reported by the 
police and by the local news media as being gang-related. 
Post notes that the GOH is prone to blame almost all violent 
crime on gang-related violence, disregarding other elements, 
such as organized crime and narco-traffickers, that also 
contribute to the high crime rate in Honduras (and often 
involve the vested interests of corrupt elite).  For these 
reasons, however, this type of legislation is very popular 
with the majority of Hondurans, who feel threatened by 
violent crime and are primed for a crackdown on street gangs. 
 
5. (SBU) While this new legislation could lead to increased 
levels of incarceration for Honduran gang members, it is 
certainly not a panacea for long-term crime fighting.  It is 
reportedly a Honduran derivative of the U.S. Racketeer 
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) statutes, which 
can be an effective tool but is difficult to prosecute given 
the challenge of having to prove conspiracy.  Also, given the 
government\'s budgetary constraints, funding a possible 
expansion and improvements in Honduran prisons necessary to 
cope with the probable influx of new prisoners into an 
already overcrowded and dysfunctional penitentiary system 
would be difficult.  In addition, there is no adjacent 
legislation to address any of the underlying reasons for 
crime and gang membership, such as poverty, inequality, and 
lack of opportunities for economic and social advancement 
(issues which the Government of Honduras has been less than 
successful at addressing).  If not administered in a just and 
transparent manner this law could cause concerns for the 
exercise of civil liberties, especially if a government were 
to misguidedly use the law to discourage anti-government 
activity.  END COMMENT. 
Pierce 
"
"10081","8/13/2003 21:14","03TEGUCIGALPA1912","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001912 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EL SALVADOR FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON AND AGAH SHUETE 
 
STATE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, EINV, EAIR, ELTN, PGOV, PREL, KPRV, KTDB, KPWR, HO, ENGR 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ECON HIGHLIGHTS: AUGUST 2003 
 
Topics: 
 
-Macro Economic Goals 
-IMF/Brooke Sanctions 
-Wood Industry: exportation 
-Tourism Growth 
-Standard Fruit Company: increased investment 
-Remittances up in 2003 
-Maquila Industry: Increased Growth 
-USD Bank Deposits on the Rise 
-Megatel and Celtel: collusion or duopoly 
-Banana Sector: Independent Producers in Trouble 
-Airport Carriers: More US Bound Flights 
 
-------------------- 
Macro Economic Goals 
-------------------- 
 
1. The GOH is running out of time to attain their 
goal of 3.2 percent economic growth for 2003, over 
2002\'s growth of 2.5 percent.  Goals proved 
difficult after unexpected high levels of bank 
liquidity and stagnant international prices of 
agricultural goods like coffee and bananas 
hindered the economy.  High bank liquidity 
translates into low levels of investment, fewer 
purchased products and services, and reduced 
transactions, which, results in sluggish economic 
growth.  Even though the 4 billion lempira (USD 
231 million) excess in bank liquidity has caused 
interest rates to drop from an average of 29 to 22 
percent, low demand for loans have kept liquidity 
high.  The only positive offsets have been the 
increased USD 70 million investment in the Maquila 
industry and the rise in remittances. 
 
-------------------- 
IMF/Brooke Sanctions 
-------------------- 
 
2. The GOH continues to struggle to improve its 
fiscal situation, as required to reach an 
agreement with the IMF.  GOH spending has 
increased from 2001 to 2002 by over 14 percent, 
reaching 18.557 billion lempira (USD 1.07 
billion).  To restrain uncontrollable government 
wages, a Civil Service Reform Law, which would 
change the salary of governmentally paid medical 
workers and teachers, is currently being 
considered.  Controversial and disliked by 
government employees, the law will face added 
difficulty in passing since the working party lost 
the majority in the National Congress in July.  If 
approved, the Civil Service Law would cut salaries 
by 700 million lempira (USD 40.46 million), just 
over 10 percent of total government wages. 
 
3. Deferral of Paris Club debt service has turned 
to active status with the failure to reach an IMF 
agreement.  Although a debt of USD 12,000 was 
repaid to the Department of Defense on July 15 , 
USD 1.73 million of overdue principal debt is 
still owed by September 3. Brooke Amendment 
Sanctions will be enacted against Honduras, ending 
DOD, DOS and USAID programs if the GOH fails to 
repay the 1.7 million by then.  Cutting the USAID 
programs alone would yield losses of USD 13 
million in FY03 and USD 45 million in FY04. 
 
------------------------------ 
Wood Industry: Falling Exports 
------------------------------ 
 
4. According to the Timber Association of 
Honduras, primary and secondary wood exports to 
the U.S. will be drastically diminished in 2003. 
Total annual raw wood exportation in past years 
has garnered USD 75 to 80 million for the wood 
industry, while this year exports will only reach 
USD 40 million.  Similarly, furniture exports, are 
expected to fall from their normal USD 40 million 
to a USD 25 to 30 million in 2003. 
 
-------------- 
Tourism Growth 
-------------- 
5. In July, the tourism sector recorded generating 24 
percent more foreign currency than last year.  According to 
the Secretary of Tourism, significant increases in business- 
oriented tourism have been seen in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro 
Sula. Recovering confidence in travel post 9/11 has also 
aided Honduras\' tourism industry. Port calls at Roatan\'s new 
pier are up to visits 7 days a week by several major cruise 
lines as well. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Standard Fruit Company: Increased Investment 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. Standard Fruit Company, a subsidiary of Dole Food 
Company, will increase investment in banana and pineapple 
production by USD 14 million, intending to boost export 
revenue of these two products from USD 75 million in 2002 to 
USD 90 million in 2003.  Standard Fruit currently directly 
employs 9,000 direct Honduran workers. 
 
---------------------- 
Remittances up in 2003 
---------------------- 
 
7. Central Bank data concludes that remittances 
from January to June 2003 have reached USD 348.2 
million, up 15.5 percent from same period in 2002. 
The approximately 600 thousand Honduras who send 
remittances, are suspected to send a total of USD 
700-800 million in 2003. According to a report 
from the Economic Commission for Latin America and 
the Caribbean, remittances are used to invest in 
small businesses, buy land, and improve homes. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Textile (Maquila) Industry: Increased Growth 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
8. The accelerated growth and success of the Maquila 
industry has drawn the attention of investors from both U.S. 
and Taiwan as profits of USD 730 million in 2002 are 
expected to rise to USD 800 million in 2003.  Optimistic 
predictions continue for 2004 with goals of USD 880 million. 
In June, the Industry started hiring what it hopes will 
eventually be an additional 20,000 employees. Honduras was 
ranked 3rd in total amount of textile exportation to the 
United States, superceded by only Mexico and China. 
Honduras exported 268 square meters of textiles in the first 
quarter of 2003 up 21.3 percent from 2002\'s first quarter\'s 
220 square meters.  Although the textile industry is hopeful 
about the upcoming export advantages from CAFTA, it is 
doubtful Honduras will match China\'s growth rate of 94.2 
percent. 
 
----------------------------- 
USD Bank Deposits on the Rise 
----------------------------- 
 
9. According to data collected by the Central Bank 
of Honduras, bank deposits in USD are on the rise 
with 33% of total Honduran bank deposits in 2002 
up from 28% in 1999. Experts believe this may have 
a role in the economic stability of the lempira as 
inflation has dropped from 10.1 percent in 2000 to 
8.1 percent in 2002.  Bank officials are not 
surprised by heightened popularity of the dollar, 
when interest rates average 10 percent for lempira 
bank accounts, which, after accounting for 
inflation, leaves little real monetary growth. 
However, with USD 500 million in Honduran bank 
accounts, dollar interest rates are also on the 
decline. 
--------------------------- 
Megatel and Celtel: Duopoly 
--------------------------- 
 
10. In June 2003 Megatel received a licensing 
contract, at a cost of over USD 7 million, to 
become a cellular Band A service provider.  Since 
then, Celtel and Megatel have joined as a duopoly 
to take advantage of Hondutel\'s 400 thousand 
unanswered requests for ground lines.  Celtel, the 
previous cellular service provider backed by 
American and Honduran investors, issued 326,000 
cellular contracts and per minute telephone costs 
have not dropped below .25 USD, the most expensive 
service in the region.  Megatel, a U.S. company 
with Honduran and Swedish investment, plans on 
investing USD 50 million on labor, construction, 
installation, and personal contracts supplying an 
additional 200 jobs to the country. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Banana Sector: Independent Producers in Trouble 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
11. Independent banana produces are asking the 
Honduran government for financial help after poor 
climate conditions have caused 40 percent losses 
on fruit harvests.  Accrued debt of 300 million 
lempira (USD 17.3 million), primarily loaned after 
hurricane Mitch, remains unpaid after independent 
banana farmers failed to reach their goal of 
exporting 10 million crates of bananas to the U.S. 
The new agriculture law, \"Ley de Fortalecimiento 
Financiero del Sector Agriculture,\" passed in June 
2003, grants 50 percent debt relief to 
agricultural producers, however this law does not 
pertain to the independent banana producers who 
currently employ 42,000 workers in Honduras. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Airport Carriers: More US Bound Flights 
--------------------------------------- 
 
12. After finally receiving authorization to 
provide carrier service to El Salvador, Sol Air in 
June 2003 began flying its new route from 
Tegucigalpa to San Salvador to Miami and back at a 
fare of USD 198, round trip.  El Salvador\'s 
granted permission to Sol Air expires March 30, 
2004. 
 
13. In June, TACA added 28 U.S. bound flights 
weekly, becoming the only flight carrier to 
provide service 3 times a day to Miami.  To 
provide these additional flights 32 new planes 
were purchased from the European company, Airbus.\" 
The additional flights are only for the temporal 
season including June, July and part of August. 
 
# PIERCE 
"
"10082","8/13/2003 21:36","03TEGUCIGALPA1914","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE215050","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 001914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO USTR FOR ADURKIN AND MMILLAN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR CENTAM/CARIB DIRECTOR 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/IPC, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/EPSC 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ELAB, PGOV, HO, XK, XL, USTR 
SUBJECT: CARIBBEAN BASIN ECONOMIC RECOVERY ACT REPORT TO 
CONGRESS: HONDURAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 215050 
 
1. Post submits the following report in response to reftel 
request for the biannual report to Congress on the operation 
of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (CBERA), as 
required by section 213(b) of the CBERA. 
 
--------------------------- 
Commitment to WTO and FTAA 
--------------------------- 
 
2. The GOH is complying with its commitments under the WTO 
and is supporting the advancement of a Free Trade of the 
Americas Agreement.  Honduras has completed nearly all of 
its tariff obligations under the Uruguay Round Agreements. 
Honduran officials have voiced some concern regarding 
certain proposals addressed in the Doha Negotiations, 
especially related to market access issues for agricultural 
and non-agricultural goods.  These concerns could place 
Honduras at odds with key U.S. objectives in the World Trade 
Organization. 
 
3. Despite these concerns, Honduras remains an active 
participant in establishing free trade in the Western 
Hemisphere.  Honduras, working in coordination with other 
Central American countries, has been negotiating with U.S. 
officials to establish the U.S.-Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) and has indicated that it would accept the 
inclusion of the Dominican Republic into the agreement as 
well. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Protection of Intellectual Property 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. Honduras remains largely in compliance with the Trade 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs); 
however, the government of Honduras has made limited efforts 
to strengthen existing intellectual property rights in the 
last year. Constitutional amendments, passed in 1999, 
updated the copyright law and addressed patent and copyright 
compliance issues.  Honduras lacks two measures, the 
protection of integrated circuit designs and plant variety 
safeguards, before it can be brought into full compliance 
with TRIPS agreement.  These two measures remain stuck 
before a committee in the National Congress. 
 
5. In 2002, a major U.S. pharmaceutical company questioned 
the GOH\'s commitment to TRIPs mandated data protection. 
Honduran law and the TRIPs agreement guarantee data 
exclusivity rights for an established time frame.  The U.S. 
company complained that the Ministry of Health was 
considering approval of another company to distribute a 
generic drug copy for which the U.S. company held the data 
exclusivity rights.  After several months of delay, the 
Ministry of Health has recognized that the drug is a copy of 
the U.S. company\'s protected product, and therefore will not 
approve the other company\'s application. 
 
6. The Government of Honduras advanced its compliance with 
World Intellectual Property Organization standards when it 
became a party to two \"internet treaties\" last year.  The 
National Congress ratified the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) 
and the WIPO Performances and Phonogram Treaty (WPPT) in 
2002. 
 
7. Since placement on the `Watch List\' category of the U.S. 
Government\'s annual Special 301 Review in 1998 for failure 
to control broadcast television piracy, the GOH has taken an 
active role to monitor television stations against further 
violations.  The negotiations of the U.S.-Central America 
Free Trade Agreement have provided a valuable forum to 
highlight and correct shortcomings in Honduran IPR 
legislation and implementation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Protection of Internationally Recognized Worker Rights 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
8. Union officials remain critical of what they perceive as 
inadequate enforcement by the Ministry of Labor (MOL) of 
workers\' rights, particularly the right to form a union and 
bargain collectively, and the reinstatement of workers 
unjustly fired for union organizing activities.  In November 
1995, the MOL signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the 
U.S. Trade Representative\'s Office to implement 11 
recommendations for enforcement of the Honduran Labor Code 
and the resolution of disputes.  The MOL has implemented 
some of these recommendations, particularly as they relate 
to inspection and monitoring of assembly-for-export 
factories (maquilas).  However, it has been slow to 
implement others due to resource constraints.  Also, the 
Honduran Maquiladora Association initiated a code of conduct 
in July 1998 for the Maquiladora Association and its 
constituent companies.  Through cooperation within the 
bipartite and tripartite commissions (unions, MOL, private 
sector) and other venues, MOL inspectors\' access to maquila 
plants to enforce the labor code has improved, and MOL has 
continued to work to increase its effectiveness in enforcing 
worker rights and child labor laws. 
 
9. The labor law prescribes a maximum 8-hour workday and 44- 
hour week.  There is a requirement for at least one 24-hour 
rest period every week.  The Labor Code provides for a paid 
vacation of 10 workdays after one year, and of 20 workdays 
after four years.  The Constitution and Labor Code prohibit 
the employment of persons under the age of 16, except that a 
15-year old may be permitted to work with the written 
permission of parents and the MOL.  All persons under 18 
years of age are prohibited from night work, dangerous work 
and full time work. 
 
10.  The Children\'s Code (September 10, 1996) prohibits a 
person of 14 years of age or less from working, even with 
parental permission, and establishes prison sentences of 3 
to 5 years for individuals who allow children to work 
illegally.  An employer who legally hires a 15-year-old must 
certify that the young person has finished or is finishing 
compulsory schooling.  The MOL grants a number of work 
permits to 15-year-olds each year.  Document fraud is 
prevalent among minors interested in working. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Commitment to Eliminate the Worst Forms of Child Labor 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
11. With regard to the elimination of the worst forms of 
child labor, the National Congress ratified the ILO 
Convention 182, and Honduras became a party to the 
Convention in June 2001.  In the textile manufacturing 
sector, the elimination of child labor has seen great 
strides.  International pressure on the export sector 
through agreements such as the Caribbean Basin Trade 
Partnership Act and negotiations such as the U.S.-Central 
American Free Trade Agreement have helped employers and 
employees recognize the importance of these laws.  The 
government has created a special commission to establish a 
more complete program towards eliminating child labor and 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the ILO\'s 
International Program for the Eradication of Child Labor 
(IPEC).  Despite a commitment of political support, child 
labor still exists in Honduras, with an estimated 400,000 
children working illegally.  Identified instances of child 
labor in Honduras include prostitution, fireworks industry 
workers, child divers on lobster boats, garbage dump 
pickers, and agricultural workers, including melon, sugar, 
and coffee. 
 
----------------------------- 
Counter-Narcotics Cooperation 
----------------------------- 
 
12. Honduras remains a trans-shipment point for narcotics 
trafficking through air, land, and maritime routes from 
South America to the United States.  Indications of 
corruption in law enforcement, judicial, and military 
entities plagues counter-narcotics efforts.  Despite 
technical support from the U.S. government, the arrest, 
prosecution, and incarceration of major narco-trafficking 
offenders remains problematic.  A new money laundering law 
passed in March 2002 provided further assistance to U.S. and 
Honduran law enforcement and counterterrorism efforts. 
Finally, in the first seven months of 2003, Honduran counter- 
narcotics authorities seized more cocaine than they had 
seized in the previous four years combined. However, the 
recent counter-narcotics seizures can be credited in large 
part to strong pressure for increased results from Embassy 
officials. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Transparency in Government Procurement 
-------------------------------------- 
13. The government of Honduras established a new contracting 
law in 2001.  Under the law, foreign firms are entitled to 
national treatment for public bids, concessions, and 
government-contracted consulting services.  As a part of the 
new code, government procurement proceedings are to be made 
public through a regularly published report.  In practice, 
U.S. companies have complained of instances of mismanaged 
and opaque bidding processes.  One U.S. company underwent an 
extended bidding process, filled with questionable 
practices, in its attempts to win a government contract 
within the publicly owned utilities sector. 
 
14. Despite these shortcomings, the Government of Honduras 
has initiated a system in which the United Nations 
Development Program oversees the bidding process for 
government procurement in a limited number of contracts. 
This attempt to make the process more transparent in some 
areas coincides with the preparations to initiate 
privatization of several government-owned entities. 
Honduras hopes such measures will make investment in these 
privatization efforts more attractive and competitive. 
 
------------- 
Expropriation 
------------- 
 
15. Over 160 property and investment disputes involving U.S. 
citizens have been registered with the U.S. Embassy in 
Honduras.  The majority of the cases relate to land disputes 
and fall under the jurisdiction of the National Agrarian 
Institute (INA).  Other sources of expropriation include 
investment disputes involving U.S. investors, resulting 
primarily from inadequate titling procedures, and investment 
disputes between U.S. citizens and Honduran citizens.  On 
July 12, 2001, a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between 
the U.S. and Honduras entered into force.  The bill provides 
for equal protection under local law for U.S. investors and 
allows expropriation only in cases that agree with 
international legal standards.  In October 2002, the 
National Congress approved a one-time expanded arbitration 
law allowing for pending cases to file for arbitration.  Of 
the 11 cases pending, only two U.S. citizens filed petitions 
for arbitration requests to INA by the July 21, 2003 
deadline. 
 
---------------------------- 
Extradition of U.S. Citizens 
---------------------------- 
 
16. Honduras does not have a treaty or any other agreement 
allowing for a treaty or any other agreement allowing for 
the extradition of U.S. citizens. 
 
--------------------------- 
General Economic Conditions 
--------------------------- 
 
17. Honduras is one of the poorest and least developed 
countries in Latin America.  The economy suffered a major 
setback after the destruction caused by Hurricane Mitch in 
1998.  The economy did not return to pre-Mitch levels until 
the end of 2000, and certain agricultural sectors, including 
the banana crop, have yet to attain pre-Mitch levels.  Low 
world coffee prices have dramatically reduced revenues from 
this other key agricultural export commodity.  The slowdown 
in the growth of the global economy, especially in the 
United States, has also had a depressing effect on the 
exports and economic growth in Honduras.  Honduras\' economic 
growth slowed to only two 2.5 percent in 2002, falling from 
a 2.7 6 percent growth in 2001 and a 4.75.2 percent growth 
rate in 2000.  At this time, it is expected to grow at a 
rate of 3.2 percent in 2003. 
 
18. Honduras has a growing textiles and apparel sector 
despite the negative effects of the U.S. economy\'s sluggish 
performance in 2001 - 2003.  Currently ranked as the third 
largest textile exporter to the United States, the maquila 
sector (garment assembly) has been largely assisted by the 
implementation of the Caribbean Basin Initiative.  The 
benefits provided through the Caribbean Basin Partnership 
Trade Agreement (CBTPA) have been crucial to the development 
of this industry, and industry officials have high hopes for 
future growth to be generated by new provisions in the 
proposed CAFTA.  Although the elimination of world textile 
import quotas in December 2004 will put new demands on the 
competitiveness of this sector.  In 2002, the maquila 
industry employed over 100,000 employees with exports from 
the industry totaling USD 2.439 billion. 
 
---------------------------- 
Revitalization of the region 
---------------------------- 
 
19. Honduras and Nicaragua underwent a period of tense 
relations in 2000 and 2001 as a result of a maritime border 
dispute.  Nicaragua levied a retaliatory 35 percent tariff 
on Honduran goods as a result of the disagreement.  The 
tariff was ruled illegal by the Central American Court of 
Justice in 2001, but was not lifted until March 2003.  Both 
countries seem to have moved past this disagreement to form 
a united Central American front in the CAFTA negotiations. 
The willingness of the Honduran government to move forward 
from this controversy indicates a commitment to regional 
integration and market liberalization. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Self-help measures to promote economic development 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
20. One area of concern that has been an impediment to 
greater U.S. investment, and thus Honduran economic 
development, is the lack of transparency and efficiency in 
the Honduran judicial system.  Post has received complaints 
from U.S. citizens and companies regarding frustrations with 
the sluggish pace of the court system, as well as court 
cases never brought to fair trial.  These inefficiencies in 
the court system mark a fundamental flaw in the government 
structure that merits attention and reform. 
 
21. Economic Officer Thomas R. Hastings is Post\'s designated 
reporting officer.  Mr. Hastings\'s telephone number is (504) 
236-9320, extension 4060; fax (504) 236-6836; and email 
hastingstr(at)state.gov. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"10112","8/14/2003 17:40","03TEGUCIGALPA1923","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE124894","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 16 TEGUCIGALPA 001923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, EXIM, OPIC, TDA, USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, EFIN, ELAB, ETRD, KTDB, PGOV, HO, OPIC 
SUBJECT: 2003 Investment Climate Statement for Honduras 
 
REF: SECSTATE 124894 
 
1.  Provided below is the 2003 Investment Climate Statement for 
Honduras.  Responses are keyed to reftel. 
 
----------------------------------- 
A.1. Openness to Foreign Investment 
----------------------------------- 
 
2.  The Honduran government is generally open to foreign 
investment and welcomes it.  Restrictions and performance 
requirements are fairly limited.  U.S. companies tend to encounter 
problems investing in infrastructure and a few visible large 
projects like the airport, telecom and energy sectors, as domestic 
companies seek ways to keep the competition out. 
 
3.  Since 1999, the Honduran government has taken steps, 
including additional legislative measures, to create a more 
favorable investment climate in key sectors including mining, 
energy and tourism, although their potential has yet to be 
realized.  Relatively low labor costs, proximity to the U.S. 
market and Central America\'s best Caribbean port have also made 
Honduras increasingly attractive to investors.  At the same 
time, however, Honduras\' investment climate is hampered by high 
levels of crime, juridical insecurity, high levels of 
corruption, low educational levels among the population, an 
antiquated labor code, a troubled financial sector and limited 
infrastructure. 
 
4.  The Constitution of Honduras requires that all foreign 
investment complement, but not substitute for, national 
investment.  Companies that wish to take advantage of the 
Agrarian Reform Law, engage in commercial fishing, forestry, or 
local transportation activities, serve as representatives, 
agents, or distributors for foreign companies, or operate radio 
and television stations must be majority-owned by Hondurans. 
 
5.  The 1992 Investment Law, which still largely governs 
investment conditions in Honduras, guarantees national treatment 
to foreign private firms in Honduras, with only a few exceptions. 
The law does not limit foreign ownership of businesses, except for 
those specifically reserved for Honduran investors, i.e., small 
firms with capital less than 150,000 Lempiras (approx. USD 8,600). 
For all investments, at least 90 percent of a company\'s labor 
force must be Honduran, and at least 85 percent of the payroll 
must be paid to Hondurans.  Under the 1992 law, dividends to 
foreign investors were taxed at 15 percent, while local investors 
paid only 10 percent.  However in 2002 a revised law was passed 
which lowered this tax rate to 5 percent for both foreign and 
local investors, and will eliminate this tax entirely by 2004. 
 
6.  Additionally, government authorization is required for both 
foreign and domestic investors in the following areas: 
 
- Basic health services, 
 
- Telecommunications, 
 
- Generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity, 
 
- Air transport, 
 
- Fishing, hunting and aquaculture, 
 
- Exploitation of forestry resources, 
 
- Investigation, exploration, and exploitation of mines, quarries, 
petroleum and related substances, 
 
- Agricultural and agro-industrial activities exceeding land 
tenancy limits established by the Agricultural Modernization Law 
of 1992 and the Land Reform Law of 1974, 
 
- Insurance and financial services, and 
 
- Private education services. 
 
7.  Foreign firms are granted national treatment for public bids. 
In practice U.S. firms complain about the mismanagement and lack 
of transparency of government bid processes.  Under the 2001 State 
Contracting Law, all public works contracts over one million 
Lempiras (USD 57,000) must be offered through public competitive 
bidding.  The government publishes tenders in Honduras\' major 
newspapers.  To participate in public tenders, foreign firms are 
required to act through a local agent.  Local agency firms must be 
at least 51 percent Honduran-owned, unless the procurement is 
linked to a national emergency.  Government purchases and project 
acquisitions are generally exempted from import duties. 
 
8.  The 1992 Investment Law requires that all local and foreign 
direct investment be registered with the Investment Office in the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade.  Upon registration, an investor is 
issued an investment certificate which provides investment 
protection under the law and guarantees investors\' international 
arbitration rights.  The registration process is cumbersome and 
companies can expect delays in registering their company. 
9.  In July 2002, the Government of Honduras ratified a law on 
simplification of administrative procedures in establishing a 
company.  Through this new legislation, the government hoped to 
streamline procedures and eliminate a series of administrative 
obstacles involved in the process, reducing the steps for 
establishing an office from up to six months to a maximum of 40 
days.  Foreign businesses setting up operations in Honduras are 
subject to the Commercial Code, which is also undergoing various 
important reforms.  The Commercial Code recognizes several types 
of mercantile organizations: individual ownership, general 
partnership, simple limited partnership, limited liability 
company, corporation and joint stock company. 
 
10.  Management of Honduras\' four international airports was 
turned over to a consortium with majority U.S. investment in 
October 2000, the only major privatization effort in recent years. 
A dispute over the financing of certain projects that the 
consortium agreed to undertake soon developed, and a re-negotiated 
agreement between the consortium and the government is expected to 
be finalized soon. 
 
11.  A bid to privatize the national telephone company failed in 
2001 and will not be attempted again until 2005.  In late 2001, 
the GOH decided to open the telecom market by bidding out one of 
Honduras\' available wireless bands.  After several delays, the 
government awarded one wireless system concession in April 2002, 
and the company is expected to be in service by December 2003. 
The Honduran government intends to allow private joint ventures 
with Hondutel to improve coverage and service beginning in August 
2003, and later to encourage private participation in the sale of 
shares in Hondutel to private interests beginning in 2004 with the 
goal of full privatization in 2005. 
 
12.  The National Electric Company (ENEE) turned over most of its 
thermal energy generation to the private sector but retains 
responsibility for electricity transmission and distribution, as 
well as for almost all hydroelectric energy generation and 
distribution throughout the country.  The GOH is working on a 
project to break up ENEE distribution and is working towards 
privatization, though there is no firm timeline set. 
 
13.  The GOH hopes to begin privatizing some port operations in 
September, 2003 and is working with the U.S. Trade and Development 
Agency to expand and modernize Puerto Cortes.  The ENP and the 
World Bank are working to meet International Maritime Organization 
requirements for port security by July 1, 2004, including the 
creation of an autonomous unit which will be responsible for the 
port security program. 
 
14.  A law is currently before Congress which would formally grant 
municipalities the right to manage water distribution themselves, 
and possibly to grant concessions to private enterprises.  However 
the law has generated a good deal of controversy from opposition 
groups which claim that it amounts to \"privatization\" of water 
distribution, and its progress through Congress has been slowed. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
A.2.  Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------------- 
 
15.  The 1992 Investment Law guarantees foreign investors access 
to foreign currency needed to transfer funds associated with their 
investments in Honduras. This includes: 
 
- Imports of goods and services necessary to operate, 
 
- Payment of royalty fees, rents, annuities and technical 
assistance, and 
 
- Remittance of dividends and capital repatriation. 
 
16.  The Central Bank uses an auction system to regulate the 
allocation of foreign exchange.  According to auction system 
regulations, dollar purchases are conducted at 7 percent above or 
below the base price established every 5 days.  During recent 
auctions, the Central Bank has adjudicated an average of USD 10.3 
million per auction (held each business day).  All individuals, 
foreign residents or national, can participate in auction system 
dollar purchases with a minimum investment of USD 5,000 and a 
maximum of USD 300,000.  Foreign exchange demand in 2002 was 99.9 
percent covered, and the currency depreciated by 6.3 percent. 
 
------------------------------------ 
A.3.  Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------------ 
 
17.  The Honduran government has the authority to expropriate 
property for purposes of land reform (usually related to a land 
invasion by farmer groups) or for public use such as construction 
of an airport.  Land disputes related to actions by the Honduran 
National Agrarian Institute (INA) are common for both Honduran and 
foreign landowners.  According to the National Agrarian Reform 
Law, idle land fit for farming can be expropriated and awarded to 
landless poor.  Generally, an INA expropriation case begins after 
squatters target and invade unprotected property.  The squatters 
then file for the land with the INA under the Agrarian Reform Law. 
In most cases, claimants have found that pursuing the subsequent 
legal avenues is costly and time consuming, and rarely lead to 
positive results.  Compensation for land expropriated under the 
Agrarian Reform Law, when awarded, is paid in 20-year government 
bonds. 
 
18.  Land title disputes are extremely common in Honduras.  Even 
areas which have been subjected to a cadastral survey have not 
been free of land disputes, as the lack of a single unified land 
registry makes adjudication of land tenure difficult.  As of July 
2003, a proposal is before congress for a new property institute 
which would combine the national land registry with the cadastral 
survey and the geographic institute.  The proposed property 
institute would provide for more security in land titling and 
ownership in Honduras, as well as allow for mortgages and home 
loans.  The national land survey project has been completed in the 
Bay Islands and is close to completion in the Comayagua area. 
Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula are scheduled for the next phase of 
the project. 
 
------------------------ 
A.4.  Dispute Settlement 
------------------------ 
 
19.  The Honduran Commercial Code is the main legislation that 
regulates the operations of businesses in the country.  This code, 
though, is antiquated and needs to be updated.  The application of 
the Commercial Code and its regulations fall under the 
jurisdiction of the Honduran civil court system. 
 
20.  Most investment and property disputes are long lasting and 
arduous.  U.S. claimants frequently complain about the lack of 
transparency and the slow administration of justice in the courts. 
There are also complaints that the Honduran judicial system caters 
to favoritism, external pressure and bribes.  While some U.S. 
firms have satisfactorily resolved their cases through the courts, 
the majority have difficulty navigating the legal system.  U.S. 
citizens also complain about the quality of Honduran attorneys. 
The government frequently blames the poor quality of a U.S. 
citizen\'s (Honduran) legal representative as the reason for an 
unfavorable outcome in the courts. 
 
21.  The process to resolve squatter cases or title disputes 
through the courts can be lengthy and frustrating.  The legal 
owner of land is at a disadvantage in a system that recognizes 
adverse possession rights acquired by squatters, especially when 
the disputed land is rural and idle. 
 
22.  Arbitration 
 
Between 1997 and 2001, the Inter-American Development Bank worked 
with the Chamber of Commerce and Industry to establish the 
framework for commercial arbitration.  Honduras\' Conciliation and 
Arbitration Law (Decree 161-2000), which seeks to encourage 
arbitration and clarify the procedures under which arbitration 
takes place, entered into force in March 2001.  In September 2001, 
Centers for Conciliation and Arbitration were established within 
the Chambers of Commerce and Industry in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro 
Sula.  Since that time, the Center in Tegucigalpa has trained 17 
arbitrators who work part-time, and they have completed 2 
arbitrations and 18 conciliations.  Approximately 5 arbitrations 
and 20 conciliations are pending in the Tegucigalpa Center. 
Arbitration and conciliation are generally considered swifter and 
more cost-effective means of resolving disputes between commercial 
entities, and there may be the additional advantage that the 
arbitrator or mediator may have specialized expertise in the 
technical area involved in the dispute.  However the only U.S. 
company to have gone through an arbitration process to date was 
disappointed with both the procedure (which it regarded as lacking 
in transparency) and the result (which was unfavorable to the U.S. 
company). 
 
Honduras is not a member of the ICSID (International Center for 
the Settlement of Investment Disputes). 
 
----------------------------------------- 
A.5.  Performance Requirements/Incentives 
----------------------------------------- 
 
23.  There are relatively few performance requirements in 
Honduras.  The 1992 Investment Law guarantees freedom to export 
and import to all foreign investors, and eliminates the 
requirement of prior administrative permits and licenses, except 
for statistical registries and customs procedures. 
 
24.  Application procedures for service suppliers in all sectors 
are generally simple, clear and non-discriminatory.  There are 
restrictions preventing foreign banks from taking deposits, and 
foreign insurance companies may be subject to a more elaborate 
administrative process than national providers per a new Insurance 
Law (though the Embassy has not received any complaints). 
Honduras\' service sector is widely accessible to foreign 
companies, including current U.S. participation in the Honduran 
banking, insurance and accounting markets. 
 
25.  Honduran law prohibits discriminatory or preferential export 
and import policies affecting foreign investors.  In practice, 
though, the Honduran government uses phyto-sanitary and 
zoosanitary requirements to prevent imports of U.S. poultry, milk 
products, pork, feed grains and rice to Honduras.  The changes in 
sanitary and phyto-sanitary requirements are seldom reported to 
the WTO as required and create uncertainty among U.S. suppliers 
and Honduran importers. 
 
26.  Honduran law requires that all imported processed food 
products and medicines be labeled in Spanish or be accompanied by 
a Spanish translation, show expiration dates and be registered at 
the Division of Food Control in the Ministry of Public Health. 
Additional import restrictions, based mainly on public health, 
public morality, and national security grounds, remain in place. 
For example, restrictions are imposed on the importations of 
firearms and ammunitions, toxic chemicals and pornographic 
material. 
 
27.  U.S. citizens wishing to travel to Honduras do not need a 
visa prior to arrival.  Foreigners interested in working in the 
country must obtain a resident visa from the Honduran Ministry of 
Government and a work permit from the Ministry of Labor.  The time 
required to process a request for a resident visa and work permit 
may take up to three months. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
A.6.  Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
28.  The Investment Law guarantees both local and foreign 
investors the right to own property without limitations, other 
than those established by the Honduran Constitution and several 
laws relating to property rights.  This guarantee includes the 
right to free acquisition, profit, use, disposition and any other 
right attributable to property ownership.  The major exception is 
the constitutional prohibition of foreign ownership of land within 
40 kilometers of international borders and shorelines, although 
Honduran law now permits foreign individuals to purchase 
properties in designated \"tourism zones.\" 
 
29.  Investors have the right to freely establish, acquire and 
dispose of interests in business enterprises at market prices, 
under freely negotiated conditions and without government 
intervention.  Private enterprises compete on an equal basis with 
public enterprises with respect to access to markets, credit and 
other business operations. 
 
----------------------------------- 
A.7.  Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------------- 
 
30.  Intellectual Property Rights 
 
There is widespread piracy of many forms of copyrighted works in 
Honduras -- movies, sound recordings and software.  The 
illegitimate registration of well-known trademarks has also been a 
problem.  Protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) is 
handled by the Ministry of Industry and Trade.  In 1994, following 
the passage of modern IPR legislation by the Honduran Congress, 
the Ministry established an office to process the registration of 
patents, trademarks and copyrights, as well as any complaints 
regarding their infringement. 
 
31.  Honduras largely complied with the Trade Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement by the January 1, 
2000, deadline.  In December 1999, the Honduran Congress passed 
two laws to correct deficiencies in previous legislation 
concerning copyrights, patents and trademarks.  The Copyright Law 
adds more than 20 different criminal offenses related to copyright 
infringement and establishes fines and suspension of services that 
can be levied against offenders.  The Law of Intellectual 
Property, which covers both trademarks and patents, includes 
modifications on patent protection for pharmaceuticals, extending 
the term from seventeen to twenty years to meet international 
standards.  The term for cancellation of a trademark for lack of 
use has been extended from one year to three years.   As soon as 
two new laws governing the designs of integrated circuits and 
plant variety protection are approved by the National Congress, 
Honduras will be in complete TRIPS compliance.  Current 
expectations are that no action will be taken on these two laws 
until early 2004, but that the laws will then be included in a 
larger bill that is likely to pass. 
 
32.  Honduras and the U.S. initialed a bilateral IPR agreement in 
March 1999.  Signing of this agreement is still pending. 
Honduras became a member of the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) in 1983, and became party to the WIPO 
Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Performances and Phonogram 
Treaty (WPPT) in May 2002.  Honduran law protects data exclusivity 
for a period of five years, and protects process patents, but does 
not recognize second-use patents. 
 
33.  Land Rights: 
 
Honduran laws and practices regarding real estate differ 
substantially from those in the United States, and there are many 
cases of disputed or fraudulent deeds and titles.  In addition, 
the Honduran judicial system is weak and inefficient, often 
prolonging disputed cases for many years before resolution.  There 
have been claims of widespread corruption in land sales and the 
registry and dispute resolution process, including claims against 
attorneys, real estate companies, judges and local officials. 
U.S. citizens have spent thousands of dollars in legal fees and 
years of frustration in trying to resolve property disputes. 
 
34.  Article 107 of the Honduran Constitution prohibits foreign 
ownership of property in Honduras that lies within 40 kilometers 
(25 miles) of the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Fonseca or the 
international borders of Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala and 
on any of the islands and cays belonging to Honduras. 
 
35.  However, recognizing that the constitutional prohibition of 
foreign property ownership in Honduras was a barrier to 
development of tourism and the economic potential of Honduras\' 
coastal and island areas, the Honduran National Congress passed 
Decree Law 90/90 in 1990 to allow foreigners to purchase 
properties in designated tourism zones established by the Ministry 
of Tourism in order to construct permanent or vacation homes. 
Foreigners or foreign companies seeking to purchase property in 
designated tourism zones exceeding 3,000 square meters in size or 
for tourism or other development projects must present an 
application to the Honduran Tourism Institute at the Ministry of 
Tourism.  In addition to providing the requested personal 
information, the potential buyer must also prove that a contract 
to buy a specific property exists and that it is registered with 
the Honduran Tourism Institute.  The buyer must also present 
feasibility studies and plans about the proposed tourism or 
economic development project. 
 
36.  In 1999, the Honduran National Congress also passed a Tourism 
Incentives Law which offers tax exemptions for national and 
international investment in tourism development projects in 
Honduras. The law provides income tax exemptions for the first ten 
years of the project and permits the duty-free import of goods 
needed for the project, including publicity materials.  In June 
2002 a reformed law was passed, offering the same basic 
incentives, but with a narrower definition of who may qualify for 
the incentives.  For example, restaurants were included as a duty- 
free tourist activity in the 1999 law, but removed in the 2002 
law.  This change is due in large part to the current saturation 
of the fast food and restaurant market, since many franchises 
established locations in Honduras under the duty-free incentives 
of the 1999 law.  Other enterprises now excluded from the law\'s 
benefits are casinos, night clubs and movie theaters.  In 
addition, a requirement was added that a business must be located 
in a designated tourism zone in order to qualify for tax 
exemptions and duty-free status. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
A.8.  Transparency of the Regulatory System 
------------------------------------------- 
 
37.  The Honduran government does not publish regulations before 
they enter into force and there is no formal mechanism for 
providing proposed regulations to the public for comment. 
Regulations must be published in the official \"Gazette\" in order 
to enter into force.  Honduras lacks an indexed legal code and 
lawyers and judges must maintain and index the publication of laws 
on their own. 
38.  Foreign market participants who are represented locally and 
are members of connected private sector groups essentially have 
access to the same information as their Honduran counterparts. 
The lack of a formal notification process excludes most non- 
governmental groups, including foreign companies, from commenting 
on regulations. 
39.  Application procedures for service suppliers in all sectors 
are generally simple, clear and non-discriminatory.  There are 
restrictions preventing foreign banks from taking deposits, and 
foreign insurance companies may be subject to a more exhaustive 
administrative process than national providers per a new Insurance 
Law (though the Embassy has not received any complaints). 
Honduras\' service sector is widely accessible to foreign 
companies, including current U.S. participation in the Honduran 
banking and insurance markets. 
 
40.  In both the banking and insurance sectors, the general rule 
is that foreign companies operate on an equal footing with local 
companies, so long as the foreign company establishes a branch or 
subsidiary in Honduras.  However, there are restrictions on cross- 
border services and offshore operations.  Insurance may not be 
offered on a cross-border basis, and a foreign bank wishing to 
operate offshore must establish a representative office in 
Honduras, which entails reporting requirements and other 
procedures which are very cumbersome.  Furthermore, a Honduran 
branch of foreign bank may only operate based on its capital in 
Honduras, not on its global or regional capital. 
 
41.  Honduran labor laws and the civil procedures code are 
outdated.  The Honduran government often lacks the resources or 
political will to implement or enforce existing laws.  Property 
registration often is not up to date, nor can the results of title 
searches be relied upon.  There is no title insurance in Honduras. 
Procedural red tape to obtain government approval for investment 
activities is still very common. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
A.9.  Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
42.  There are no government restrictions on foreign investors\' 
access to local credit markets.  However, the local banking system 
is conservative and generally extends only limited amounts of 
credit.  Interest rates have been steadily declining for several 
years, but remain high.  As of April 2003, the average lending 
rate for a loan in Lempiras as was 21.1 percent, down from 23.1 
percent a year earlier, and for a loan in dollars was 10.7 
percent, down from 11.6 percent a year earlier.  Local banks 
should not be considered a significant source of start-up capital 
for new foreign ventures, unless they use specific business 
development credit lines made available by bilateral or 
multilateral financial institutions, such as the Central American 
Bank for Economic Integration.  Loans from banks tend to be short- 
term, with substantial collateral and/or guarantee requirements. 
 
43.  There is a limited number of credit instruments available in 
the local market.  Two security exchanges operate in the country: 
the Honduran Securities Exchange (BHV), in San Pedro Sula, and the 
Central American Securities Exchange, in Tegucigalpa.  Both 
security exchanges are supervised by the National Banking and 
Insurance Commission.  The instruments traded in these exchanges 
include bankers\' acceptances, reposition agreements, short-term 
promissory notes, Honduran government private debt conversion 
bonds and land reform repayment bonds. 
 
44.  While any private business is eligible to trade its financial 
instruments on the security exchanges, firms that participate are 
subject to a rigorous screening process.  Traded firms generally 
have economic ties to the different business/financial groups 
represented as either shareholders of the security exchanges or 
exchange trading houses.  Supervision of the security exchanges 
has traditionally been inadequate, and even though a new law 
regulating the security exchanges was passed in June 2001, 
implementation has taken place slowly.  By July 2003, 
implementation was nearly complete and expected to be completed by 
the end of the year.  Nevertheless, investors should exercise 
caution before putting money into the Honduran security exchange. 
 
45.  There is no regulatory body for the accounting profession in 
Honduras.  The Association of Public Accountants is responsible 
for certifying practicing professionals.  In general, Honduran 
businesses adhere to international Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP).  These principles are normally applied per 
guidelines from the Ministry of Finance\'s General Directorate for 
Taxation. 
 
46.  The Honduran banking system, currently comprised of 18 
private banks, is considered weak and in need of consolidation. 
Most banks were originally founded primarily to service the 
financing needs of family-run business conglomerates, rather than 
provide full banking services to the public in a transparent 
manner. 
 
47.  In recent years, the Honduran banking system has been shaken 
by the bankruptcy of several major banking institutions. The first 
bank to collapse was Bancorp in 1999.  In response to this 
collapse, the Honduran legislature enacted the Temporary Law of 
Financial Stabilization in an attempt to help stabilize the 
banking sector.  Under this law, all bank deposits are insured by 
the State regardless of the sum.  Currently, the Honduran 
government guarantees 100 percent of bank deposits, with the 
deposit insurance program (FOSEDE) paying up to $10,000 or 150,000 
Lempiras, and the government covering the remaining amount.  After 
September 30, 2003, however, the government\'s guarantee will drop 
to 50 percent of the deposit.  As in other countries, this deposit 
insurance only covers qualified deposits in banks, not in 
uninsured financial institutions. 
 
48.  When Banhcreser collapsed in 2001, the rules established in 
the temporary law helped to protect the bank\'s customers. With 
both the collapses of Banhcreser and Bancorp, allegations of 
corruption and wrongdoing followed the investigations into the 
causes of the bank\'s failures. 
 
49.  In December 2002, the National Banking and Insurance 
Commission (CNBS) announced the forced liquidation of Banco 
Capital, which had been under government supervision since May 
2002.  At nearly the same time another bank, Banco Sogerin, was 
placed under the supervision of the Honduran Deposit Insurance 
Fund (Fosede).  With both Banco Sogerin and Banco Capital failing 
at the same time, the CNBS delayed the initial sale of Banco 
Sogerin for several months to prevent wider damage to the banking 
system.  The sale of Banco Sogerin was finally announced in July 
2003. 
 
50.  The mixed success of CNBS\'s handling of the failed banks has 
attracted some criticism. Certain Honduran banking officials have 
criticized the CNBS for adding too many generalized rules with too 
many loopholes and for not enforcing the established banking 
regulations. 
 
51.  The Honduran financial system had total assets equivalent to 
75 percent of GDP in 2002.  The financial system is comprised of 
commercial banks, state-owned banks, savings and loans and finance 
companies.  Banks account for 90 percent of total assets in the 
financial system.  There is limited off-shore banking in Honduras. 
 
52.  There are no legal barriers to entry in the banking sector, 
but the small size of the market and weak financial situation have 
discouraged greater foreign investment.  Four banks have majority 
foreign ownership as of 2002, accounting for 19 percent of total 
bank capital. 
 
------------------------- 
A.10.  Political Violence 
------------------------- 
 
53.  Honduras has not experienced major problems with domestic 
political violence.  Political demonstrations do occur 
sporadically, and they can disrupt traffic, but they are generally 
announced in advance and are usually peaceful.  Most major 
demonstrations occur in downtown Tegucigalpa.  Travelers should 
avoid areas where demonstrations are taking place, and they should 
keep informed by following the local news and consulting hotel 
personnel and tour guides. 
 
---------------- 
A.11. Corruption 
---------------- 
 
54.  Two codes regulate justice and provide for penalties against 
corruption: the Criminal Procedures Code (CPC) and the Penal Code 
(PC).  In a landmark reform, the National Congress approved a new 
CPC in February of 2000, which entered into force in February 
2002.  The criminal judicial system has changed from a traditional 
written inquisitorial trial system to an adversarial, oral, and 
public trial system.  The new CPC should improve justice and 
accountability in a number of ways, including increased 
transparency in the criminal process.  The PC is currently under 
review and faces challenges in terms of funding and support. 
55.  The main responsibility for fighting corruption lies with the 
Public Ministry, under the direction of the Attorney General 
(Fiscal General).  In January 2002, the Government created a new 
control entity, the Supreme Court of Accounts (TSC) which has 
brought together the Comptroller General of the Republic (CGR), 
the Directorate of Administrative Probity (Ethics office) and the 
Office of State Assets under one roof and direction of three 
members selected by the Congress.  These three members are 
appointed for a period of 7 years.  The presidency of the TSC is 
exerted in a rotating manner within the elected members for 
periods of one year.  In the past few years, there has been an 
increase in the number of cases involving corruption adjudicated 
by the courts. 
 
56.  In June 2002, new money laundering legislation entered into 
force.  The new bill expands the definition of the crime of money 
laundering to encompass any non-economically justified sale or 
movement of assets, including financing of terrorism, and calls 
for the creation of a financial information unit to track 
suspicious transactions.  The bill also strengthens the powers of 
prosecutors to investigate and prosecute.  However, as of July 
2003, not a single person has ever been convicted of money- 
laundering in Honduras. 
 
57.  In May 1998, Honduras ratified, adopted and deposited its 
signature for the Inter-American Anti-Corruption Convention at the 
Specialized Conference of the Organization of American States 
(OAS). 
 
58.  Historically, U.S. firms and private citizens have found 
corruption to be a problem and a constraint to investment. 
Corruption appears to be most pervasive in government procurement, 
government permits, and in the buying and selling of real estate 
(land titling).  With considerable U.S. help, the government is 
reforming Honduras\' judicial system and reducing elite immunity 
and corruption, though serious problems remain in these areas. 
The U.S. and other donors, as part of the Hurricane Mitch 
reconstruction effort, have contributed significant funding to 
strengthen those institutions involved in the oversight of 
government expenditures. 
 
59.  Bribery is a criminal act and, depending on the degree of the 
offense, is subject to fines or incarceration.  A bribe to a 
foreign official is also a criminal act under U.S. law (Foreign 
Corrupt Practices Act). 
 
----------------------------------- 
B.  Bilateral Investment Agreements 
----------------------------------- 
 
60.  On July 12, 2001, a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between 
the U.S. and Honduras entered into force.  The Treaty provides for 
equal protection under the law for U.S. investors in Honduras and 
permits expropriation only in accordance with international law 
standards and accompanied by adequate compensation.  U.S. 
investors in Honduras also have the right to submit an investment 
dispute to binding international arbitration.  The U.S.-Honduras 
Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights (1928) provides 
for Most Favored Nation treatment for investors of either country. 
The U.S. and Honduras also signed an agreement for the guarantee 
of private investments in 1955 and an agreement on investment 
guarantees in 1966.  Honduras signed a Tax Information Exchange 
Agreement with the U.S. in 1992. 
 
61.  Provisions for bilateral investment are included in 
commercial treaties between Honduras and Costa Rica, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Panama and the Dominican Republic.  In 1993 Honduras 
signed bilateral investment agreements with the United Kingdom and 
Spain. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
C.  OPIC & Other Investment Insurance Programs 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
62.  The U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) 
provides loan guarantees, which are typically used for larger 
projects, and direct loans, which are reserved for projects 
sponsored by or substantially involving U.S. small businesses and 
cooperatives.  OPIC can normally guarantee or lend from USD 
100,000 to USD 250 million per project.  OPIC also offers 
insurance against risks of currency inconvertibility, 
expropriation and political violence. 
 
63.  Other countries, including Germany, the United Kingdom, 
Taiwan, Spain, Italy, Switzerland and Japan provide insurance and 
guarantees for their companies doing business in Honduras.  In 
addition, Honduras is a party to the World Bank\'s Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). 
 
--------- 
D.  Labor 
--------- 
 
64.  Honduras has a significant availability of labor for 
industries with a demand for relatively low skilled workers, given 
the low level of education of a significant portion of its 
population.  There is a limited supply of skilled workers in all 
technological fields, as well as in medical and high technology 
industries. 
 
65.  Union officials remain critical of what they perceive as 
inadequate enforcement by the Ministry of Labor (MOL) of workers\' 
rights, particularly the right to form a union and bargain 
collectively, and the reinstatement of workers unjustly fired for 
union organizing activities.  In November 1995, the MOL signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding with the U.S. Trade Representative\'s 
Office to implement 11 recommendations for enforcement of the 
Honduran Labor Code and the resolution of disputes.  The MOL has 
implemented some of these recommendations, particularly as they 
relate to inspection and monitoring of assembly-for-export 
factories (maquilas).  However, it has been slow to implement 
others due to resource constraints.  Also, the Honduran 
Maquiladora Association initiated a code of conduct in July 1998 
for the Maquiladora Association and its constituent companies. 
Through cooperation within the bipartite and tripartite 
commissions (unions, MOL, private sector) and other venues, MOL 
inspectors\' access to maquila plants to enforce the labor code has 
improved, and MOL has continued to work to increase its 
effectiveness in enforcing worker rights and child labor laws. 
 
66.  The labor law prescribes a maximum 8-hour workday and 44-hour 
week.  There is a requirement for at least one 24-hour rest period 
every week.  The Labor Code provides for a paid vacation of 10 
workdays after one year, and of 20 workdays after four years.  The 
Constitution and Labor Code prohibit the employment of persons 
under the age of 16, except that a 15-year old may be permitted to 
work with the written permission of parents and the MOL.  All 
persons under 18 years of age are prohibited from night work, 
dangerous work and full time work. 
 
67.  The Children\'s Code (September 10, 1996) prohibits a person 
of 14 years of age or less from working, even with parental 
permission, and establishes prison sentences of 3 to 5 years for 
individuals who allow children to work illegally.  An employer who 
legally hires a 15-year-old must certify that the young person has 
finished or is finishing compulsory schooling.  The MOL grants a 
number of work permits to 15-year-olds each year.  Document fraud 
is prevalent among minors interested in working. 
 
---------------------------------- 
E.  Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
---------------------------------- 
 
68.  There are no known export subsidies provided by the Honduran 
government.  The Temporary Import Law (RIT) allows exporters to 
introduce raw materials, parts and capital equipment (except 
vehicles) into Honduras exempt from surcharges and customs duties 
if the input is to be incorporated into a product for export (up 
to five percent can be sold locally).  Export processing zones 
(ZIPS and ZOLIS) are exempt from paying import duties and other 
charges on goods and capital equipment.  In addition, the 
production and sale of goods within the ZIPS and ZOLIS are exempt 
from state and municipal income taxes for the first ten years of 
operation.  Companies operating in an export processing zone are 
permitted unrestricted repatriation of profits and capital and 
have access to onsite customs facilities.  However, companies are 
now required to purchase the Lempiras needed for their local 
operations from Honduran commercial banks or from foreign exchange 
trading houses registered with the Central Bank. 
 
69.  The principal free trade zone (FTZ) in Honduras is located in 
Puerto Cortes and is operated by the Honduran government through 
the National Port Authority.  In 1998, the government extended FTZ 
benefits to the entire country.  Privately-owned free trade zones 
are legal extensions of official free trade zones.  In terms of 
operations and incentives, they are identical to the privately 
operated industrial parks. 
 
70.  There are 27 industrial parks currently operating in 
Honduras.  Over 80 percent of the parks are located in the North 
Coast region, with close access to Puerto Cortes, Honduras\' major 
Caribbean port, and San Pedro Sula, a transportation crossroads. 
Industrial parks and export processing zones are treated as 
offshore operations.  Subsequently, customs duties must be paid on 
products manufactured in the parks and sold in Honduras.  In 
addition, if Honduran inputs are used in production, they are 
treated as exports and must be paid for in U.S. dollars.  Ninety 
percent of the companies that operate in these parks are involved 
in apparel assembly.  The government and park operators are 
seeking to diversify into other types of light industry, including 
footwear, automotive parts, electronics assembly and data 
processing services. 
 
71.  Privately-owned Tourism Free Zones (ZOLT) may be established 
to promote the tourism industry development in Honduras.  The law 
allows the free importation of equipment, supplies, and vehicles 
to the exclusive benefit of the ZOLT, with certain restrictions 
(see the description of the tourism law in section A.7, above). 
 
---------------- 
Maquila Industry 
---------------- 
 
72.  Honduras currently ranks as the third largest exporter of 
textiles and apparel to the U.S., and the first among Central 
American nations.  However, the slowdown and sluggish recovery of 
the U.S. economy during 2001 and 2002 continue to have a 
depressing effect on the Honduran maquila sector, and the future 
is clouded by fears of being unable to compete with China and 
other Asian producers after the removal of quotas in 2005. 
Benefits under the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act (CBTPA) 
have helped to establish the maquila industry in Honduras, but 
officials in the maquila sector hope that improved market access 
and rules of origin currently under negotiation for the Central 
America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) will provide increased 
opportunities. 
 
73.  Total investment in the maquila sector surpassed USD 1.5 
billion in 2002, but employment in the sector has fallen by 15 
percent from 2000 to 2002. One reason for this decrease in 
employment is the closing of 13 maquilas in 2002 as a result of 
the U.S. market slowdown and Honduran management problems. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
F. Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
--------------------------------------- 
 
74.  In Honduras, figures for investment in the maquila industry 
are kept separately from figures for investment in the rest of the 
economy.  Table 1 below shows the flows of FDI into Honduras in 
recent years, excluding the maquila industry.  According to the 
Central Bank of Honduras, total flows of non-maquila investment in 
2002 totaled USD 142.9 million, down 27 percent from 2001.  The 
United States supplied 54.5 million, or 38 percent, of this 
investment.  A breakdown of this investment by industry was not 
available. 
 
 
75.                           TABLE 1 
     HONDURAS: FLOWS OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT BY COUNTRY, 
                 NOT INCLUDING THE MAQUILA SECTOR 
                  (In Millions of U.S. Dollars) 
 
COUNTRY              2000          2001          2002 
-------              ----          ----          ---- 
United States        64.2          52.6          54.5 
Canada               36.1          15.1          18.1 
El Salvador           7.9           9.2          11.8 
Costa Rica           21.2          24.1           9.8 
Panama               15.1          18.1           8.8 
Italy                13.6           7.6           6.2 
Guatemala            11.1          10.8           6.0 
Spain                 7.8           9.8           5.4 
United Kingdom       15.0           4.3           4.8 
Japan                 0.0           1.2           1.2 
Switzerland          -4.1          -1.3           0.5 
Mexico               -0.1           0.2           0.2 
Germany               0.2           0.2           0.2 
Other                94.1          43.1          15.2 
 
TOTAL               282.0         195.0         142.9 
 
Source: Central Bank of Honduras 
 
 
76.                          TABLE 2 
          HONDURAS: GDP AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT FLOWS, 
                 NOT INCLUDING THE MAQUILA SECTOR 
                   (In Millions of U.S. Dollars) 
 
                     2000          2001          2002 
                     ----          ----          ---- 
GDP               5,952.1       6,248.4       6,389.7 
FDI Flows           282.0         195.0         142.9 
FDI Flows as 
 percentage of GDP    4.7           3.1           2.2 
 
Source: Central Bank of Honduras 
 
------------------------- 
Maquila Sector Statistics 
------------------------- 
 
77.  In the maquila sector, total accumulated investment reached 
USD 1.56 billion in 2002, up from 1.421 billion in 2001 and 1.237 
billion in 2000.  A detailed breakdown of investment by country of 
origin for 2002 was not available; however, Table 3 provides this 
information for the year 2001, and Table 4 shows investment origin 
by number of companies established (not dollar value of 
investment) for 2002. 
 
 
78.                          TABLE 3 
    HONDURAS: ACCUMULATED INVESTMENT IN MAQUILA SECTOR, 2001 
                  (In Millions of U.S. Dollars) 
 
                     Amount        Percent of 
                 (USD millions)         Total 
 
Honduras             670.1              47.1 
U.S.                 370.2              26.0 
Korea                145.5              10.2 
Hong Kong             43.8               3.1 
Taiwan                55.2               3.9 
China                 33.8               2.5 
Singapore             18.8               1.3 
Canada                49.2               3.5 
Other                 35.0               2.5 
                    ------             ----- 
Total               1421.6             100.0 
 
Source: Honduran Maquila Association 
 
 
79.                          TABLE 4 
       HONDURAS: INVESTMENT ORIGIN IN MAQUILA SECTOR, 2002 
                 (Number of Companies Established) 
 
                 Number of       Percent of 
                 Companies          Total 
 
U.S.                 87               40 
Honduras             67               31 
Korea                33               15 
Hong Kong             9                4 
Taiwan                4                2 
Other                17                8 
                    ---              --- 
TOTAL               217              100 
 
Source: Honduran Maquila Association 
 
 
80.  There are no records kept on Honduran investment abroad. 
 
----------------------- 
Major Foreign Investors 
----------------------- 
 
81.  The following is a partial list of foreign firms and 
franchises of foreign firms operating in Honduras, with a 
description of the type of investment and country of origin. 
 
Investor                        Country         Type of Investment 
 
Agro Internacional de           U.S.            Agricultural 
Honduras                                        products 
 
Alpha-Graphics                  U.S.            Printing services 
 
Alberti Food Co.                U.S.            Food products 
 
Alimentos Concentrados          U.S.            Veterinary food 
Nacionales 
 
American Airlines               U.S.            Air services 
 
Americar                        U.S.            Car distributors 
America\'s Favorite Chicken      U.S.            Fast food 
 
American Home Assurance Co.     U.S.            Insurance services 
 
American International Group    U.S.            Insurance services 
 
Americatel                      U.S.            Telecommunications 
 
Antonino\'s Pizza                U.S.            Fast food 
 
Applewoods                      United Kingdom  Cosmetics 
 
Applebee\'s                      U.S.            Restaurant 
Arthur Andersen                 U.S.            General Business 
Consulting 
 
Astaldi, s.p.a.W.A.             ITA             Engineering 
                                                services 
 
Azucarera \"La Grecia\"           Guatemala       Sugar mill 
 
BAT Industries PLC              United Kingdom  Tobacco products 
 
Bay Island Fish Co.             U.S.            Seafood 
 
Bayer                           Germany         Pharmaceutical 
                                                products 
 
Benetton                        ITA             Casual clothing 
 
Bennigan\'s                      U.S.            Restaurant 
 
Best Western Hotel              U.S.            Hotel 
 
Bojangles                       U.S.            Restaurant 
 
Breakwater Resources Corp.      CAN/U.S.        Mining 
 
Bristol Myers Squibb            U.S.            Beauty products 
 
Budget Rent a Car               U.S.            Car rental 
 
Burger King Inc.                U.S.            Fast food 
 
Candy Bouquet                   U.S.            Candy Store 
 
Cargill, Inc.                   U.S.            Animal feed, 
                                                poultry & meat 
                                                processing 
 
Castle & Cooke, Inc.            U.S.            Bananas and other 
                                                Agricultural 
                                                products; Bottling 
                                                and brewing 
 
Caterpillar Tractors            U.S.            Spare parts, 
                                                accessories 
 
Cerveceria Hondurena, S.A.      U.S.            Soft drinks and 
                                                beers 
 
Chestnut Hill Farms             U.S.            Agricultural 
                                                products 
 
Chiquita Brands International   U.S.            Bananas and other 
                                                Agricultural 
                                                products; 
                                                plastic products 
                                                manufacturing 
 
Church\'s Chicken                U.S.            Fast food 
 
Cinemark                        U.S.            Entertainment 
 
Citibank                        U.S.            Banking and 
                                                financial services 
 
Citrus Development Corp.        U.S.            Citrus production 
                                                and processing 
 
Colgate-Palmolive               U.S.            Personal care 
                                                products 
 
Congelados Holanda              Mexico          Ice cream 
 
Continental Airlines            U.S.            Air services 
CPC International               U.S.            Corn starch 
 
Crowley American Transport      U.S.            Ocean freight 
                                                services 
 
Crowne Plaza Hotel              U.S.            Hotel 
                                                services 
 
Cultivos Marinos                U.S.            Shrimp farm 
 
Cybex                           U.S.            Health & fitness 
 
Daimler Crysler Corporation     U.S.            Cars 
Demahsa                         Mexico          Corn flour 
 
DHL                             U.S.            Air freight 
                                                services 
 
Domino\'s Pizza                  U.S.            Fast food 
 
Dos Pinos                       Costa Rica      Ice cream and milk 
                                                products 
 
Dry Cleaning USA                U.S.            Dry cleaning 
                                                services 
 
Empacadora Cortes, S.A.         U.S.            Meat production; 
                                                packing 
 
Electrical & Consulting         U.S.            Engineering 
Petroleum Training Programs 
Services, Inc. 
 
Elektra                         Mexico          Household 
                                                goods/appliances 
 
Ernst & Young International     U.S.            Accounting & 
                                                auditing services 
 
Espresso Americano              U.S.            Fast food 
 
Exxon                           U.S.            Petroleum products 
                                                marketing 
 
Federal Express                 U.S.            Air freight svcs. 
 
Five Star Mining                U.S.            Mining exploration 
 
From the Ground Up/Tippman      U.S.            Trading and 
                                                consulting 
 
G.B.M. de Honduras              U.S.            Computer services 
 
Glamis Gold, Ltd.               U.S.            Gold mining 
 
Global One Communication        U.S.            Telecommunications 
 
Gold\'s Gym                      U.S.            Health & fitness 
 
Grey Advertising Inc.           U.S.            Advertising 
                                                services 
 
Grupo Granjas Marinas           U.S.            Shrimp farms 
 
H.B. Fuller                     U.S.            Adhesives; paints 
 
Hertz Rent a Car                U.S.            Car rental 
 
Holiday Inn Hotel               U.S.            Hotel 
 
Hotel Intercontinental          El Salvador     Hotel 
/Camino Real (Grupo Roble) 
 
Hotel Princess                  Guatemala       Hotel 
 
House of Windsor                U.S.            Tobacco 
 
IBM                             U.S.            Business machines; 
                                                Computer software 
 
Industrial Engineers, Inc.      U.S.            Repair & 
                                                construction, 
                                                naval vessels 
 
Kimberly-Clark                  U.S.            Paper products; 
                                                Pharmaceutical 
                                                products 
 
KPMG Peat Marwick               U.S.            General business 
                                                consultants 
 
La Costena                      Mexico          Canned foods 
 
Little Caesar\'s Pizza           U.S.            Fast food 
 
Lloyd\'s Bank PLC                United Kingdom  Banking services 
 
Lucent Technologies             U.S.            Telecommunications 
 
Mail Boxes, etc.                U.S.            Courier services 
                                                and copy center 
 
Martinizing                     U.S.            Dry cleaning 
                                                services 
 
McDonald\'s                      U.S.            Fast food 
 
McCann Erickson                 U.S.            Advertising; 
                                                publicity 
 
Midas International             U.S.            Automotive parts & 
                                                Services 
 
Motorola                        U.S.            Telecommunications 
 
Moore Business Forms            U.S.            Business forms 
 
Multiplaza Malls (Grupo Roble)  El Salvador     Shopping center 
                                                chain 
 
Nestle Products                 Switzerland     Food products 
 
Oil Butler                      U.S.            Oil change 
 
Oracle                          U.S.            Software 
 
Pakmail                         U.S.            Packaging and 
                                                Courier Services 
 
Pan Bimbo                       Mexico          Bread products 
 
Pan American Life Ins. Co.      U.S.            Life insurance 
 
Papa John\'s                     U.S.            Fast food 
 
Parker Tobacco                  U.S.            Cigars 
 
Payless                         U.S.            Footwear 
 
Paysen                          Germany         Pharmaceutical 
                                                products 
 
Peat, Marwick, & Mitchell       U.S.            Accounting and 
                                                auditing services 
 
Phelps-Dodge                    U.S.            Electric wire & 
                                                Cable 
                                                manufacturing 
 
Pizza Hut International         U.S.            Fast food 
 
Pollo Campero                   Guatemala       Fast food; Animal 
                                                feed; Poultry 
                                                processing 
 
Popeye\'s                        U.S.            Fast food 
 
PriceSmart                      U.S.            Warehouse stores 
 
Price Waterhouse                U.S.            Accounting & 
                                                auditing services 
 
Quick Internet                  U.S.           Telecommunications, 
                                                internet services 
 
R. Rodriguez y Asociados        U.S.            General Business 
                                                consulting 
 
Radio Shack                     U.S.            Electrical 
                                                Appliances 
 
RJR-Nabisco                     U.S.            Food products 
 
Rochez Brothers Entertainment   U.S.            Entertainment 
Ruby Tuesday\'s                  U.S.            Restaurant 
 
Sabritas                        Mexico          Snacks 
 
Scott Paper, Inc.               U.S.            Paper products 
 
Seaboard Marine Corp.           U.S.            Winter fruits & 
                                                vegetables; 
                                                aquaculture; 
                                                ocean freight 
                                                services 
 
Sealand Service, Inc.           U.S.            Ocean freight 
                                                services 
 
Sears                           U.S.            Household goods 
 
Select                          United Kingdom  Convenience store 
 
Shell                           United Kingdom  Petroleum products 
                                /Holland        marketing 
 
Siemens                         Germany         Telecommunications 
 
Smith-Kline Beecham             United Kingdom  Pharmaceutical 
 
Sprint                          U.S.            Telecommunications 
                                                products 
 
Standard Fruit Co.              U.S.            Tropical fruits 
 
Star Mart                       U.S.            Convenience store 
 
Stewart & Stevenson             U.S.            Electricity 
                                                generation 
 
Subway                          U.S.            Fast food 
 
TAHSA                           United Kingdom  Tobacco 
 
TACA                            El Salvador     Air services 
 
TCBY                            U.S.            Fast food 
 
Technology Research Corp.       U.S.            Electrical 
                                                supplies 
 
Texaco                          U.S.            Petroleum products 
                                                marketing 
 
TGI Friday\'s                    U.S.            Restaurant 
 
3M                              U.S.            Office supplies 
 
Tony Roma\'s                     U.S.            Restaurant 
 
Tropical Gas Company            U.S.            Appliance and 
                                                other equipment 
 
Truly International             U.S.            Pest control 
 
Unilever                        United Kingdom  Cleaning Products, 
                                /Holland        Beverages, Food 
 
United Marketing (Unimerc)      U.S.            Marketing services 
 
United Parcel Services          U.S.            International 
                                                Courier 
 
United Technologies Automotive  U.S.            Automobile 
                                                Electronics 
                                                assembly 
 
U.S. Tobacco                    U.S.            Cigars 
 
Van Ommeren-Ceteco              Netherlands     Trading/retailing 
 
Wellington Hall Caribbean, Inc. U.S.            Furniture 
 
Wendy\'s International           U.S.            Fast food 
 
Witten International            U.S.            Apparel 
 
Xerox Corp.                     U.S.            Business machine 
                                                sales & services 
 
Pierce 
"
"10114","8/14/2003 22:25","03TEGUCIGALPA1927","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE230096","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/AS NORIEGA, WHA/DAS FISK, AND WHA/CEN TRIVELLI FROM 
CHARGE PIERCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, PREL, HO, WHA 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA\'S 90-DAY GOAL PLANS 
 
REF: STATE 230096 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Embassy Tegucigalpa\'s priority goals for 
the next ninety days include: (a) providing current 
information on Honduran negotiating strategies on measures 
related to CAFTA, to the U.S. delegation to the talks in 
order to support their efforts to narrow the gap in U.S. 
positions on these subjects; (b) negotiating and signing 
either a new Letter of Agreement (LOA) on Narcotics Control 
and Law Enforcement with the GOH, or an amendment to the 
2000 LOA that will permit the expenditure of FY03 counter- 
narcotics assistance money; and (c) negotiating and signing 
four new bilateral agreements with the GOH which will 
directly support USAID\'s Central America and Mexico (CAM) 
Regional Strategy. End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU)  Goal  1: Providing information on Honduran  CAFTA 
negotiating strategy. 
Honduran  participation in the CAFTA rounds has  been  badly 
organized and haphazard.  Honduran representatives  appeared 
to  be  unprepared to discuss the major topics of the recent 
rounds.  Our  efforts  will enable the  U.S.  delegation  to 
better   understand  the  positions   taken   by   the   GOH 
representatives to the talks.  Having the ability to predict 
the  position that will be taken by Honduran representatives 
will  enable this Mission to support the U.S. delegation  in 
its  efforts to narrow the gap in U.S./GOH positions on  the 
CAFTA subjects. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Goal  2: Negotiating and signing  a  new  LOA  on 
Narcotics and Law Enforcement or amending the 2000 LOA. 
We  estimate  that in excess of 100 metric tons  of  cocaine 
transits Honduras destined for the U.S. each year.   Cocaine 
seizures  in  recent years have been anemic, although  there 
have been considerable improvements in 2003.  Recent arrests 
of  prominent figures for drug trafficking and  seizures  of 
large   drug  shipments  have  sparked  Honduran  government 
interest  in  the  problems and its desire  to  enhance  its 
counter-narcotics performance.  By channeling our assistance 
properly  and  improving our working relationship  with  the 
elements  responsible  for  fighting  drug  trafficking,  we 
should  continue  to  increase the number  of  seizures  and 
amounts of drugs seized. 
 
4.  (SBU) Goal 3: Negotiating and signing four new bilateral 
agreements  to  support USAID\'s Central America  and  Mexico 
Regional Strategy. 
Negotiating  and  signing  the  bilateral  agreements   will 
directly support the CAM Regional Strategy by providing  the 
framework for regional and country-specific programs leading 
to  the  achievement of the overarching regional goal  of  a 
more  democratic and prosperous Central America and  Mexico. 
Sharing the benefits of trade-led growth broadly among their 
citizens  is a central part of this strategy.  The  Regional 
Strategy  narrows  the  focus of  USAID\'s  investment  to  a 
limited   number   of  results  within  performance   arenas 
established by the President\'s Millennium Challenge  Account 
(MCA)  and  the results selected will prioritize investments 
which  have  the greatest potential for affecting positively 
national  and regional programs, thus assisting Honduras  to 
move  towards meeting MCA criteria.  It also will  help  put 
the region on a faster track towards broad-based prosperity. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"10124","8/15/2003 13:14","03TEGUCIGALPA1930","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001930 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, CA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KFRD, CVIS, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: RAID NETS MAJOR ALIEN SMUGGLING RING IN HONDURAS 
 
 
1. SUMMARY - Honduran police, military and prosecutors with 
DHS assistance, conducted a raid in the northwestern city of 
La Entrada de Copan, capturing the leaders of a major alien 
smuggling ring.  The ring had been operating with the 
alleged collusion of GOH civilian employees of the passport 
office and the National Registry of Persons, as well as two 
former employees of the Mexican Consulate in San Pedro Sula. 
The Government of Mexico is cooperating with the GOH to 
investigate the former Consulate employees, both of whom 
have been recalled to Mexico. 
 
2. On Thursday, August 7, 2003, three leaders of an alien 
smuggling ring were captured in a raid conducted by Honduran 
police, prosecutors, and military personnel, with the 
assistance of the DHS Unit of Embassy Tegucigalpa.  The raid 
took place in the northwestern town of La Entrada de Copan, 
Honduras, near the Honduras/Guatemala border.  The three 
arrestees were part of a band called \"The Chameleon\". They 
are Honduran businessman Walter Leonel Guevara Velasquez, 
his brother engineer Roque Ramon Guevara Velasquez, and 
attorney Edgar Danilo Chinchilla.  An arrest warrant was 
issued for Dolores Alvarado Flores, an employee of the 
National Registry of Persons Office in the neighboring city 
of Santa Rosa de Copan.  She allegedly escaped to El 
Salvador. 
 
3. Two residences and a law office were searched during the 
raid.  A large number of stamps and seals, as well as forged 
letterhead stationery from local banks, clinics, government 
offices, airlines, commercial businesses, notarized 
certificates and titles to real estate and personal property 
were found.  More than 40 Honduran passports were also 
found.  Some of the passports had been issued, but did not 
contain seals, indicating that the traffickers had access to 
blank passports.   On the properties police also found over 
eleven thousand dollars in cash.  The traffickers\' affluent 
life styles were clear from the pictures printed in local 
press.  An Olympic sized swimming pool, surrounded by hand- 
painted murals dominated one of the residences.  The houses 
were large and opulently furnished, and several luxury 
vehicles were confiscated. 
 
4. The smuggling scheme allegedly involved charging seven 
thousand dollars for a package of false documents including 
passports, birth certificates, job letters, and all the 
documentation necessary to get a visa at the Mexican 
Consulate in San Pedro Sula.  All documents were notarized 
and contained realistic seals.  Mexican consular employees 
allegedly working with the ring would issue visas to the 
buyers.  Once in Mexico, the buyers would be directed to a 
\"coyote\" to take them across the border into the U.S. 
 
5. Strong evidence was found linking Doris Alvarado Flores, 
the Registrar of Persons in Santa Rosa de Copan to the ring. 
She allegedly issued the false birth certificates, 
identification cards and other official documents.  The two 
former Mexican consular employees, Roberto Ruelas Angel and 
Susann Avila Castelazo issued the visas at the Mexican 
Consulate in San Pedro Sula.  Ruelas and Castelazo had 
worked at the Mexican Consulate in San Pedro Sula since 
2000.  According to the Mexican Embassy in Tegucigalpa, both 
have been recalled to Mexico and are awaiting the outcome of 
an ongoing visa fraud investigation. 
 
6. COMMENT - According to the prosecutor, the smuggling 
operation had been ongoing since 2000, and is reported to 
have been able to smuggle ninety to one hundred persons per 
month into the U.S.  From material found at the scene, it is 
evident that the ring had contacts in the local Registry of 
Person\'s Office as well as the Passport Office.  It will be 
interesting to see how the case is handled since the 
Attorney General Against Organized Crime is new in the 
office.  This is her first major case and it potentially 
involves wealthy and connected people.  We will monitor the 
progress of the case through the court system and keep 
Department posted on the outcome. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"10128","8/15/2003 14:30","03TEGUCIGALPA1931","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 08 TEGUCIGALPA 001931 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECDEF FOR SECRETARY RUMSFELD 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE FOR PM, INL, EB, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/15/2013 
TAGS: OVIP, MARR, MASS, MOPS, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECDEF RUMSFELD\'S VISIT TO 
HONDURAS AUGUST 20 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger D. Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, nearing 
the half-way point of his constitutionally mandated single 
four-year term, faces numerous challenges in one of the 
poorest and most corrupt countries in the Western Hemisphere. 
 His Administration has been stalled on its domestic agenda 
since June of last year and has mustered little progress as 
it tries to reconcile its ambitious goals to its 
straitjacketed financial situation.  Bilateral relations 
between the U.S. and Honduras are excellent; Honduras was the 
first country in the Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an 
ICC Article 98 Agreement with the United States.  Honduras\' 
support for the international counterterrorism effort is 
steadfast and the Government of Honduras (GOH) is sending 
troops to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  The 
United States and Honduras have maintained a long-standing 
close relationship framed by such events as the establishment 
of the banana plantations in the late 1800s, the Contra wars 
of the 1980s, and reconstruction efforts in the wake of the 
October 1998 fury of Hurricane Mitch.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Key Issues in Bilateral Relationship 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) The central themes in our bilateral diplomatic efforts 
in Honduras are combating international crime by 
strengthening governance and attacking corruption, assisting 
American citizens, fostering economic development, promoting 
regional stability, promoting trade and investment, and 
combating terrorism.  However, the underlying difficulty to 
realizing USG objectives is improving the administration of 
justice and rule of law.  President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
government is rhetorically committed on all of these issues, 
but has made very little substantive headway in addressing 
the myriad problems Honduras faces.  While Maduro has also 
spoken out strongly on tackling corruption, he faces 
formidable challenges from entrenched economic and political 
interests in moving his agenda forward. 
 
3. (U) Your visit comes one week after the visit of the 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, GEN Myers, to Honduras 
on August 13.  In his visit GEN Myers touched on many of the 
political/military issues discussed in paragraphs 6-17.  (See 
septels for reporting on GEN Myers\' visit.).  Your visit is 
also the first by a cabinet member since Secretary of the 
Interior Norton came for President Maduro\'s inauguration 
January 27, 2002, and will provide a significant boost to him 
politically. 
 
------------------------------- 
Status of the Maduro Government 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) President Maduro is facing increasing criticism from 
the political opposition over his government\'s policies and 
continued dissatisfaction from his own party\'s Members of 
Congress because of his Administration\'s technocratic style. 
The Honduran Congress is a focal point of political 
opposition to his policies.  It is a corrupt institution 
riddled with avaricious politicians, and Maduro\'s National 
Party does not control a majority of the unicameral body. 
Maduro recently lost his coalition partner, the Christian 
Democrats, who had given Maduro a majority in Congress.  The 
ongoing problems within his own party are serious and 
threaten his broader political agenda, which will require 
legislation to advance.  Continuing political negotiations 
will be needed to manage this situation.  Maduro\'s personal 
life also intruded into the political sphere.  His October 
2002 wedding to a Spaniard was criticized by many Hondurans 
who viewed the President as distracted by his personal life. 
A recent public squabble has not helped the situation. 
 
5. (SBU) The President\'s standing has remained stalled at a 
low point since June 2002.  Faced with slow progress in his 
efforts to promote regional economic integration, Maduro\'s 
team is pinning its hopes that a U.S.-Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA) can serve as a catalyst to regional 
economic cooperation.  Maduro is also beginning to hear wider 
disillusionment among the Honduran public as violent crime 
levels are increasing once again despite his initial \"zero 
tolerance\" law and order campaign.  Notwithstanding his 
crackdown on street crime, criminal investigations are 
usually inadequate and case closure rates, in particular for 
homicides, remain very low. 
 
---------------------------- 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Maduro is a good and reliable friend of the U.S. on 
counterterrorism.  His government hosted a major U.S. 
military counterterrorism exercise in March 2002 and has 
quickly responded with freeze orders to all U.S. requests 
regarding suspect terrorist bank accounts.  No terrorist 
assets have been found in Honduran financial institutions, to 
date.  The GOH still needs to take the following concrete 
steps: designate a national coordinator for counterterrorism, 
file its national report in accordance with United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 1373, and most of all, 
sign and/or ratify the five outstanding international 
conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions (1971 and 2002) 
against terrorism.  It is also of vital importance for 
Honduras to improve security at its maritime ports, 
particularly Puerto Cortes. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
7. (C) The GOH is in general supportive of key USG foreign 
policy goals and is a member of the Coalition of the Willing. 
 In support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, the GOH will deploy 
some 370 troops to the vicinity of An Najaf as part of the 
Spanish Brigade operating under the Polish Division.  The 
troops departed Honduras for Spain on August 10-13.  After 
approximately a week in Spain, they will deploy in 
conjunction with the other Central American units from El 
Salvador, Nicaragua, and the Dominican Republic through 
Kuwait to Iraq.  Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) 
negotiations are still ongoing between the GOH and the 
Government of Kuwait (GOK).  In the interim, The GOK has 
given the GOH authority to transit Kuwait under the blanket 
USG SOFA, however this is not an ideal solution. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Bilateral Political/Military Issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) In January of 1999, the constitution was amended to 
abolish the position of military commander in chief of the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF), thus codifying civilian 
authority over the military.  Honduras now has a civilian 
Minister of Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint Staff who 
heads the HOAF.  Civilian control is well accepted by the 
HOAF, and the transition to civilian control has resulted in 
greater transparency and fiscal accountability.  The current 
MOD, Fred Breve, enjoys a good relationship with the HOAF 
military leadership, but the Office of the Minister of 
Defense still lacks a staff that could provide institutional 
memory and continuity between the change in political 
administrations. 
 
9. (C) Honduras was the first country in all the Western 
Hemisphere to sign and ratify an Article 98 Agreement with 
the USG.  President Maduro, despite domestic political and 
some regional opposition, has also consistently supported 
overall USG foreign policy objectives, particularly U.S. 
efforts to create a stable and peaceful Iraq.  President 
Maduro and his military advisors are very aware that 
Nicaragua and El Salvador have received FMF funds and 
question why Honduras, even though it has been a staunch 
political and military supporter in the region, has not 
received any funds for many years. 
 
10. (SBU) In January 2002, Honduras formally requested 6 
UH-1H helicopters through the EDA program.  However, due to 
changes in U.S. law, the cost of 6 EDA helos rose from about 
USD 700,000 to USD 4.2 million - an amount the GOH was unable 
to afford.  The original Letter of Agreement expired some 
three months ago.  In early August, however, MOD Breve 
renewed his request for UH-1H helicopters, and also asked if 
there was way to get them either free (i.e. under section 516 
as grant aid at no cost to the GOH), or at an extended 
payment plan, i.e. 15 years.  The AMB and country team 
strongly support any assistance in this area as a principal 
use for these helos is to support counternarcotics 
operations.  The current Honduran fleet of UH-1H helicopters 
is in poor condition with a limited life expectancy. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Soto Cano Air Base - Joint Task Force Bravo 
------------------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Five hundred fifty-eight U.S. service men and women 
and eight civilian DOD employees are stationed at Honduras\' 
Soto Cano Air Base under the auspices of SOUTHCOM as Joint 
Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment and will enable our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster relief, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
 
------------------- 
Cerro La Mole Radar 
------------------- 
 
12. (C) In 1993, the U.S. entered into an agreement with the 
GOH regarding the maintenance of the radar located at Cerro 
La Mole, under which the U.S. military agreed to pay 75 
percent of maintenance costs up to USD 400,000 per year.  The 
U.S. has paid nothing under the agreement, (OSD/CN has stated 
that the USG cannot fund radars operated by foreign 
nationals) and the issue affects relations between the U.S. 
and Honduran militaries.  The Embassy has sought guidance 
from DOD and State on how to resolve U.S. obligations, and 
recommended that the U.S. either replace the radar with a 
solid state version (TPS-78) or with another TPS-70 
transferred from counterdrug programs.  When operational, the 
radar  provides a view of the Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador 
border areas and the Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific Ocean.  A 
functioning radar in this location could greatly enhance 
Honduran capability to intercept and track illegal flights. 
The MOD and CHOD have agreed to share all data from this 
radar with the US and with its neighbors.  Additionally, this 
radar would be the first step in eliminating the 10 mile \"no 
fly\" (without advance notice) corridor between the Honduran 
and Nicaraguan border - currently a safe haven for illegal 
flights. The AMB and country team strongly support current 
efforts to have the radar in Venezuela (currently being 
dismantled) be made available for EDA for Honduras in 
December of this year. 
 
------------------ 
F-5\'s for MANPADS? 
------------------ 
13. (C) Honduras maintains a fleet of aging F-5\'s as part of 
its overall defense structure, providing Honduras with the 
most lethal air force in the region.  Honduras has been under 
some regional pressure to give up or reduce its fleet of 
F-5\'s as a consolation to Nicaragua who is also being 
encouraged to give up, or significantly reduce, its stock of 
Man Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS).  Honduras has 
resisted these efforts, suggesting that its fleet of F-5\'s 
should be de-coupled from any discussion of MANPADS, which 
are a potential terrorist weapon.  The issues were discussed, 
but not linked, at an August 11 regional disarmament 
conference hosted by Managua that focused on reducing small 
arms and MANDPADS.  Honduras is not opposed to discussing the 
future of its F-5s in the context of regional disarmament, 
but not if the F-5s are directly linked to the reduction of 
Nicaraguan MANPADS. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Brooke Amendment - GOH Facing Possible Sanctions 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
14. (C) Honduras faces the possibility of mandated Brooke 
Sanctions in September if three DOD loans totaling USD 1.73 
million are not paid in full.  This debt is over a year old 
and once Brooke Sanctions are invoked, no new or pending USG 
assistance is permitted to proceed, including programs 
administered by USAID, DOD, and State.  These sanctions do 
not affect existing assistance efforts already obligated by 
these agencies.  The GOH is fully aware of the consequences 
of falling under Brooke Sanctions but is not clear at all 
how, or if, the GOH will be able to repay the loans before 
the September 3 deadline.  Also, another payment of USD 
295,000 comes due on October 1, which if not paid will also 
place Honduras under Brooke.  The situation is further 
complicated because under the Paris Club rules, the GOH is 
not allowed to pay only one official creditor.  Brooke has 
never before been invoked against a Central American nation, 
although Nicaragua came close.  If Brooke Sanctions are 
applied, any attempt to settle the issue of the radar at 
Cerro la Mole or provide assistance in purchasing EDA 
helicopters could not proceed. 
 
----------------------- 
Counternarcotics Issues 
----------------------- 
 
15. (C) Honduras\' geography places it squarely in the middle 
of a major illegal drug transshipment zone and the Embassy 
estimates that between 80-100 tons of cocaine transit the 
country annually on its way to the U.S. market.  Honduras\' 
airspace is regularly violated by drug traffickers, who also 
use go-fast boats to transit their cocaine through the 
region.  Heroin and marijuana are likewise transited through 
Honduras on a lesser scale.  Recently, the Embassy has 
noticed a significant increase in drugs-for-guns bartering 
between Colombian traffickers and local Honduran smugglers. 
 
16. (C) Honduras has been under heightened USG pressure to 
increase its effectiveness on narcotics interdiction after 
disappointing results in 2001 and 2002.  This effort appears 
to have born fruit.  The GOH has seized approximately 4,000 
kilos of cocaine this year (more than the previous four years 
combined).  While seizure rates have expanded significantly 
this year, endemic corruption in the Public Ministry and the 
police continue to hamper long-term efforts to increase the 
rule of law and reduce the amount of drugs transiting the 
country. 
 
17. (C) Under pressure from the USG to interdict more drugs, 
in April the Honduran Air Force shot-down an intruding 
Colombian aircraft carrying approximately 942 kilos of 
cocaine, killing the plane\'s two Colombian crewmembers. 
SOUTHCOM temporarily suspended sharing of air-track 
information pending reconfirmation from the GOH that Honduras 
has a \"no shoot-down\" policy.  The Embassy has since received 
such assurances and the GOH has stated that the incident was 
an aberration.  Honduras is fully aware that under U.S. law, 
the USG is not allowed to share tactical air-track 
information with countries that employ a shoot-down policy. 
SOUTHCOM has since restored sharing air-track information 
with the GOH. 
 
-------------- 
Anticorruption 
-------------- 
 
18. (C) U.S. policy against corruption struck a nerve in 
Honduras, especially any mention of our visa revocation 
authorities.  Politicians in Congress and certain business 
elements feel the U.S. is attacking them.  Maduro appears 
committed to addressing corruption, even if it will cost him 
political support within his party.  The Supreme Court 
President is also on board.  However, individual judges 
remain susceptible to offers of bribes and the Attorney 
General is unwilling to prosecute high-profile cases.  Given 
the scope of the problem, any public discussion about the 
country\'s pervasive corruption is a positive development. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
19. (SBU) The Supreme Court is developing into an independent 
branch of power, unlike all of its predecessor courts since 
democracy was restored in 1982.  It is pro-reform in 
orientation and fighting for its prerogatives.  A key 
emerging issue is whether it can become a fully independent 
and co-equal branch of political power, consistent with the 
separation of powers provision in the Honduran Constitution. 
The established political order is fighting that prospect 
with all its might.  In fact, the Congress seized the 
political opportunity to introduce legislation that would 
amend the constitution to give itself the power to interpret 
the constitutionality of the laws it passes.  The Supreme 
Court ruled in May that the proposed amendment was 
unconstitutional, which sparked a tense confrontation between 
the Supreme Court and Congress.  Congress, however, refrained 
from any precipitous action and the issue has since receded. 
 
---------------------------- 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
20. (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27, 2002, President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
out-of-control crime situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 
soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The public 
responded enthusiastically.  However, despite the initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides, continues at a high rate. 
Public support is fading and the campaign needs some visible 
victories to restore confidence in the government\'s program. 
The USG is helping the Maduro government establish an 
anti-kidnapping unit, increase intake/training of police 
recruits, create a model tourist police force, boost its 
counternarcotics efforts, and expand the frontier police. 
The country\'s geographic position makes it an obvious 
strategic transit point for narcotics trafficking, alien 
smuggling operations and other organized crime activities. 
 
21. (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults since 1998, have been a source of 
serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to take 
steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases.  There 
are serious problems with child labor in several industries, 
particularly melon, coffee, and sugar cane (but not the 
maquila) sectors, and trafficking in persons of 
women/children for prostitution in the U.S. and children for 
commercial sexual exploitation in Central America.  USAID and 
Peace Corps have both been involved in HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
22. (SBU) At least 600,000 Hondurans, both legal and illegal, 
live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration issues high 
on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of Honduras is 6.5 
million.)  There is deep appreciation for the USG\'s extension 
of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) in the U.S. and interest 
in possible congressional action on the proposed Nicaraguan 
Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA), which 
would give immigration parity for Hondurans.  With 
approximately 18,000 American citizens residing in Honduras 
and many thousands visiting Honduras annually for tourism and 
business, American Citizen Services are a key part of the 
Embassy\'s work.  Since 1995, 34 American Citizens have been 
murdered in Honduras.  There has been little progress on 
these cases and to date, only two convictions have been made. 
 However, in the last year the GOH has increased cooperation 
with the Embassy on the remaining cases, including 
establishing two prosecutors to further the GOH\'s effort. 
Also, little progress has been made on extradition cases 
involving American Citizens residing in Honduras who are 
wanted for felonies in the United States. 
 
-------------- 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
23. (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three Central 
American land neighbors and its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  Its land and maritime 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast is a particularly 
difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
ruling laid out shared areas of control in the Gulf of 
Fonseca and established the land border between Honduras and 
El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow to implement 
the ruling.  In September 2002, El Salvador requested a 
revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling.  Honduras has responded to 
this request and opposes any revisions to the original 
ruling.  In the interim, the Organization of American States 
(as a neutral third party) is providing both nations 
technical assistance to help them implement the ICJ\'s ruling. 
 
 
24. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.  In the past, the dispute has threatened to derail 
trilateral counternarcotics operations.  Honduras provoked 
Nicaraguan retaliation when it signed a maritime treaty with 
Colombia recognizing the 15th parallel as its maritime border 
in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an ICJ case over the maritime 
border and more importantly in 1999 slapped a punitive 35 per 
cent tariff on Honduran goods.  This tariff remained in place 
until April of this year despite a Central American Court of 
Justice ruling that it is illegal.  Only after Honduras 
responded with a retaliatory tariff, threatening Nicaraguan 
exports, did Managua back down.  Tensions still exist between 
the GOH and Nicaragua, hampering regional integration and 
couternarcotics efforts. 
 
----------------- 
Economic Overview 
----------------- 
25. (SBU) Honduras, with a per-capita income of only USD 950, 
is the third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere ahead 
of only Nicaragua and Haiti.  The Honduran economy is growing 
slowly, with real GDP growth of only two-and-a-half percent 
in 2002 and 2003.  Low world coffee prices also continue to 
inhibit growth in rural areas.  Inflation, at double-digit 
levels in the late 1990s, has decreased and is now relatively 
stable at about 8 percent per year, while the currency is 
depreciating at a rate of about 6 percent per year.  The 
economy continues to be dominated primarily by agriculture, 
particularly the production of coffee, bananas and cultivated 
shrimp.   However, the in-bond apparel assembly industry 
(maquilas) has grown dramatically over the past decade and 
now employs over 100,000 people.  Remittances from Hondurans 
living overseas, primarily in the United States, continue to 
grow rapidly (up 15 percent in the first six months of 2003) 
and have become the most important source of foreign 
exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras\' largest trading partner and 
the roughly 150 U.S. companies that do business in Honduras 
constitute the largest block of foreign direct investors. 
While many social indicators are improving, two-thirds of all 
Hondurans live in poverty and average educational levels are 
very low. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Stubborn Fiscal Deficits Endanger IMF Program/Debt Relief 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
26. (C) President Maduro inherited a stagnating economy and 
seriously deteriorated government finances from the previous 
administration.  During its first 18 months in power the 
Maduro administration has passed two fiscal packages (in May 
2002 and April 2003) designed to broaden the tax base, help 
reduce chronic budget deficits, and move the government on 
the road to an IMF agreement.  However the IMF is still 
concerned about persistent fiscal deficits, and an IMF 
agreement is highly unlikely until the Congress passes major 
civil service reform legislation.  The Maduro Administration, 
however, is hesitant to push these needed reforms because 
they will fundamentally alter the salary structure of 
teachers and medical workers who currently benefit from 
special legislation which gives them annual salary increases 
well above inflation.  Teachers particularly are a powerful 
special interest group that if agitated could destabilize the 
government.  Moreover, Maduro\'s lack of congressional support 
for civil service reform has also hamstrung his efforts. 
 
27. (SBU) Multilateral and bilateral donor disbursements (USD 
140 million) will be held up until a new IMF program is in 
place.  There is also pressure on GOH Paris Club debt service 
payments (USD 100 million per year), and the completion point 
for debt reduction under the Highly Indebted Poor Countries 
initiative (HIPC - worth USD 900 million) continues to slip 
back further.  If unaddressed, this fiscal situation could 
also impact Honduras\' eligibility for Millennium Challenge 
Account grants. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
28. (SBU) President Maduro, who has identified CAFTA as his 
government\'s principal trade objective, is a strong supporter 
of regional economic integration.  The historically weak 
Ministry of Trade and Industry got a late start in preparing 
for this year\'s CAFTA negotiations, but has added staff and 
been an active participant in the negotiations so far. 
Latent protectionism exists in the private sector, especially 
agriculture, but the general attitude toward a free trade 
agreement in Honduras is guardedly positive.  The textile and 
apparel industry in particular believes that some type of 
free trade agreement is the only way that the Honduran 
apparel sector can survive the elimination of quotas in 2005 
and compete with Asian manufacturers.  As such, it is the 
strongest supporter of CAFTA. 
 
------------------------------ 
U.S. Investment Faces Problems 
------------------------------ 
 
29. (SBU) Maduro\'s Administration understands the need to 
increase foreign (and domestic) investment to spur economic 
growth, but so far has placed its emphasis on the more 
immediate problems of political and judicial reforms, the 
fiscal deficit, and needed improvements in security, 
education and health.  The government identified tourism, 
agribusiness, and forestry as important sectors that could 
create much-needed jobs.  While some efforts to promote 
tourism have paid off, little headway has been made in the 
other sectors. 
 
30. (SBU) Much needs to be done to declare Honduras \"open for 
business.\"  Maduro needs to find a way to get his cabinet 
(and the prickly legislative and judicial branches) to make 
meaningful changes that will resolve key problems such as: 
poor and expensive infrastructure; a weak legal system; 
threats to personal security; weak education and health 
conditions; land tenure problems; and opposition to large 
foreign investments by well-connected vested interests. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Money Laundering and Bank Failures 
---------------------------------- 
 
31. (C) Strengthened money laundering legislation, with an 
anti-terrorist financing clause, was passed in early 2002, 
and the GOH followed up rapidly with creation of a Financial 
Information Unit (FIU) for investigation of financial crimes. 
 Currently, over 150 potential cases of money laundering are 
under investigation.  However, without greater participation 
from the slow and corrupt Public Ministry, responsible for 
prosecuting such cases, results will be minimal. 
 
32. (SBU) Weakness of the financial system remains a key 
concern.  The GOH took over the two most troubled banks in 
May 2002 (one has since been closed), arranged for the 
absorption of a third undercapitalized bank, and is actively 
promoting mergers among the remaining 20 private banks. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
33. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  Our Peace Corps program, with more than 220 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY03 budget of USD 45 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula. 
Pierce 
"
"10129","8/15/2003 14:31","03TEGUCIGALPA1932","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1173|03TEGUCIGALPA1497|03TEGUCIGALPA1622|03TEGUCIGALPA1868|03TEGUCIGALPA1904","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001932 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CJCS FOR GENERAL MYERS 
STATE FOR PM, INL, WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/15/2013 
TAGS: OVIP, MARR, MASS, MOPS, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: CJCS GENERAL MYERS MEETS WITH HONDURAN PRESIDENT 
MADURO TO THANK HIM FOR GOH SUPPORT ON IRAQ AND ART. 98 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1868 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1904 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1622 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 1497 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 1173 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger D. Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On August 13, CJCS General Myers met with 
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro and senior government 
officials to discuss issues of bilateral importance and to 
thank Honduras for its strong support of Operation Iraqi 
Freedom, including its troop contribution to that effort, and 
the signing and ratification of an ICC Article 98 Agreement. 
Among the particular issues discussed were Iraq, 
narcotrafficking, terrorism, regional disarmament and 
integration, the general crime situation in Honduras, and the 
modernization of the Honduran Armed Forces.  The visit was an 
important boost for both President Maduro and USG-GOH 
cooperation on political/military issues.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) CJCS General Myers, accompanied by Mr. Hanley, CPT 
Hunt, COL Ross, LCDR Cheever, and COL Gonzalez, and from the 
Embassy Charge, DATT, MILGP Commander, and PolMilOff 
(notetaker), met August 13 with Honduran President Ricardo 
Maduro, accompanied by Minister of Defense Federico Breve, 
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs Anibal Quinonez, Minister 
of the Presidency Luis Cosenza, and Honduran CJCS General 
Barahona.  The meeting took place at the Casa Presidencial. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
General Myers Expresses Gratitude for Honduran Support 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
3. (C) President Maduro started the meeting off by outlining 
Honduran actions over the past few months in support of USG 
foreign policy objectives, specifically mentioning the 
ratification of an ICC Article 98 Agreement with the U.S. and 
Honduran troop contributions to Operation Iraqi Freedom 
(OIF).  Maduro expressed solidarity with the U.S. in the War 
on Terror, but noted that by overtly supporting the U.S., 
Honduras was at heightened risk of terrorist attacks.  Maduro 
also acknowledged that his explicit support of the U.S. in 
Iraq came at a political cost. 
 
4. (C) General Myers thanked Maduro for Honduras\' support, 
not only on Iraq and the signing of an ICC Article 98 
Agreement with the U.S., but also on Honduras\' overall 
support on the War on Terror and the fight against 
narcotrafficking.  General Myers let Maduro know that the USG 
has confidence in the preparedness of the Honduran troops en 
route to Iraq and that the U.S. greatly appreciates Honduras\' 
efforts, stating that the support the Government of Honduras 
(GOH) has offered the USG has been noticed at the highest 
levels.  General Myers also told Maduro that the 
predominantly negative press coverage of Iraq was quite 
different from the facts on the ground.  He stated that the 
Honduran troops would be part of the international effort 
bringing new hope to the Iraqi people. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
The Fight Against Narcotrafficking a Top Priority 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
5. (C) In a very candid manner, Maduro outlined for General 
Myers the myriad difficulties Honduras faces in effectively 
fighting the scourge of narcotrafficking, from the lack of 
necessary resources, to corruption, to a frail legal system, 
to insufficient coordination amongst the other Latin American 
countries.  Maduro acknowledged that his strong emphasis on 
crime fighting was the reason for his election and he 
reiterated that fighting crime, particularly 
narcotrafficking, remains his number one priority.  Maduro 
stated that if his administration was unable to stem the 
growing influence of drug-related crime in Honduras, his 
successor would inherit a terrible situation. 
 
6. (C) Regarding narcotrafficking, Maduro told General Myers 
that he was personally becoming more involved in the fight to 
reduce corruption and the amount of drugs that illegally 
transit Honduran territory.  While committed to reducing drug 
trafficking, Maduro questioned the utility of having a \"no 
shoot-down policy\" (ref E), saying that the current policy of 
escorting intruding aircraft to the border to be handed off 
to neighboring states was both costly and ineffective. 
Maduro pointed to the fact that Honduran airspace was 
violated on almost a daily basis because the narcotraffickers 
know that they could transit Honduran airspace without risk. 
Maduro went so far as to offer his assistance in lobbying the 
U.S. Congress to change the law that prohibits the USG from 
sharing tactical air-track information with countries that 
employ a shoot-down policy. 
 
7. (C)  Maduro also expressed fears over the growing 
influence of organized crime in Honduras, citing the recent 
arrest of two Congressmen on drug charges as just the \"tip of 
the iceberg\" (refs C and D).  Maduro alluded to the influence 
organized crime can have on elected officials, saying that 
one plane-load of cocaine could finance a presidential 
election in Honduras.  Maduro also pointed to a linkage 
between street gangs and narcotrafficking and claimed 
Honduras was already moving from a transit zone to a staging 
area for narcotraffickers. 
 
8. (C) Maduro noted the need for greater information sharing 
and cooperation between the other Central American states 
(CENTAMS) and the USG to effectively fight narcotrafficking. 
He told General Myers that his other CENTAM counterparts 
share this concern and that movement is afoot to increase the 
region\'s ability to better integrate their crime fighting 
abilities.  However, Maduro also noted the lack of resources 
Honduras faces, specifically mentioning the need for a radar 
and new helicopters to help in the fight against 
narcotrafficking. 
 
9. (C) General Myers thanked Maduro and the GOH for its 
dedication to fighting narcotrafficking and told Maduro his 
efforts to foster greater regional integration were the right 
approach.  General Myers further stated that the 
trans-national threats posed by terrorists and 
narcotraffickers leave countries little choice but to work 
closer together.  General Myers told Maduro that the USG also 
needed to re-evaluate its policies toward the area to help 
the CENTAMS better combat these threats. 
 
------------------------------- 
Violent Crime a Serious Concern 
------------------------------- 
 
10. (C) Maduro confessed the issue of street crime, including 
violent crime, remains a a serious concern despite his best 
efforts to combat it.  While kidnappings and bank robberies 
have dropped off since Maduro\'s deployment of the military to 
assuage police patrols, murder rates have been climbing as 
well as general gang-related crime.  Maduro estimated that 
over 30,000 Hondurans are gang members with some 20 percent 
being committed to that type of life-style.  Maduro expressed 
hope that newly passed legislation which makes it a crime to 
be a gang member would reduce their roles, but he 
acknowledged that this law alone would not be a panacea to 
Honduras\' crime problems (ref B). 
 
11. (C) Maduro noted that the judicial system needed to 
function better and that the police needed to step-up patrols 
in poorer neighborhoods.  He admitted that the general public 
perception was that the government was not in control of the 
crime situation, particularly in dealing with gang violence. 
General Myers indicated he had received a similar message 
about gangs and violence while visiting El Salvador. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Maduro Stresses the need for Greater Regional Integration 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
12. (C) Maduro returned to the need for greater regional 
integration as one of the keys to strengthening the region\'s 
ability to combat terrorism, organized crime, and 
narcotrafficking.  He then mentioned the progress his 
administration has made on border disputes with both El 
Salvador and Nicaragua as proof of Honduras\' desire to reduce 
tensions within the region.  General Myers applauded these 
efforts and again stressed that working together with other 
countries was key to success in the war against terror and 
drugs. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Regional Disarmament Necessary, but Remains a Prickly Issue 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
13. (C) Maduro acknowledged the need for regional disarmament 
and claimed Honduras stood ready to move forward but that the 
process was complicated and moving slower than he had 
originally hoped.  He mentioned to General Myers that 
Honduras had \"got the ball rolling,\" by initiating a meeting 
with President Flores but that not much progress has happened 
since then.  Maduro reminded General Myers that in terms of 
manpower Honduras already had the smallest military in the 
region. 
 
14. (C) Maduro also raised the issue of Honduras\' fleet of 
F-5\'s and the possible linkage to reductions in Nicaragua\'s 
stockpile of Man Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS). 
Maduro indicated he understood why the USG was interested in 
reducing the number of MANPADS in Nicaragua but he noted that 
Honduras was ready to discuss the F-5\'s only in the context 
of regional disarmament.  General Myers told Maduro he 
understood the situation and that it was not USG policy to 
pressure Honduras to give up it\'s fleet of F-5\'s in exchange 
for a reduction of MANPADS in Nicaragua. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Modernization of the Honduran Armed Forces 
------------------------------------------ 
 
15. (C)  Maduro touched slightly on the on-going 
modernization of the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF).  Maduro 
pointed to the fact that the Honduran Military was now a well 
respected institution with a high degree of esprit de corps. 
He noted that the armed forces would continue to expand its 
professionalization and that the HOAF stood ready to embrace 
new non-traditional missions such as providing disaster 
relief, combating narcotrafficking, and helping the police 
reduce street crime. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Boost for Maduro and for USG-GOH Cooperation 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
16. (C) Comment:  General Myers\' visit was an important boost 
for President Maduro at a time when he has been buffeted by a 
number of political problems (ref A).  The meeting with 
Maduro reinforced the Ambassador\'s statements of appreciation 
for Maduro\'s decision to both support Operation Iraqi Freedom 
with Honduran troops and to sign and ratify an ICC Article 98 
Agreement with the U.S.  The meeting also underlined USG 
statements of encouragement and support for Maduro in the 
fight against narcotrafficking.  Maduro, in fact, made clear 
during the subsequent joint press conference that the USG was 
a firm supporter of Honduras and the GOH\'s fight against 
narcotrafficking.  Post expects President Maduro to make many 
of the same points he raised in his meeting with General 
Myers in his planned August 20 meeting with Secretary of 
Defense Rumsfeld.  End Comment. 
Pierce 
"
"10130","8/15/2003 14:31","03TEGUCIGALPA1933","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1868","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CJCS FOR GENERAL MYERS 
STATE FOR PM, INL, WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/15/2013 
TAGS: OVIP, MARR, MASS, MOPS, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: CJCS GENERAL MYERS MEETS WITH HONDURAN MINISTER OF 
DEFENSE AND CJCS TO THANK GOH; DISCUSSES REGIONAL ISSUES 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1868 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger D. Pierce; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On August 13, after a meeting with Honduran 
President Ricardo Maduro, CJCS General Myers met separately 
with Minister of Defense Federico Breve, Honduran CJCS 
General Barahona, and other senior military officials to 
discuss issues of bilateral importance and to thank Honduras 
for its strong support of Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) 
including its troop contribution to that effort, and the 
signing and ratification of an ICC Aricle 98 Agreement. 
Among the particular issues discussed were Iraq, 
narcotrafficking, regional disarmament, and the modernization 
of the Honduran Armed Forces.  The Honduran military is proud 
of its planned role in Iraq, supportive of greater USG-GOH 
cooperation in counternarcotics, and firmly opposed to any 
linkage of Nicaraguan MANPADS and Honduran F-5\'s.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) CJCS General Myers, accompanied by Mr. Hanley, CPT 
Hunt, COL Ross, LCDR Cheever, and COL Gonzalez, and from the 
Embassy Charge, DATT, MILGP Commander, and PolMilOff 
(notetaker), met August 13 with Honduran Minister of Defense 
Federico Breve, Vice Minister of Defense Perez, CJCS General 
Barahona, Vice CJCS GEN Andino, Inspector General GEN 
Maldonado, Army Commanding General COL Vasquez, Air Force 
Commanding General COL Caceres, and Navy Commanding General 
COL Mejia.  The meeting took place at the Casa Presidencial. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Breve Highlights Risks in Iraq and Changing Role of Military 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
3. (C) MOD Breve began the session by outlining the areas 
that the Government of Honduras (GOH) has worked closely with 
the USG over the last couple of months, including providing 
troops to OIF and signing and ratifying an ICC Article 98 
Agreements with the United States.  He again reiterated that 
this came at a political cost to the Maduro Administration as 
well as put Honduras at heightened risk of terrorist attack, 
but that Honduras was prepared to accept these risks in 
support of U.S. policy objectives.  MOD Breve also stated 
that the GOH has considered the ramifications of taking 
casualties in Iraq in support of the war against terror and 
that they were prepared for that eventuality. 
 
4. (C) MOD Breve then outlined for General Myers the dramatic 
changes the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) had been through 
over the last few years.  He began with the budget process 
and spending which was now a transparent process compared to 
the past when it was undisclosed.  He mentioned that this 
process has helped the HOAF spend its limited resources more 
wisely.  He also mentioned that having the HOAF under 
civilian leadership has been a positive development both for 
the HOAF and democracy in Honduras. 
 
5.(C) MOD Breve discussed the changing missions and role of 
the HOAF in Honduras.  He stated that respect for human 
rights and democracy was now firmly entrenched in the HOAF 
and that the institution as a whole was rapidly becoming more 
professional.  MOD Breve went on to note that this process 
was very important for the HOAF and its reconciliation with 
the Honduran people.  To cement these institutional changes, 
Breve mentioned that the HOAF would like to establish a 
defense university similar to the National Defense University 
in the United States.  Breve then outlined the new missions 
the HOAF was involved in including: disaster relief, the 
fight against narcotrafficking; fighting crime; helping to 
protect the environment; educational programs; health care; 
and helping to eradicate diseases such as dengue. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Honduran Military Committed to Counternarcotics Fight 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
6. (C) MOD Breve stated the HOAF was committed to the fight 
against narcotrafficking and recent success demonstrated 
this.  However, Breve indicated that increased information 
sharing and more resources were necessary for success.  He 
noted that Honduras was still looking for more substantial 
support from the USG in this area. 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
General Myers Expresses Gratitude for Honduran Support 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
7. (C) General Myers thanked Breve and the HOAF for its 
support of OIF and noted that Honduras was among the some 40 
other nations that have come together to provide the Iraqi 
people the chance for a better life.  General Myers 
acknowledged that the Honduran deployment of troops in 
support of OIF was a \"big deal\" and that it was noticed at 
the highest levels of the USG, raising Honduras\' profile. 
General Myers reiterated his confidence that the Honduran 
troops would do well in Iraq due to their good training and 
competent leadership.  General Myers stated that all 
democracies face the threat of terrorism and have a stake in 
the current security environment and that the GOH was a solid 
partner in this effort.  General Myers also thanked MOD Breve 
for his continued support of Joint Task Force Bravo.  Note: 
Five hundred fifty-eight U.S. service men and women and eight 
civilian DOD employees are stationed at Honduras\' Soto Cano 
Air Base under the auspices of SOUTHCOM as Joint Task Force 
Bravo.  End Note. 
 
8. (C) General Myers congratulated MOD Breve on Honduras\' 
effort to create a national defense university, suggesting 
that this type of education helps to bring together \"the big 
picture.\"  General Myers offered USG assistance and directed 
Breve to the Country Team if he wanted to pursue this offer. 
 
9. (C) Charge also congratulated Breve and the HOAF on its 
recent successes in the fight against narcotrafficking, 
stating that the Embassy was pleased with their efforts. 
Charge also indicated that the Embassy was looking for ways 
to better assist the HOAF in their efforts. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Regional Disarmament and Integration 
------------------------------------ 
 
10. (C) Breve stated that the countries of Central America 
needed to act with a more regional focus rather than 
unilaterally when approaching the many problems the region 
faces, such as narcotrafficking.  Breve noted that this 
process was complicated and slow, but that it needed to be 
done.  Breve also called for greater information sharing on 
the part of the USG. 
 
11. (C) Breve expressed his displeasure with the recent 
meeting in Nicaragua to discuss regional disarmament, feeling 
that the USG was putting pressure on Honduras to give up its 
fleet of F-5\'s as a tradeoff for Nicaragua eliminating its 
stockpile of Man Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS). 
Breve indicated that he did not have an agenda for the 
meeting or know PM Assistant Secretary of State Bloomfield or 
WHA Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Fisk planned on 
attending the meeting, suggesting he felt somewhat ambushed 
on the issue.  Note:  In fact, Charge had told both Breve and 
Acting Foreign Minister Anibal Quinonez, who also attended 
the meeting, that both A/S Bloomfield and DAS Fisk would be 
present.  End Note. 
 
12. (C) Breve said he understood USG concerns about MANPADS 
but that that was between the U.S. and the Government of 
Nicaragua.  He indicated that Honduras was ready to discuss 
F-5\'s, but only in the context of regional disarmament, not 
as a precondition for reducing Nicaragua\'s stockpile of 
MANPADS.  General Myers let MOD Breve know that while in 
Nicaragua, the F-5 issue was never raised.  He said the 
MANPADS threat was an issue of bilateral importance between 
the USG and Nicaragua. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Cooperation and Assistance Welcomed; F-5\'s for MANPADS Not 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
13. (C) Comment:  General Myers\' meeting with MOD Breve, 
General Barahona, and the top Honduran military brass was a 
well-received outcome of the GOH\'s strong support for the USG 
in Iraq and on Article 98.  The visit, coming as the last of 
the Honduran troops were departing for Iraq via training in 
Spain, was also a concrete example to the Honduran public of 
the gratitude the U.S. has for Honduran assistance in 
Operation Iraqi Freedom.  The HOAF is sober about the 
situation in Iraq and possible casualties for Honduran 
troops, but is proud of its planned role.  Breve\'s call for 
more USG assistance for the military for counternarcotics is 
not new, but will continue.  Regional disarmament is a 
somewhat pricklier issue for Breve and the GOH, who are 
strongly opposed to any link between Nicaraguan MANPADS and 
Honduran F-5\'s, which they see as a non-starter.  End Comment. 
Pierce 
"
"10132","8/15/2003 21:14","03TEGUCIGALPA1938","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA1560|03TEGUCIGALPA527","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 001938 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/PHD, INL, INL/LP, INR, AND DS 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, PINR, SNAR, ECON, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: TRUTH SCARIER THAN FICTION: AN ANALYSIS OF 
INCREASINGLY HIGH HONDURAN MURDER RATES 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1560 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 527 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Assault rifles, gang-related, nine 
victims, 15 to 48 years old, early morning, all family 
members, murdered.  It is August 5 in Tegucigalpa, Honduras 
and the facts of the latest mass murder swirl as you thumb 
through the local newspapers.  You know shock should follow, 
but it does not.  Instead, you mechanically proceed to the 
next news item.  Unfortunately, in the purest sense, this 
multiple homicide is not news in Honduras; something similar 
happened the day before, and a couple of days before that, 
too.  In fact, there are so many murders in Honduras that, 
according to recent CID-Gallup polling data, the number one 
concern among voters is violent crime (ref A).  This is even 
more significant when one considers the myriad of problems 
facing the nation.  But how violent is Honduras, and is it 
really more violent than anywhere else?  There are no easy 
answers.  The lack of reliable, comprehensive, and 
transparent data, coupled with abundant speculation and 
brandishing of unsourced material, frustrates any effort to 
truly understand the problem. 
 
2. (SBU) This report examines various organizations involved 
with tracking violent deaths in Honduras, methodologies 
employed, and the limitations inherent to the available data. 
 From this analysis, several conclusions are drawn.  For one, 
while murder statistics vary between sources, underreporting 
of homicides in Honduras is endemic, and true murder rates 
are probably even higher than currently being reported by the 
Government, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and the 
media.  Secondly, this report finds that the murder rate in 
Honduras is high compared with its Central American neighbors 
and the U.S., and is climbing fast in 2003; and that the San 
Pedro Sula murder rate is exceptionally high (almost four 
times as high as the Washington, DC murder rate).  Finally, 
this report addresses how the Government and various NGOs in 
Honduras compile homicide statistics, and how differing uses 
of the terms \"murder\" and \"extrajudicial killings\" further 
muddle murder-related reporting. END SUMMARY 
 
----------- 
METHODOLOGY 
----------- 
 
3. (SBU) Much of the information contained in this report 
comes from an analysis of the murder-related data collected 
and published by the Public Ministry, the Ministry of Public 
Security, the San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa morgues, Casa 
Alianza (an NGO dedicated to the betterment of abandoned 
Honduran youth), Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in 
Honduras (CODEH), and Amnesty International.  Interviews were 
conducted with members of these organizations when possible, 
and considerable time was spent at both morgues observing 
facilities, procedures, and meeting with forensic doctors and 
staff.  Procedures for conducting preliminary murder 
investigations were also observed at the Public Ministry\'s 
\"Integrated Center\" in Tegucigalpa.  In order to evaluate how 
murders are reported by the press, an assessment of murders 
reported by the four nationally circulated newspapers was 
conducted during the month of June, and several sources 
familiar with how the media reports on murders, including a 
newspaper journalist, were interviewed. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
MURDER STATISTICS VARY BETWEEN SOURCES 
-------------------------------------- 
 
GOH Data Collection Procedures: 
 
4. (U) The Public Ministry (MP) and the Ministry of Public 
Security (MOPS) are the two GOH agencies that serve as 
repositories for data on crime and violent deaths.  The 
Public Ministry derives its murder count from the nation\'s 
two morgues, located in San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa.  The 
morgues also report cause-of-death findings to the MOPS, 
which treats this information as one component in its broader 
investigation into whether a death was murder.  In practice, 
however, most cases are not investigated (President Ricardo 
Maduro says that each murder investigator is responsible for 
more than 200 cases, ref B) and the morgue\'s recommendation 
often becomes the cause-of-death for MOPS statistics. 
 
Morgue Procedures for Collecting and Reporting Murder 
Statistics: 
 
5. (U) Theoretically, when a violent death occurs in Honduras 
a forensic medicine professional arrives at the scene to help 
determine whether the cause of death was crime related.  If 
it is determined that the death is suspicious, the body is 
taken to either the San Pedro Sula or Tegucigalpa morgue, 
depending on jurisdiction.  After conducting an autopsy, 
forensic doctors record the death as a homicide, accident, 
suicide, natural death, or indeterminable.  Each morgue then 
tabulates monthly and yearly murder statistics from these 
records. 
 
Discrepancies between MOP and MOPS Murder Statistics: 
 
6. (U) As previously stated, the MP relies on data from the 
two morgues for its murder statistics.  While the MOPS also 
receives data from the morgue, its murder figures, which are 
most readily available through the Preventative Police\'s 
Sub-Directorate for Information and Analysis (SDIA), are 
considerably larger than the MP\'s numbers.  This is because 
the SDIA includes vehicular homicide in its count, while the 
morgues list these deaths in a separate \"accident\" category. 
The MOPS does maintain a database that differentiates 
vehicular homicide from other murders, but the most widely 
available, and the most publicly quoted, MOPS murder 
statistics do include vehicular homicides. 
 
NGO Procedures for Collecting and Reporting Murder Statistics: 
 
7. (U) NGOs that report murder statistics in Honduras also 
cite varying homicide rates.  For example, Casa Alianza 
compiles statistics on the murder of children and youths in 
Honduras, but it is difficult to compare Casa Alianza\'s 
figures with those of the MP because each organization uses 
different age categories.  While Casa Alianza reports on all 
murders in which the victim was under 23-years-old, the MP 
breaks their data down into smaller age groups, including a 
20 to 24-year-old grouping.  This lumps together murders 
which fall outside Casa Alianza\'s purview with the murders 
counted by the NGO.  This problem is compounded further by 
the fact that the 20 to 24-year-old age group accounts for 
the largest number of murder victims, making any simple 
comparison between MP numbers and Casa Alianza numbers 
impossible.  Casa Alianza\'s numbers differ from those of the 
MP further, because the organization draws its data 
exclusively from homicide cases reported by the four 
nationally circulated newspapers, a not entirely accurate 
barometer since many murders go unpublished. 
 
8. (U) Other high-profile NGOs that report on the murder 
problem in Honduras include the Committee for the Defense of 
Human Rights in Honduras (CODEH) and Amnesty International. 
CODEH quotes murder rates directly from the SDIA, which, as 
previously stated, are significantly higher than other 
sources because they include vehicular homicide.  Amnesty 
International\'s reporting on murders in Honduras, on the 
other hand, does not include any actual numbers.  The 
organization astutely notes that \"it has been exceptionally 
difficult to establish with any certainty the number of 
victims in question.\" 
 
---------------------- 
ENDEMIC UNDERREPORTING 
---------------------- 
 
Victims From Remote Areas Less Likely to Show Up in 
Government Statistics: 
 
9. (SBU) Information about morgue procedure was obtained from 
meetings with: Dr. Amilcar Rodas, Director of Forensic 
Medicine in Tegucigalpa; Dr. Arturo Alvarez, Head of Forensic 
Pathology in Tegucigalpa; and Dr. Francisco Herrera, Director 
of Forensic Medicine in San Pedro Sula.  According to each of 
these doctors, the bodies of some murder victims from remote 
parts of the country never reach either the Tegucigalpa or 
the San Pedro Sula morgue.  Reasons they reported for this 
included:  No one ever called the police, the bodies were 
dumped somewhere and never found, family members refused to 
allow bodies to be taken to the morgue, insufficient 
transportation to move a body, and police not following 
proper procedure.  Consequently, the morgues are actually 
underreporting the numbers of murders taking place, and the 
numbers collected and reported by both the MP and the MOPS 
are also being skewed.  None of the three doctors would 
speculate as to how many murder victims do not reach a 
morgue, and were doubtful that this number could be 
determined to even a ballpark figure. 
 
10. (SBU) Wilfredo Hernandez, violent crime reporter for La 
Tribuna newspaper, also said that not all bodies from rural 
areas were transported to the morgue.  He reasoned that it 
was impractical for poor, rural families to allow the bodies 
to be taken to Tegucigalpa or San Pedro Sula since it was 
unlikely that justice would be carried out through official 
channels, and the cost of recuperating the body after the 
autopsy is exorbitant.  Hernandez said that while the MP paid 
for a body to be transported to a morgue, the family bore the 
burden of recuperating the body.  He estimated that the least 
expensive box allowed by the morgue cost USD 59, and a truck 
to transport the body would cost at a minimum USD 29. 
Additionally, the family would have to pay the morgue for 
clothing the body, sealing the casket if the body was badly 
decomposed, and for the official papers needed to bury a 
cadaver.  Hernandez estimated that a rural family allowing a 
body to be taken to a morgue would need nearly USD 176 to get 
it back, an exorbitant amount for many in Honduras.  Since 
rural families often place no value on the autopsy, they may 
never call the police in the first place, or physically 
prevent the police from transporting the body to a morgue. 
 
Honduran Media Does Not Report All Murders: 
 
11. (U) In an attempt to evaluate the degree to which murders 
in Honduras were being reported in the press, Political 
Section interns tracked all murders reported in the four 
major newspapers, El Heraldo, La Tribuna, La Prensa and El 
Tiempo, for the month of June.  This is important because 
these print media sources play a significant role in shaping 
the public\'s impression of murder trends in Honduras. 
Newspaper reporting on murders is also important, because 
Casa Alianza derives its murder statistics solely from 
accounts published in newspapers.  During the month of June, 
the newspapers reported on 183 individual murder cases.  La 
Tribuna generally reported more murders daily than the other 
three newspapers, while El Heraldo tended to report the 
fewest, focusing primarily on high profile murders. 
 
12. (SBU) The fact that not even every murder reported by one 
newspaper is reported by the other newspapers suggested that 
not all murders are published, and that some selection and 
exclusion is taking place.  Wilfredo Hernandez, violent crime 
reporter for La Tribuna for the past three years, confirmed 
that not every murder is reported in Honduran newspapers. 
Though Hernandez visits the Tegucigalpa morgue every morning, 
confers with police officers, and visits crime scenes each 
day, he acknowledged that many of the murders he learns of 
are not reported by his newspaper.  Hernandez said that 
newspapers generally allot one page per day for murder and 
violent crime news.  He said this usually means three to four 
articles per day no matter how much news there is to report. 
According to Hernandez, murders of women and minors tend to 
receive greater coverage, whereas the more frequent 
gang-related shootings of 20-something-year-old males 
receives less attention.  Hernandez estimated that his 
newspaper reports on two-thirds of all the murders he is 
aware of. 
 
13. (SBU) Hernandez also reported that rural murders are 
especially prone to going unreported.  He said that violent 
crime newspaper reporters rarely travel more than 20 km 
outside of San Pedro Sula or Tegucigalpa, and that crime 
reporting in secondary cities and in the countryside was left 
to correspondents and special reports.  He would not 
speculate on the number of rural murders that went unreported 
by the newspapers. 
 
14. (SBU) Another source familiar with the local media\'s 
murder reporting, brought to the Political Section\'s 
attention by the RSO, said that political pressure on 
newspapers contributes to the underreporting of violent 
crime.  He said that President Maduro\'s administration leans 
on newspapers to limit violent crime reporting.  The fact 
that both El Heraldo and La Prensa are affiliated with the 
National Party (President Maduro\'s party) and tend to report 
fewer murders than does La Tribuna and El Tiempo, Liberal 
Party (opposition) affiliated newspapers, seems to affirm 
that there is some observable link between politics and 
newspaper murder reporting in Honduras.  Note: These four 
newspapers are the primary means by which the Honduran public 
receives information on murders and crime trends.  Despite 
the phenomenon of underreporting in the Honduran print media, 
a climate of fear still pervades the country.  It must be 
assumed that the public would react even more severely if the 
newspapers were reporting all murders.  End Note. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
NUMBER OF MURDERS IN HONDURAS CLIMBING FAST IN 2003 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
San Pedro Sula Morgue Reports More Than 50 Percent Increase 
in Murders Since 2002: 
 
15. (U) Forensic doctors from both the San Pedro Sula and 
Tegucigalpa morgues report that they have seen significantly 
more homicide victims so far this year than during the same 
period last year.  The San Pedro Sula morgue, which receives 
bodies from the northern half of the country, and keeps 
better and more accessible statistics than the Tegucigalpa 
morgue, reports that through the first six months of 2003 
they have performed autopsies on 994 murder victims compared 
to 628 during the same time period in 2002.  This is a 58 
percent year-on-year increase.  While this augmentation could 
be partly due to a population increase, the Honduran National 
Institute of Statistics estimates that the population of 
Honduras is growing at only 2.6 percent annually. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
HONDURAS MURDER RATE HIGHER THAN CENTRAL AMERICAN NEIGHBORS 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
16. (SBU) To make murder statistics comparable between cities 
and countries with different populations, a murder rate per 
100,000 is tabulated.  In 2001, based on morgue statistics, 
the murder rate in Honduras was 29/100,000.  In 2002, the 
murder rate in Honduras climbed to 34/100,000.  By 
comparison, in 2001, according to the RSO in Guatemala City, 
Guatemala recorded a murder rate of 24/100,000.  In 2002, the 
murder rate in Guatemala climbed to 29/100,000, a number 
significantly smaller than the rate in Honduras.  Similarly, 
according to numbers available from the RSO in San Salvador, 
El Salvador\'s murder rate was 31/100,000 in 2002, which is 
again lower than in Honduras.  As a point of reference, using 
the FBI statistics on murders, the murder rate for the U.S. 
as a whole in 2001 was 6/100,000. 
 
---- 
2002 
---- 
 
Country    # of Murders       Population    Murders/100,000 
 
Honduras    2,205              6,500,000          34 
 
Guatemala   3,631             12,900,000          28 
 
El Salvador 1,925              6,200,000          31 
 
---- 
2001 
---- 
 
Country    # of Murders       Population    Murders/100,000 
 
Honduras    1,899              6,500,000          29 
 
Guatemala   2,905             12,900,000          24 
 
U.S.       15,980            281,500,000           6 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SAN PEDRO SULA MURDER RATE EXTRAORDINARY 
---------------------------------------- 
 
17. (U) The San Pedro Sula morgue reports conducting 411 
autopsies on murder victims from the city of San Pedro Sula 
during the first six months of 2003.  If this trend continues 
through the end of 2003, there would be 822 murders in San 
Pedro Sula for the year.  Based on a population estimate of 
500,000 for the city, the murder rate would be 164/100,000 in 
San Pedro Sula (SPS) in 2003.  By comparison, according to 
police statistics, in 2002 the District of Columbia (DC) 
recorded the highest murder rate of any large U.S. city at 
46/100,000.  In other words, San Pedro Sula is almost four 
times as violent as Washington, DC. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
PROJECTED 2003 SPS MURDER RATE VS. 2002 DC MURDER RATE 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
City        # of Murders      Population   Murders/100,000 
 
SPS         822               500,000           164 
 
DC          264               572,000            46 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
CASA ALIANZA REPORTING ACCURATE, BUT MISLEADING ON AGE 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
Casa Alianza Counts Individuals Under 23-years-of-age as 
\"Children and Youth\": 
 
18. (U) Casa Alianza\'s murder reporting in Honduras is 
focused exclusively on murders in which children and youth 
are the victims.  The organization publishes monthly and 
yearly reports, as well as intermittent stories about 
individual homicide cases that exemplify what Casa Alianza 
considers to be the government\'s indifference towards the 
murder of children.  The monthly and yearly statistics 
reported by Casa Alianza are published under the title 
\"Children and Youth Extrajudicially Murdered in Honduras,\" 
and come exclusively from the four nationally circulated 
newspapers.  For these reports, Casa Alianza uses the term 
\"children and youth\" to mean anyone under the age of 23.  The 
Honduran Penal Code defines minors as individuals less than 
18 years old.  Casa Alianza\'s numbers do not include 
vehicular homicides, suicides, or drug overdoses. 
 
19. (U) Setting aside Casa Alianza\'s broad definition of 
\"children and youth,\" the statistics published by the 
organization accurately reflect the number of youths murdered 
in Honduras as reported by local newspapers.  A review of the 
murders recorded by Casa Alianza during June 2003 showed that 
all were distinct cases published in at least one local 
newspaper.  In fact, Casa Alianza actually erred on the side 
of underreporting, having missed several published murder 
cases involving victims under 23-years-of-age.  No vehicular 
homicides, suicides, or drug overdoses were recorded by Casa 
Alianza as murders during the month of June. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
DIFFERING USES OF TERMS \"MURDER\" AND \"EXTRAJUDICIAL KILLING\" 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
20. (U) Any discussion of collecting and reporting murder 
statistics is incomplete without a discussion of what the 
term \"murder\" actually means.  In general terms in the U.S., 
murder is considered to be the intentional and unlawful 
killing of a human being.  There is a wide-ranging use of the 
term in Honduras, however.  The morgues define murder as 
\"death given by one person to another.\"  The MOPS, on the 
other hand, has a more complicated definition of murder that 
takes into consideration a criminal investigation, the penal 
code, and the rulings of judges.  For some NGOs, suspicious 
deaths that have not been categorized as murders by any 
official entity are at times referred to as murders. 
 
21. (U) The use of the term \"extrajudicial killing\" is 
similarly nebulous.  Traditionally defined, extrajudicial 
killing is a murder carried out by someone acting in an 
unofficial capacity as judge, jury, and executioner.  Casa 
Alianza uses a looser definition and counts every murder of a 
child or youth as an extrajudicial killing.  In fact, in its 
monthly and yearly reports of extrajudicial killings of 
children and youth, Casa Alianza includes every murder of a 
youth published in local newspapers.  Amnesty International 
relies almost exclusively on Casa Alianza\'s information for 
its critique of the extrajudicial killing situation in 
Honduras.  CODEH on the other hand, perhaps because of its 
focus on state involvement in human rights violations, counts 
murders perpetrated by police officers or soldiers as 
extrajudicial killings. 
 
---------- 
CONCLUSION 
---------- 
 
22. (SBU) Comment:  Honduras is a shockingly violent country. 
 There are many theories as to why the murder rate is so 
astronomically high, including the plethora of AK-47s and 
other guns left in the region from the 1980s, the high 
unemployment (and underemployment) rate, the dissolution of 
families due to heavy illegal immigration to the U.S., the 
huge number of gang members (estimated to be at least 
30,000), and, in some cases, the actions of corrupt security 
officials.  The fact that the police force is understaffed 
and undertrained, and that the Public Ministry is often 
ill-equipped to successfully prosecute criminals also 
contributes the high number of murders.  As noted in the 
Human Rights Report, during 2002 \"no perpetrator was 
identified in an average of 60-70 percent of the killings; 
gangs were suspected in 15-20 percent of killings; police, 
private guards, or neighborhood vigilante groups were 
suspected in 5 percent of killings, and 10-15 percent of 
killings were drive-by shootings usually involving a truck, 
often without license plates.\" 
 
23. (SBU) Comment Continued:  What is clear is that the 
murder rate is high and increasing, especially in San Pedro 
Sula.  Debates over varying figures and interpretations 
should not cloud the fact that the high murder rate is one of 
the most critical human rights and law enforcement issues in 
Honduras, one that has wreaked devastation on a country 
already challenged by slow economic development, corruption, 
and natural disasters.  It also makes it clear why reform of 
the justice system is one of the GOH\'s (and Post\'s) top 
priorities.  End Comment. 
Pierce 
"
"10133","8/15/2003 22:53","03TEGUCIGALPA1940","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001940 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, SNAR, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA COVERAGE ON THE VISIT OF CJCS GENERAL RICHARD 
MYERS TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 13, 2003 
 
 
1. CJCS visited Honduras on 8/13 and met with Honduran President 
Ricardo Maduro, Minister of Defense Federico Breve, Chief of 
Staff General Isaias Barahona and other key governmental 
officials. 
 
2. In his opening remarks, General Myers expressed his 
appreciation for Honduran support of the U.S. effort to establish 
a free and democratic government in Iraq and in the fight against 
terrorism and drug trafficking.  He also thanked Honduras for 
being the first country in the Western Hemisphere to sign and 
ratify an ICC Article 98 agreement. 
 
3. All four national newspapers (La Tribuna, El Heraldo, La 
Prensa and Tiempo) announced General Myers\' visit on 8/12 and La 
Tribuna, El Heraldo and La Prensa followed up on 8/13 on the 
possible issues to be addressed during the visit and published a 
bio.  The two most important radio networks in Honduras (HRN and 
Radio America) also announced the visit on 8/12. 
 
Media Coverage on General Myers\' visit 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4. Newspapers: All four Honduran newspapers had full-page 
coverage of the press conference by General Myers and President 
Ricardo Maduro.  Two of them (Tegucigalpa-based \"El Heraldo\" and 
San Pedro Sula-based \"La Prensa\") carried a front-page photo of 
General Myers. 
 
5. Television: Coverage on the main television stations was 
extensive.  All evening news programs (channels 3, 5, 7, 9, 11 
and 13) reported on the visit and coverage continued on 8/14 on 
the morning news program Noticiero TVC (channels 3, 5, and 7). 
 
6. Radio: Radio networks HRN, Radio America, and other smaller 
stations also covered the visit.  Some of them broadcast the 
press conference live.  Also international wires AP, AFP, Reuter, 
Notimex, Acan-Efe, and CNN Radio covered the visit. 
 
7. Headlines: 
  -    \"The U.S. will support the fight against drug trafficking\" 
     La Prensa. 
-    \"Thanks Honduras for sending troops to Iraq\" La Tribuna. 
-    \"Honduras needs to do more in the fight against drug 
trafficking\" La Tribuna. 
-    \"The U.S. wants the destruction of dangerous arms that may 
fall in the wrong hands\" La Tribuna. 
-    \"Nicaragua needs to destroy its SAM-7 missiles\" Tiempo. 
-    \"There will be help, promises Richard Myers\"  \"Even though 
the helicopters have to wait, the Chief of Staff promised to 
consider the request\" El Heraldo. 
 
Pierce 
"
"10173","8/19/2003 17:04","03TEGUCIGALPA1958","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001958 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, SNAR, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF CJCS GENERAL RICHARD 
MYERS TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 18, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 
8/16 entitled \"A long promise\".  \"If we carefully read the 
statements of Richard Myers, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff during his visit to Tegucigalpa, he didn\'t mention how he 
will help Honduras in its fight against drug trafficking.  He 
simply stated that his government `will seriously consider\' the 
possibility of sending military equipment to support the Honduran 
armed forces in the fight against this global threat, which 
definitely affects the U.S. more than any country.\" 
 
\"When we hire a plumber to repair a water leak at home, the first 
thing he does is to close the main valve, then the secondary 
valves.  When we talk about drugs, we all know the main valve is 
located south of our continent, and the secondary ones are in 
Central America, that is used as a bridge to transport coke and 
heroin to the American market.\" 
 
\"Why doesn\'t the U.S. government control this flow of drugs? 
Besides, drug traffickers evade the rigorous watch of U.S. 
authorities and maintain a great supply in the flourishing market 
of the Northern big cities.\" 
 
\"In addition, there isn\'t serious control on money laundering 
coming from this illegal and dangerous activity.  Even though we 
see that some businesses grow in a surprising and enormous manner 
in front of our very eyes, there isn\'t real control on these 
activities.\" 
 
\"Surely, the DEA should collaborate extensively with the Honduran 
authorities, but the lack of their support shouldn\'t be an excuse 
for our security forces to give up on this fight. or just join 
the drug trafficking party.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"10175","8/19/2003 23:17","03TEGUCIGALPA1964","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE215050","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 001964 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO USTR FOR ADURKIN AND MMILLAN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR CENTAM/CARIB DIRECTOR 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/IPC, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/EPSC 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ELAB, PGOV, HO, XK, XL, USTR 
SUBJECT: CARIBBEAN BASIN ECONOMIC RECOVERY ACT REPORT TO 
CONGRESS: HONDURAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 215050 
 
1. Post submits the following report in response to reftel 
request for the biannual report to Congress on the operation 
of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (CBERA), as 
required by section 213(b) of the CBERA. 
 
--------------------------- 
Commitment to WTO and FTAA 
--------------------------- 
 
2. The GOH is complying with its commitments under the WTO 
and is supporting the advancement of a Free Trade of the 
Americas Agreement.  Honduras has completed nearly all of 
its tariff obligations under the Uruguay Round Agreements. 
Honduran officials have voiced some concern regarding 
certain proposals addressed in the Doha Negotiations, 
especially related to market access issues for agricultural 
and non-agricultural goods.  These concerns could place 
Honduras at odds with key U.S. objectives in the World Trade 
Organization. 
 
3. Despite these concerns, Honduras remains an active 
participant in establishing free trade in the Western 
Hemisphere.  Honduras, working in coordination with other 
Central American countries, has been negotiating with U.S. 
officials to establish the U.S.-Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) and has indicated that it would accept the 
inclusion of the Dominican Republic into the agreement as 
well. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Protection of Intellectual Property 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. Honduras remains largely in compliance with the Trade 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs); 
however, the government of Honduras has made limited efforts 
to strengthen existing intellectual property rights in the 
last year. Constitutional amendments, passed in 1999, 
updated the copyright law and addressed patent and copyright 
compliance issues.  Honduras lacks two measures, the 
protection of integrated circuit designs and plant variety 
safeguards, before it can be brought into full compliance 
with TRIPS agreement.  These two measures remain stuck 
before a committee in the National Congress. 
 
5. In 2002, a major U.S. pharmaceutical company questioned 
the GOH\'s commitment to TRIPs mandated data protection. 
Honduran law and the TRIPs agreement guarantee data 
exclusivity rights for an established time frame.  The U.S. 
company complained that the Ministry of Health was 
considering approval of another company to distribute a 
generic drug copy for which the U.S. company held the data 
exclusivity rights.  After several months of delay, the 
Ministry of Health has recognized that the drug is a copy of 
the U.S. company\'s protected product, and therefore will not 
approve the other company\'s application. 
 
6. The Government of Honduras advanced its compliance with 
World Intellectual Property Organization standards when it 
became a party to two \"internet treaties\" last year.  The 
National Congress ratified the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) 
and the WIPO Performances and Phonogram Treaty (WPPT) in 
2002. 
 
7. Since placement on the `Watch List\' category of the U.S. 
Government\'s annual Special 301 Review in 1998 for failure 
to control broadcast television piracy, the GOH has taken an 
active role to monitor television stations against further 
violations.  The negotiations of the U.S.-Central America 
Free Trade Agreement have provided a valuable forum to 
highlight and correct shortcomings in Honduran IPR 
legislation and implementation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Protection of Internationally Recognized Worker Rights 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
8. Union officials remain critical of what they perceive as 
inadequate enforcement by the Ministry of Labor (MOL) of 
workers\' rights, particularly the right to form a union and 
bargain collectively, and the reinstatement of workers 
unjustly fired for union organizing activities.  In November 
1995, the MOL signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the 
U.S. Trade Representative\'s Office to implement 11 
recommendations for enforcement of the Honduran Labor Code 
and the resolution of disputes.  The MOL has implemented 
some of these recommendations, particularly as they relate 
to inspection and monitoring of assembly-for-export 
factories (maquilas).  However, it has been slow to 
implement others due to resource constraints.  Also, the 
Honduran Maquiladora Association initiated a code of conduct 
in July 1998 for the Maquiladora Association and its 
constituent companies.  Through cooperation within the 
bipartite and tripartite commissions (unions, MOL, private 
sector) and other venues, MOL inspectors\' access to maquila 
plants to enforce the labor code has improved, and MOL has 
continued to work to increase its effectiveness in enforcing 
worker rights and child labor laws. 
 
9. The labor law prescribes a maximum 8-hour workday and 44- 
hour week.  There is a requirement for at least one 24-hour 
rest period every week.  The Labor Code provides for a paid 
vacation of 10 workdays after one year, and of 20 workdays 
after four years.  The Constitution and Labor Code prohibit 
the employment of persons under the age of 16, except that a 
15-year old may be permitted to work with the written 
permission of parents and the MOL.  All persons under 18 
years of age are prohibited from night work, dangerous work 
and full time work. 
 
10.  The Children\'s Code (September 10, 1996) prohibits a 
person of 14 years of age or less from working, even with 
parental permission, and establishes prison sentences of 3 
to 5 years for individuals who allow children to work 
illegally.  An employer who legally hires a 15-year-old must 
certify that the young person has finished or is finishing 
compulsory schooling.  The MOL grants a number of work 
permits to 15-year-olds each year.  Document fraud is 
prevalent among minors interested in working. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Commitment to Eliminate the Worst Forms of Child Labor 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
11. With regard to the elimination of the worst forms of 
child labor, the National Congress ratified the ILO 
Convention 182, and Honduras became a party to the 
Convention in June 2001.  In the textile manufacturing 
sector, the elimination of child labor has seen great 
strides.  International pressure on the export sector 
through agreements such as the Caribbean Basin Trade 
Partnership Act and negotiations such as the U.S.-Central 
American Free Trade Agreement have helped employers and 
employees recognize the importance of these laws.  The 
government has created a special commission to establish a 
more complete program towards eliminating child labor and 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the ILO\'s 
International Program for the Eradication of Child Labor 
(IPEC).  Despite a commitment of political support, child 
labor still exists in Honduras, with an estimated 400,000 
children working illegally.  Identified instances of child 
labor in Honduras include prostitution, fireworks industry 
workers, child divers on lobster boats, garbage dump 
pickers, and agricultural workers, including melon, sugar, 
and coffee. 
 
----------------------------- 
Counter-Narcotics Cooperation 
----------------------------- 
 
12. Honduras remains a trans-shipment point for narcotics 
trafficking through air, land, and maritime routes from 
South America to the United States.  Indications of 
corruption in law enforcement, judicial, and military 
entities plagues counter-narcotics efforts.  Despite 
technical support from the U.S. government, the arrest, 
prosecution, and incarceration of major narco-trafficking 
offenders remains problematic.  A new money laundering law 
passed in March 2002 provided further assistance to U.S. and 
Honduran law enforcement and counterterrorism efforts. 
Finally, in the first seven months of 2003, Honduran counter- 
narcotics authorities seized more cocaine than they had 
seized in the previous four years combined. However, the 
recent counter-narcotics seizures can be credited in large 
part to strong pressure for increased results from Embassy 
officials. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Transparency in Government Procurement 
-------------------------------------- 
13. The government of Honduras established a new contracting 
law in 2001.  Under the law, foreign firms are entitled to 
national treatment for public bids, concessions, and 
government-contracted consulting services.  As a part of the 
new code, government procurement proceedings are to be made 
public through a regularly published report.  In practice, 
U.S. companies have complained of instances of mismanaged 
and opaque bidding processes.  One U.S. company underwent an 
extended bidding process, filled with questionable 
practices, in its attempts to win a government contract 
within the publicly owned utilities sector. 
 
14. Despite these shortcomings, the Government of Honduras 
has initiated a system in which the United Nations 
Development Program oversees the bidding process for 
government procurement in a limited number of contracts. 
This attempt to make the process more transparent in some 
areas coincides with the preparations to initiate 
privatization of several government-owned entities. Honduras 
hopes such measures will make investment in these 
privatization efforts more attractive and competitive. 
 
------------- 
Expropriation 
------------- 
 
15. The Embassy has files on over 160 property, investment 
and commercial disputes involving U.S. citizens have been 
registered with the U.S. Embassy in Honduras.  Eleven are 
considered potential expropriations, for purposes of the 
annual Helms Act report to Congress.  Many of the cases 
relate to land disputes and fall under the jurisdiction of 
the National Agrarian Institute (INA).  Other disputes 
include investment disputes involving U.S. investors, 
resulting primarily from inadequate titling procedures, and 
commercial disputes between U.S. citizens and Honduran 
citizens.  On July 12, 2001, a Bilateral Investment Treaty 
(BIT) between the U.S. and Honduras entered into force.  The 
bill provides for equal protection under local law for U.S. 
investors and allows expropriation only in cases that agree 
with international legal standards.  In October 2002, the 
National Congress approved a one-time expanded arbitration 
law allowing for pending cases to file for arbitration.  Of 
the 11 cases pending, only two U.S. citizens filed petitions 
for arbitration requests to INA by the July 21, 2003 
deadline. 
 
---------------------------- 
Extradition of U.S. Citizens 
---------------------------- 
 
16. Honduras does not have a treaty or any other agreement 
allowing for the extradition of U.S. citizens. 
 
--------------------------- 
General Economic Conditions 
--------------------------- 
 
17. Honduras is one of the poorest and least developed 
countries in Latin America.  The economy suffered a major 
setback after the destruction caused by Hurricane Mitch in 
1998.  The economy did not return to pre-Mitch levels until 
the end of 2000, and certain agricultural sectors, including 
the banana crop, have yet to attain pre-Mitch levels.  Low 
world coffee prices have dramatically reduced revenues from 
this other key agricultural export commodity.  The slowdown 
in the growth of the global economy, especially in the 
United States, has also had a depressing effect on the 
exports and economic growth in Honduras.  Honduras\' economic 
growth slowed to only two 2.5 percent in 2002, falling from 
a 2.7 6 percent growth in 2001 and a 4.75.2 percent growth 
rate in 2000.  At this time, it is expected to grow at a 
rate of 3.2 percent in 2003. 
 
18. Honduras has a growing textiles and apparel sector 
despite the negative effects of the U.S. economy\'s sluggish 
performance in 2001 - 2003.  Currently ranked as the third 
largest textile exporter to the United States, the maquila 
sector (garment assembly) has been largely assisted by the 
implementation of the Caribbean Basin Initiative.  The 
benefits provided through the Caribbean Basin Partnership 
Trade Agreement (CBTPA) have been crucial to the development 
of this industry, and industry officials have high hopes for 
future growth to be generated by new provisions in the 
proposed CAFTA.  Although the elimination of world textile 
import quotas in December 2004 will put new demands on the 
competitiveness of this sector.  In 2002, the maquila 
industry employed over 100,000 employees with exports from 
the industry totaling USD 2.439 billion. 
 
---------------------------- 
Revitalization of the region 
---------------------------- 
 
19. Honduras and Nicaragua underwent a period of tense 
relations in 2000 and 2001 as a result of a maritime border 
dispute.  Nicaragua levied a retaliatory 35 percent tariff 
on Honduran goods as a result of the disagreement.  The 
tariff was ruled illegal by the Central American Court of 
Justice in 2001, but was not lifted until March 2003.  Both 
countries seem to have moved past this disagreement to form 
a united Central American front in the CAFTA negotiations. 
The willingness of the Honduran government to move forward 
from this controversy indicates a commitment to regional 
integration and market liberalization. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Self-help measures to promote economic development 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
20. One area of concern that has been an impediment to 
greater U.S. investment, and thus Honduran economic 
development, is the lack of transparency and efficiency in 
the Honduran judicial system.  Post has received complaints 
from U.S. citizens and companies regarding frustrations with 
the sluggish pace of the court system, as well as court 
cases never brought to fair trial.  These inefficiencies in 
the court system mark a fundamental flaw in the government 
structure that merits attention and reform. 
 
21. Economic Officer Thomas R. Hastings is Post\'s designated 
reporting officer.  Mr. Hastings\'s telephone number is (504) 
236-9320, extension 4060; fax (504) 236-6836; and email 
hastingstr(at)state.gov. 
 
PALMER 
"
"10256","8/22/2003 22:23","03TEGUCIGALPA1996","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001996 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, SNAR, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA COVERAGE ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
DONALD H. RUMSFELD TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 20, 2003 
 
 
1. Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld visited Honduras on 
8/20 and met with Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve, Chief of Staff General Isaias Barahona 
and other top governmental officials. 
 
2. In his opening remarks, Secretary Rumsfeld expressed the 
gratitude of the U.S. government for the Honduran decision to 
supply infantry and military police forces for Iraq, which was 
important for Honduras, the U.S. and the region. 
 
3. All four national newspapers (La Tribuna, El Heraldo, La 
Prensa and Tiempo) announced Secretary Rumsfeld\'s visit on 8/19, 
after President Maduro announced the visit. 
 
Media Coverage of Secretary Rumsfeld\'s visit 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4. Newspapers: All four Honduran newspapers had an extensive 
coverage of the press conference by Secretary Rumsfeld and 
President Ricardo Maduro.  Three of them (Tegucigalpa-based \"El 
Heraldo\" and \"La Tribuna\", and San Pedro Sula-based \"La Prensa\") 
carried a front-page photo of Secretary Rumsfeld, Ambassador 
Larry Palmer and President Maduro. 
 
5. Television: Coverage on the main television stations was 
extensive.  All evening news programs (on channels 3, 5, 7, 9, 11 
and 13) reported on the visit.  A noon program (channel 3\'s 
Noticiero Hoy Mismo al Da) had live coverage of part of the 
press conference that was rerun in the evening program.  Coverage 
continued on 8/21 on the morning news program Noticiero TVC 
(channels 3, 5, and 7). 
 
 
6. Radio: Radio networks HRN, Radio America, and other smaller 
stations also covered the visit.  Some of them broadcast the 
press conference live. 
 
7. International Press: International wires such as AP, AFP, 
Reuters, Notimex, Acan-Efe, and CNN Radio covered the visit.  In 
addition, U.S. press accompanying Secretary Rumsfeld (AP, 
Reuters, AFP, NBC News, Chicago Tribune and Telemundo) also 
covered the visit. 
 
8. Headlines: 
  -    \"The U.S. wants to set up antidrug base\" \"Apparently they 
     seek to establish a base to help them achieve the objectives of 
     Plan Colombia\" (El Heraldo). 
-    \"Aid is being analyzed \" \"About disarmament, he said: we 
wish you well and we want to assist you\" (El Heraldo). 
-    \"The U.S. respects efforts of Honduras against narcos\" (La 
Prensa). 
-    \"The U.S. is analyzing request of equipment to fight narco 
trafficking \" (La Tribuna). 
-    \"Why did Rumsfeld come?\" \"The U.S. respects the Central 
American decision to reduce arms\" (Tiempo, 8/21). 
-    \"The U.S. is considering to give helicopters and radars for 
fight against drugs\" (Tiempo, 8/21). 
 
Palmer 
"
"10257","8/22/2003 22:23","03TEGUCIGALPA1997","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, SNAR, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA COVERAGE ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
DONALD H. RUMSFELD TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 20, 2003 
 
1. Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld visited Honduras on 
8/20 and met with Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve, Chief of Staff General Isaias Barahona 
and other top governmental officials. 
 
2. In his opening remarks, Secretary Rumsfeld expressed the 
gratitude of the U.S. government for the Honduran decision to 
supply infantry and military police forces for Iraq, which was 
important for Honduras, the U.S. and the region. 
 
3. All four national newspapers (La Tribuna, El Heraldo, La 
Prensa and Tiempo) announced Secretary Rumsfeld\'s visit on 8/19, 
after President Maduro announced the visit. 
 
Media Coverage of Secretary Rumsfeld\'s visit 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4. Newspapers: All four Honduran newspapers had extensive 
coverage of the press conference by Secretary Rumsfeld and 
President Ricardo Maduro.  Three of them (Tegucigalpa-based \"El 
Heraldo\" and \"La Tribuna\", and San Pedro Sula-based \"La Prensa\") 
carried a front-page photo of Secretary Rumsfeld, Ambassador 
Larry Palmer and President Maduro. 
 
5. Television: Coverage on the main television stations was 
extensive.  All evening news programs (on channels 3, 5, 7, 9, 11 
and 13) reported on the visit.  A noon program (channel 3\'s 
Noticiero Hoy Mismo al Da) had live coverage of part of the 
press conference that was rerun in the evening program.  Coverage 
continued on 8/21 on the morning news program Noticiero TVC 
(channels 3, 5, and 7). 
 
 
6. Radio: Radio networks HRN, Radio America, and other smaller 
stations also covered the visit.  Some of them broadcast the 
press conference live. 
 
7. International Press: International wires such as AP, AFP, 
Reuters, Notimex, Acan-Efe, and CNN Radio covered the visit.  In 
addition, U.S. press accompanying Secretary Rumsfeld (AP, 
Reuters, AFP, NBC News, Chicago Tribune and Telemundo) also 
covered the visit. 
 
8. Headlines: 
  -    \"The U.S. wants to set up antidrug base\" \"Apparently they 
     seek to establish a base to help them achieve the objectives of 
     Plan Colombia\" (El Heraldo). 
-    \"Aid is being analyzed \" \"About disarmament, he said: we 
wish you well and we want to assist you\" (El Heraldo). 
-    \"The U.S. respects efforts of Honduras against narcos\" (La 
Prensa). 
-    \"The U.S. is analyzing request of equipment to fight narco 
trafficking \" (La Tribuna). 
-    \"Why did Rumsfeld come?\" \"The U.S. respects the Central 
American decision to reduce arms\" (Tiempo, 8/21). 
-    \"The U.S. is considering to give helicopters and radars for 
fight against drugs\" (Tiempo, 8/21). 
 
Palmer 
"
"10258","8/22/2003 23:05","03TEGUCIGALPA2004","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, SNAR, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
DONALD H. RUMSFELD TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 20, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/22 entitled \"Anti-drug base\".  \"If the U.S. were to set up a 
base with the exclusive purpose of fighting against the terrible 
threat of narcotrafficking, it would help stop the operations of 
drug mafias that use Honduran territory as a bridge to transport 
the coke demanded by the growing American population of drug 
addicts.  Besides, it will hinder the corruption generated by 
this illegal activity and the risk of Honduras becoming a narco- 
state.  Definitely, it could prevent a lot of suffering in the 
future for us.\" 
 
\"Thus, it\'s not odd that the visits of high ranking officials of 
the U.S. government, such as the CJCS General Richard Myers and 
the Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld may have had the goal of 
negotiating the installation of a center to fight against 
narcotrafficking.  These visits could also be aimed at achieving 
the support of the Honduran society for this undertaking.\" 
 
\"Until we see if the there will be such a base or not, we hope 
the U.S. government increases its support to its Honduran 
counterpart in the fight against narcotrafficking, because the 
huge economic resources this illegal activity generates greatly 
surpass our limited capabilities to confront it.  Obviously, the 
U.S. can do a lot more than just give money, helicopters and 
state-of-the-art technology to fight drugs; it has the power to 
eradicate these mafias for good: it only has to stop its millions 
of drug addicts from buying heroin and cocaine, and end the 
laundering of billions of narco-dollars that its financial system 
does.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 
8/22 entitled \"Gratitude?\".  \"The visit of the U.S. Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld just a few days after CJCS General 
Richard Myers came to Honduras doesn\'t add up with the official 
explanation given as the goal of both visits.  Previous 
experience leads us to think that they entailed much more than 
expressing the gratitude of the U.S. government, no matter how 
real and sincere it appears to be.\" 
 
\"What were the issues discussed with President Maduro?  The press 
conference given by the President and his distinguished visitor 
concentrated on issues we already knew about and which have been 
discussed repeatedly between our two governments.\" 
 
\"We don\'t disregard the fight against drug trafficking, as we 
don\'t think we\'re immune to terrorism.  We need to carry on with 
the joint efforts with the international community to confront 
these threats that have increased poverty and misery in 
Honduras.\" 
 
3. Today\'s edition of San Pedro Sula-based daily \"La Prensa\", ran 
on its front page headline \"Maduro requests concrete support from 
the U.S.\": I would like to see from our North American friends a 
change in its policy, and a consequent and effective fight 
against narcotrafficking\".  Also in the same article he clarified 
some headlines of yesterday\'s newspapers, which stated that 
during the visits of CJCS General Richard Myers and Secretary of 
Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, the U.S. and Honduras had 
negotiations to establish an anti-drug base in Honduras. 
 
Regarding this issue, Maduro stated \"It\'s not true, they (General 
Myers and Secretary Rumsfeld and their delegations) came for a 
very simple reason, to thank the Honduran people for our support 
by sending troops for the pacification and reconstruction in 
Iraq.  There was nothing more.\" 
 
4. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
8/22 entitled \"It would be an excellent idea.\"  \"Armida de Lopez 
Contreras, Vice-president of Honduras and President of the 
National Council Against Narcotrafficking said that it would be 
an excellent idea to establish an anti-drug base in Honduras.\" 
 
\"Several Honduran political leaders have said that we need more 
determined assistance from the U.S. in the fight against 
narcotrafficking.  Lopez Contreras stated, \'I believe that is the 
opinion of all politicians\'. \" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10292","8/25/2003 22:19","03TEGUCIGALPA2014","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, SNAR, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
DONALD H. RUMSFELD TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 20, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
8/23 entitled \"Thanks\".  \"President Maduro made an opportune 
clarification stating that it was absolutely false that Honduras 
is getting prepared to install another U.S. military base in our 
territory, which will be supposedly used to fight against 
narcotrafficking.  According to Maduro, the U.S. Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld came for a very simple reason: to thank 
the Honduran people for our support by sending troops for the 
pacification and reconstruction of Iraq, and there was nothing 
else.\" 
 
\"Since we are very skeptical, there is a lot of people who 
believe that such an important visitor doesn\'t bother to come to 
a country like Honduras just to give thanks, that there must be a 
hidden agenda for his visit.  There have been several theories 
about the presence of Rumsfeld here in Honduras, especially when 
we were the only Central American country he visited.  Even 
though the governmental authorities have repeatedly explained the 
purpose of his visit, there are still many people wondering, why 
did Rumsfeld come to Honduras?.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" on 
8/23 entitled \"Thank you, very much\".  \"We don\'t really know the 
real purpose of the visit of the U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald 
Rumsfeld to Honduras after he went to Colombia.  Then, we should 
try to be satisfied with the official explanation that Rumsfeld 
came to thank the Maduro government for sending Honduran troops 
to help the British-American occupation armies in Iraq.\" 
 
\"This expression of gratitude is truly extraordinary because we 
had already been visited by the Deputy Secretary of Defense and 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Richard Myers, 
who also came to Honduras to thank us.  So, as we say, this much 
gratitude is getting confusing.\" 
 
\"However, we can\'t avoid using our imagination.  Some people - 
ourselves included - have seen a relationship between the visit 
of Secretary Rumsfeld to Colombia and Honduras with the internal 
conflict in this South American country and its links with drug 
trafficking, and President Bush\'s war against terrorism.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10293","8/25/2003 22:19","03TEGUCIGALPA2015","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, SNAR, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
DONALD H. RUMSFELD TO HONDURAS, AUGUST 20, 2003 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 
8/25 entitled \"The agenda\".  \"The fact that the issue of 
narcotrafficking came up during the recent visit of the U.S. 
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is undeniable.  What we 
 
SIPDIS 
don\'t know is the scope of these discussions and the proposals 
presented by Rumsfeld to the Maduro administration.\" 
 
\"Despite the fact that President Maduro denied a future 
installation of an anti-drug base in our territory, there are 
still some doubts in the air, because Secretary Rumsfeld came to 
Honduras after he visited Colombia.  It\'s evident that the U.S. 
government makes a lot of demands, but doesn\'t always help to 
achieve what it wants.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10322","8/26/2003 21:53","03TEGUCIGALPA2022","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002022 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECDEF FOR SECRETARY RUMSFELD 
STATE FOR PM, INL, WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/26/2013 
TAGS: OVIP, MARR, MASS, MOPS, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: SECRETARY RUMSFELD\'S MEETING WITH PRESIDENT MADURO 
AND MOD BREVE IN HONDURAS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C)  Summary:  Secretary Rumsfeld met on 20 August with 
President Maduro and MOD Breve.  SECDEF made the following 
points:  (a)  the U.S. appreciated Honduras\' steadfast 
support and friendship as demonstrated by the Article 98 
agreement and the deployment of a battalion to Iraq.  (b) 
the U.S. supports Central American regional cooperation in 
the security field, including maritime interdiction.  (c) 
inviting USSOUTHCOM to be an observer at the Conference of 
Central American Armed Forces (CFAC) could be helpful.  (d) 
SECDEF agreed with MOD Breve that Nicaragua\'s  SA-7\'s are a 
serious problem, but that eliminating them should not be 
linked to reducing Honduras\' Air Force.  (e)  the USG would 
carefully consider bilateral issues raised by Honduras, e.g., 
the purchase of UH-1H helicopters and a solution to the Cerro 
la Mole radar issue.    President Maduro and MOD Breve made 
the following points:  (a)  deployment of forces to Iraq is 
for Honduras a matter of both friendship and principle.  (b) 
Central American regional cooperation is important to 
Honduras to reduce tensions and to promote regional offensive 
arms reductions.  (c)  MOD Breve argued for more generous 
U.S. financial terms for the UH-1H helicopters and for 
maintaining/repairing the Cerro la Mole radar.  (d) he 
announced that USSOUTHCOM would be invited into CFAC as an 
observer by the end of the year.  End summary. 
 
2. (C)  U.S.-Honduran Solidarity:  Secretary of Defense 
Rumsfeld had a meeting and luncheon with Honduran President 
Ricardo Maduro, accompanied by MOD Federico Breve, in 
Tegucigalpa on 20 August.  SECDEF expressed appreciation for 
Honduras\' early signature and ratification (first in the 
hemisphere) of an Article 98 Agreement, an important issue of 
U.S. sovereignty.  He also thanked Maduro for the Honduran 
deployment of a battalion of infantry and military police to 
Iraq.  President Maduro said the latter is a matter of both 
traditional friendship and principle.  The U.S., he said, has 
always been a friend to Honduras in support of its social 
progress, reforms, and democracy.  SECDEF described the 
situation in Iraq as difficult but improving. 
 
3. (C)  Regional Cooperation:  President Maduro stressed the 
importance to Honduras of Central American regional 
cooperation.  Especially for a small country, regional 
economic integration and participation in the global 
community are essential to Honduras\' future.  Honduras is 
promoting regional security cooperation especially with El 
Salvador and Nicaragua, both to reduce tensions and to 
further opportunities for disarmament.  SECDEF supported 
this, pointing to the likely synergy from, e.g., cooperation 
in interdicting drugs along the coasts.   He cited the 
Hemispheric Maritime Cooperation Initiative he had announced 
at the November Ministerial in Chile.  SECDEF also noted that 
USSOUTHCOM participation as an observer in CFAC could be 
helpful substantively and as a catalyst.  MOD Breve replied 
that USSOUTHCOM would be invited by the end of the year. 
 
4. (C)  Domestic Issues.  President Maduro emphasized his 
domestic fight against crime.  He had championed campaign 
finance reform in order to limit drug-related money in 
politics.  \"We don\'t want to end up like Colombia,\" he said 
(though he had nothing but praise for President Uribe).  He 
spoke at length about the new law outlawing gangs.  There are 
something like 25-40,000 gang members in Honduras committing 
murder, extortion, and other crimes. 
 
5. (C)  Bilateral Issues.  The future of the Cerro la Mole 
radar was discussed.  MOD Breve said it is needed to combat 
drug trafficking.  SECDEF replied that we need to know better 
whether, given the air picture and information-sharing we 
have from JIATF-South, this radar is really worth the cost. 
It was agreed that the question needed to be examined, 
together, on a comprehensive basis.  On a second issue, the 
six UH-1H helicopters whose cost had soared because of U.S. 
regulations, it was agreed to continue to discuss it. 
 
6. (U) OSD staff drafted this message; SECDEF has read and 
cleared. 
PALMER 
"
"10347","8/27/2003 14:04","03TEGUCIGALPA2025","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE193266","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL (MHARPOLE), EB, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB (TFAULKNER) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EIND, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI, EAID, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: CHILD LABOR IN HONDURAS: INFORMATION FOR THE TRADE 
AND DEVELOPMENT ACT (GSP) REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
REF: A. STATE 193266 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 650 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 185 
     D. 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2359 
     E. 01 TEGUCIGALPA 2091 
 
1. Summary.  Over the past several months, Labor Attache and 
other EmbOffs have spoken with government officials, private 
sector, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and 
child advocates regarding the situation of child labor in 
Honduras.  The Embassy has been active in promoting an agenda 
to support the eradication of the worst forms of child labor. 
 We believe that child labor is a serious issue in Honduras 
and will continue to pressure government and private sector 
stakeholders to eradicate the worst forms of child labor. 
The Government of Honduras (GOH) and the Ministry of Labor 
have demonstrated the political will necessary to implement 
and uphold their obligations to eliminate the worst forms of 
child labor.  Answers below generally follow the subjects 
specified in ref A.  Post notes that there have been no 
dramatic changes since last year\'s report.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------- 
CHILD LABOR IN HONDURAS 
----------------------- 
 
2. Honduran government officials, International Labor 
Organization officials, and human rights organizations 
estimate that approximately 400,000 children work illegally 
in Honduras, the majority for their own families, in the 
informal sector, and in rural areas.  Many of these children 
work out of economic necessity alongside other family 
members.  Bonded and/or enslaved labor is rare, but work in 
hazardous conditions and for long hours is common, especially 
for those children who have given up schooling.  The 
U.S.-funded and International Labor Organization-managed 
International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor 
(IPEC) identified the worst forms of child labor in Honduras 
as prostitution (particularly in tourist areas along the 
North Coast), fireworks industry workers in Copan, child 
divers in lobster boats in the Mosquitia (Caribbean coast), 
limestone quarry and lime production workers, garbage dump 
pickers in the two large cities of Tegucigalpa and San Pedro 
Sula, and coffee and melon agricultural workers.  Of these 
occupations, the most hazardous is diving; some children are 
victims of commercial sexual exploitation (ref B). 
Commercial agriculture is the industry with the most 
significant incidence of child labor, especially melons, 
where NGOs and the GOH have estimated that approximately 
2,000 children work as seasonal laborers (ref E).  Harvesting 
sugar cane fields is also a dangerous area of child labor. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PROSCRIBING WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR 
-------------------------------------- 
 
3. Honduras has adequate laws and regulations proscribing the 
worst forms of child labor.  The Honduran Congress ratified 
ILO Convention 182 in May 2001 and Honduras became a party to 
the convention in June 2001.  The definition of the worst 
forms of child labor are identical to that of the ILO 
Convention 182.  All child labor laws, including the ILO 
Convention 182, are applicable in all sectors and industries. 
 
4. Honduras regulates child labor in the Constitution and in 
two codes, one relating to minors, and the other to labor. 
The Constitution (Chapter 5, article 128, section 7) 
establishes that minors who are under age 16 or who are 
students ages 16 and older cannot work.  The Constitution 
also establishes the maximum hours worked for children under 
17 years as six hours daily and 30 hours weekly.  Under the 
Child and Adolescent Code, a law passed in 1996, parents or a 
legal guardian can request the Ministry of Labor for special 
permission to allow children ages 14-15 to work, as long as 
the Ministry of Labor performs a home study to assure that 
the child both shows the need to work and will be working 
under non-hazardous conditions.  The work day proscribed for 
children is four hours per day for 14-15 year-olds, and six 
hours per day for 16-17 year-olds.  No minor is allowed to 
work in hazardous conditions.  In law and in practice, the 
Ministry of Labor carries out the home studies and limits the 
number of permits that children ages 14-15 can have.  The 
Labor Code, passed in 1959 and subsequently revised, 
prohibits night work and extra hours for minors under age 16, 
and also requires that employers in areas with more than 20 
school-aged children on their farm, ranch, or business must 
provide a location for a school.  In practice, many children 
work without going to the Ministry of Labor to request a 
permit, particularly those who work in the informal sector 
and in rural areas. 
 
5. International treaties have a status superior to that of 
the Constitution.  Honduras is a party to ILO Convention 138, 
which was ratified in 1980.  It establishes the minimum age 
of work at 14 years and specifies the age for completing 
educational requirements at 15 years.  The United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Children, ratified by Honduras in 
1990, requires each signatory government to establish a 
minimum age of work, conditions and hours of work, and 
penalties to assure effective application of the law.   The 
above-mentioned Child and Adolescent Code was developed out 
of the UN Convention, according to Ministry of Labor sources. 
 
6. Honduran law defines hazardous work to include: standing 
on scaffolding higher than three meters; use of toxic or 
noxious substances; exposure to vehicular traffic; exposure 
to abnormal temperatures; work in tunnels or underground 
mining; exposure to noise louder than 80 decibels; 
manipulation of radioactive substances; exposure to high 
voltage electric currents; underground diving; exposure to 
garbage or to biological or pathogenic substances; painting 
with industrial or lead paint; work on dangerous machines 
such as those that cut, shape, or file metal or wood; 
activities related to ovens, smelters, metal-working, or 
heavy presses; or high risk agroindustrial work. 
 
7. The minimum age for employment is consistent with the age 
for completing educational requirements in law, but in 
practice, more than sixty percent of children do not complete 
sixth grade, despite GOH increased spending on educational 
budgets and improvement to school access in rural areas. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
8. In urban areas, these laws and regulations regarding child 
labor are better implemented than in rural areas.  A rural 
economy in which a significant portion of employment is in 
the informal sector and in which parents face high 
opportunity costs to send children to school makes it 
difficult to implement and enforce these measures against 
child labor.  In large scale manufacturing and services, 
however, implementation and enforcement of these measures are 
more consistent.  National enforcement remedies are not 
adequate to punish or deter violations, but pressure from 
international agreements, such as the Generalized System of 
Preferences (GSP) and Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act 
(CBTPA), and awareness of the U.S. Customs Forced Child Labor 
program, have sensitized employers who work in the export 
sector. 
 
9. Regarding the worst forms of child labor, the GOH has not 
yet established enforcement or penalties beyond those 
mentioned above and - for child labor in illicit activities - 
in the criminal code.  Penalties imposed on firms for 
violating the Child and Adolescent Code include sanctions 
between USD 287 and 1,437 (5,000-25,000 Lempiras), or twice 
that if the employer is a repeat offender.  For sale or 
trafficking of children, the criminal code prohibits illegal 
detention of minors and imposes a 14-18 year prison sentence. 
 Forced child labor, prostitution, and other immoral 
activities are characterized as economic exploitation in the 
Child and Adolescent Code and are subject to a three to five 
year prison term.  Furthermore, the criminal code specifies a 
seven to 12 year sentence, and a USD 431 to 862 (7,500-15,000 
Lempiras) fine for persons found guilty of prostituting 
minors.  Forced recruitment and obligatory military service 
were abolished under a Constitutional amendment in 1997. 
Adults who use children in narcotrafficking are sanctioned 
according to the Law on the Illicit Use and Trafficking of 
Psychotropic Drugs. 
 
10. In theory, if children are found to be working in illicit 
conditions, either through a labor inspection or through a 
police investigation, the Special Prosecutors\' Office on 
Children, founded in 1997, works with the investigative 
police to uncover evidence and bring the perpetrators to 
trial.  The judicial branch has also established Children 
Courts, where violations of children\'s rights are tried.  In 
practice, the Honduran police and judicial system are rife 
with inefficiencies and corruption and face many difficulties 
in administering justice.  Nonetheless, the GOH has begun to 
improve its police force and recently implemented a new 
modern criminal procedures code that is intended to improve 
the Government\'s ability to bring cases to trial and to 
administer justice. 
 
11. For children employed in the worst forms of child labor 
that are not illicit by their nature but are hazardous or 
illegal for minors, the authority that would investigate such 
cases is the Ministry of Labor, which has trained inspectors 
to identify child labor.  Labor inspectors, upon being told 
of a violation or in a routine inspection, report the 
incident for administrative action.  The inspection unit 
cannot immediately sanction employers, and the Ministry has 
less than 50 inspectors in a country of 6.5 million people. 
Note:  Even more than most government ministries, a severe 
lack of resources restricts what the MOL is able to 
accomplish.  End Note.  Despite these problems, in 2001, the 
MOL re-opened a regional office and re-initiated inspections 
of lobster boats in the Mosquitia region, where boat captains 
illegally employ boy divers.  The MOL also cooperated with 
the Honduran Private Business Council (COHEP) to launch an 
education campaign among private industries that increases 
business awareness of the worst forms of child labor in 
September 2001.  Early in 2001 the Minister of Labor 
personally directed a special inspection of the melon 
industry in order to uncover the incidence of abuse in the 
sector.  Since then, Minister German Leitzelar has visited 
Choluteca several times to observe the problems of child 
labor in the melon and sugar cane industries. 
 
--------------------- 
WHAT DOES THE GOH DO? 
--------------------- 
 
12. The Government provides free, universal, and compulsory 
education through the age of 13; however, the Government 
estimated that as many as 65,000 children ages 6 through 12 
fail to receive schooling of any kind each year; of these, 
almost 10,000 will never attend primary school.  A number of 
social and educational programs exist that are intended to 
reach children at risk for working instead of attending 
school.  A school grant program run by the Ministry of 
Education (MOE) provides very poor families with money for 
school supplies.  The MOE also provides alternative schooling 
by radio and long-distance learning for children in distant 
rural areas with few schools.  Regional committees of \"Child 
Defense\" volunteers try to convince parents to send their 
children to school.  Nonetheless, extreme poverty, recent 
famine in some rural areas, and lack of jobs for grade school 
and high school graduates create an atmosphere where 
government incentives or programs have not yet stemmed the 
flow of children working. 
 
13. The National Commission for the Gradual and Progressive 
Eradication of Child Labor, established by decree by former 
President Carlos Flores in 1998 and maintained by current 
President Ricardo Maduro (who swore in a new commission in 
May 2002), provides a tripartite working group in which civil 
society (including the ILO/IPEC, unions, and non-governmental 
organizations), employer groups, and a number of government 
ministries have been able to discuss child labor issues over 
the past several years.  The Commission created a social 
dialogue and forum for negotiation between the groups, 
resulting in broad support for the ratification of ILO 
Convention 182, the development of a National Action Plan for 
the Gradual and Progressive Eradication of Child Labor, and 
the Regulations on the Worst Forms of Child Labor, which were 
drafted by the Commission and passed by Congress in December 
2001.  (Note:  In Honduras, Congress passes a law, the 
President signs the law, the executive branch drafts 
implementing regulations, and then Congress must pass the 
regulations for them to take effect.  This cumbersome process 
is a factor in the inability of successive administrations to 
update many outdated labor regulations.  End Note.) 
Furthermore, the Commission spawned seven inter-institutional 
sub-committees throughout the country that work in a 
tripartite fashion to develop strategies to eliminate child 
labor in Honduras.  For example, several GOH entities, 
international organizations, and NGOs have participated in an 
inter-institutional working group that is finalizing a 
national plan against the commercial sexual exploitation of 
children.  Maduro\'s impressive Minister of Labor, German 
Leitzelar - a labor lawyer by profession, has continued to 
increase the ministry\'s work combating child labor. 
 
14. The MOL also signed a Memorandum of Understanding with 
the ILO in 1997 to support the ILO/IPEC program, which 
initiated program activities in the melon and coffee sectors. 
 These programs have since expanded to cover lobster divers, 
garbage dumps, and the commercial sexual exploitation of 
children.  The MOL also established its own office on the 
Gradual and Progressive Eradication of Child Labor. 
 
15. The Department of Labor (through ILO/IPEC) and USAID, as 
well as UNICEF, support several projects to promote the 
eradication of the worst forms of child labor, including by 
promoting school attendance.  In general these projects aim 
to remove children from or prevent children from exploitative 
work, and aim to provide educational opportunities and social 
services for children and their families.  See ref C for a 
list of technical assistance on labor issues from 
international donors, including projects combating child 
labor. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
16.  The GOH and the MOL have actively demonstrated the 
political will and found the resources to combat the child 
labor problem.  The industry group, COHEP, has recently 
showed renewed vigor to participate in the tripartite 
commission and to educate its own members on the importance 
of adhering to the ILO Convention 182.  We note that this 
reawakened commitment came on the heels of the July 17-18, 
2001 visit of the USTR-led interagency delegation to Honduras 
to discuss labor conditions.  The delegation determined that 
the situation in Honduras did not warrant opening a review of 
CBTPA benefits (ref D).  The U.S. Embassy continues to work 
with the government, NGOs, and the private sector to send the 
message that the worst forms of child labor are detrimental 
to business with the U.S. and could subject offending sectors 
to U.S. sanctions.  In addition, strong Honduran interest in 
a U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) is 
clearly a motivating factor for the GOH and the private 
sector to accelerate efforts to eradicate the worst forms of 
child labor.  In sum, Post believes that the GOH is making 
continual progress toward the elimination of the worst forms 
of child labor.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"10356","8/27/2003 22:15","03TEGUCIGALPA2034","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002034 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA, INR, DS 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
TREASURY FOR C. KUSHLIS 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, EAGR, PINR, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: IMF AGREEMENT HINGING ON SALARY LAW 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1581 AND PREVIOUS 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) The imminent GOH submission to Congress of a new 
government salary bill (substituting the broader Civil 
Service Framework bill) is dominating the political debate in 
Honduras this week.  President Maduro and his team have 
appeared on the airwaves and taken out ads in the papers 
defending the need to address the burgeoning public sector 
wage bill, and in particular the legislatively-mandated 
increases in teacher and medical employees\' salaries.  The 
World Bank will sponsor a two-day roundtable entitled the 
National Dialogue, on August 28-29, in an effort to forge a 
national fiscal pact that will facilitate the adoption of the 
legislation by the National Congress, when introduced next 
week.  The IMF and GOH continue intensive discussions on the 
details needed to be included in the law to lay the basis for 
an IMF agreement, and continue to have strong differences. 
The leftist Popular Block held demonstrations in Tegucigalpa 
and temporarily blockaded the major routes into the city 
August 26 to voice its membership\'s strong opposition to the 
measures.  This may prove to be the endgame for the IMF 
negotiation.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
The Needs: A Salary Law and Wage Bill Reductions 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (SBU) Improved control of the burgeoning public sector 
wage bill has now become the critical issue in Honduras\' 
troubled negotiations with the International Monetary Fund on 
a new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) program. 
Government wages rose by 140 percent in nominal terms between 
1998 and 2002, accounting for 60 percent of the growth in 
public spending in that period.  Government wages have 
reached an unsustainable level of ten percent of GDP. 
Although other issues (such as the adequacy of recent tax 
measures and implementation of financial sector reform) 
remain on the table and will need to be addressed in the 
context of a three-year PRGF program, Fund staff have made 
clear to the government that the following measures are 
minimum requirements for return of a mission and negotiation 
of the letter of intent: (1) legislation which provides the 
executive branch of government control over public sector 
wage policy, and (2) reductions in the wage bill as a percent 
of GDP of 0.5 percent in both 2004 and in 2005, which in turn 
implies a reduction of the planned wage increases for 
teachers.  The IMF had earlier been pushing for a 1.0 percent 
of GDP reduction in the wage bill in both 2004 and 2005, but 
has agreed to allow the GOH to fill the budget hole with 
additional foreign donations. 
 
3. (SBU) The IMF and GOH have agreed that negotiation of a 
fiscal pact among different sectors of society would be the 
best way to develop the elusive consensus on needed changes 
in Honduran law and policy.  The World Bank office here is 
assisting in this process by bringing in Colombian economist 
and former Finance Minister Roberto Junguigo to moderate a 
two-day roundtable entitled the National Dialogue, on August 
28-29.  Approximately 60 participants, from government, 
Congress, private sector, public sector unions and civil 
society, will participate in the roundtable.  One of the 
hoped-for outcomes of this meeting will be a commitment on 
the control of public sector salaries. 
 
4. (SBU) Because of the political controversy that has arisen 
this summer as a result of the discussion over a draft Civil 
Service law, the GOH has decided to divide the bill in two. 
The GOH now plans to introduce a shorter bill (during the 
first week of September) called the Law on Salary Equity that 
only covers the wage policy for the government employees. 
The reforms that would establish a permanent and professional 
civil service will be submitted at a later date.  To meet the 
targets of reducing the public sector wage bill as percent of 
GDP in 2004 and 2005, the GOH has proposed a law that would 
include the spreading out of planned teacher increases for 
2004 and 2005 over the four-year period of 2004-2007. 
 
5. (SBU) An IMF mission, visiting Honduras in late July, saw 
a draft of the bill and gave its blessing with one important 
exception.  The Fund staff objected to the provision stating 
that teachers will not be subject to the integrated salary 
(one salary rate, without additional built-in raises for 
years of service, teacher certification and other collateral 
allowances) until 2008; this matches the planned, new period 
for the teacher agreement.  This draft government salary bill 
has been under intensive, but private, discussion since that 
time.  The IMF resident rep. continues to express the Fund\'s 
concerns that the lack of reduction of the collateral 
allowances during the transition period will undercut the 
GOH\'s efforts to control the wage bill in the next few years 
and reduce the budget deficit to manageable levels.  This is 
going to be a politically difficult proposition; teachers are 
already striking and marching against an earlier proposed 
reform to the civil service law that has much more modest 
impact on their compensation packages. 
 
6. (SBU) The GOH, working closely with the World Bank, is 
trying to square the circle by identifying other ways to 
reach the IMF\'s fiscal goals.  They hope, for example, that 
the fiscal pact will include a two-year wage freeze for 
doctors and nurses.  They may also try to focus on quiet 
incremental changes to the two most costly collateral 
built-in salary increases in the teachers\' compensation 
statute.  For example, one idea forwarded is that the 
\"quincenio\" provision, which provides a twenty percent 
increase in salary for every five years of service, might not 
be provided to new teachers.  Another idea, that the 
\"licenciatura\", which provides a seventy percent increase for 
teachers who receive their teacher certification, be divided 
between a 20 percent increase in pay and a 50 percent 
contribution to pension funds. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Appealing for Congressional and Public Support 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
7. (SBU) Congressional leaders have made it clear, up to now, 
that any proposed reforms to medical and teacher compensation 
(implying changes to the special statutes that govern these 
public sector groups) would be dead on arrival unless there 
is a consensus from all sides on the bill, which has forced 
the government into problematic negotiations with the unions. 
 The teacher unions have refused, up to now, to reopen 
negotiations on the 2002 agreement (which by the way, were 
only accepted by the primary school teacher unions and not 
the secondary teachers, although the GOH imposed these terms 
on the secondary teachers). 
 
8. (SBU) Under heavy pressure from the international 
community for more leadership and political courage, Maduro 
and his team have started a full court (although at times 
clumsy) press to appeal for public support.  Maduro spoke to 
the nation on August 24 on the need to control the public 
sector wages of certain privileged groups for the sake of 
economic reactivation. 
 
9. (SBU) Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza, Central 
Bank President Maria Elena Mondragon, and Finance Minister 
Arturo Alvarado spoke the next evening providing the 
technical arguments for the need to control the wage bill. 
The three focused on the fact that these privileged groups 
are receiving large annual increases while others have had 
their wages frozen, and all at the expense of provision of 
public services and spending on poverty reduction.  Although 
they did acknowledge that wage policy control was vital to 
reaching an agreement with the IMF, the GOH team has tried to 
make it clear that the underlying issue is the unsustainable 
budget deficits. 
 
10. (SBU) The politics of this legislation has been 
complicated all along, and has been a clear example of 
Maduro\'s weak political position and limited political skills 
of his technocratic administration.  Maduro is the first 
democratically elected president whose party has not had a 
majority in the National Congress, making his administration 
dependent on support from small parties.  The Christian 
Democrats left a formal coalition in July (citing, among 
other reasons, the GOH\'s lack of openness about the IMF 
negotiations and the civil service law deliberations).  The 
GOH now needs to pick up votes from the opposition Liberal 
Party and try to keep members of Maduro\'s own Nationalist 
party, from straying.  Politically, neither side can afford 
to be seen as catering to the demands of the IMF over the 
interests of Honduran workers.  On the other hand, none of 
the political parties can afford the economic mess that will 
result if an agreement with the Fund is not reached (and the 
structural deficits are not addressed).  As political leaders 
around the country are weighing their chances of gaining a 
Presidential nomination, these calculations become difficult. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Popular Block and Teachers Take to the Street 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU)  Teacher\'s union and other opponents of any change 
in the civil service law that would negatively affect their 
pay and benefits have denounced the proposed changes as 
\"fascist\", despite the fact that no one has yet seen a draft 
bill detailing the proposed changes.  The fact that the IMF 
is pressing for such changes makes it easier for reform 
opponents to protest proposed changes as, in their view, 
globalist, neoliberal economics being imposed via the GOH to 
the detriment of Honduran sovereignty and the Honduran 
people. 
 
12. (U) The leftist Popular Block, a loosely knit umbrella 
organization that encompasses many public sector unions, 
leftist NGOs, and other groups, led a series of significant 
protests in and around Tegucigalpa August 26 demonstrating 
against the proposed civil service law, a new water law, as 
well as the usual anti-globalization targets such as CAFTA. 
Protesters initially blocked the four major roads in and out 
of Tegucigalpa, the roads to Choluteca, Danli, Olancho, and 
San Pedro Sula and the North Coast.  The demonstrators, while 
peaceful, were armed with rocks, sticks, ropes, boards with 
nails, and gasoline, and caused huge traffic problems in and 
out of the city.  Protesters then marched to the center of 
Tegucigalpa for demonstrations in front of Congress. 
Although peaceful when witnessed by PolOffs, some protesters 
later became violent, throwing rocks and Molotov cocktails at 
congressional buildings and confronting the police.  Post 
believes it is likely that the Popular Block will organize 
more such demonstrations if Congress takes up a wage bill. 
 
------------------------- 
Comment: Why the Urgency? 
------------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) The negotiations with the GOH have been dragging on 
since Maduro took office in January 2002.  The last 19 months 
have been marked by a series of austerity and tax measures 
that have been controversial and politically costly, but in 
fact have had only moderate impact on the government\'s budget 
woes.  In addition, there have been some key junctures in 
which the Fund\'s position was ignored (i.e. the unsustainable 
cost of the 2002 agreement with the teachers) or 
misunderstood (i.e. the Agricultural Finance law).  The 
Congress, during this period, has continued to water down 
fiscal package legislation and try to slip in new budget 
busting measures without care.  The IMF mission has thus 
become increasingly skeptical about GOH commitments.  The 
GOH, after getting two fiscal packages through in two years 
and cutting discretionary spending to the bone, feels 
strongly that the IMF has been unfair and unrealistic about 
political realities.  One could make the argument that the 
latest burp in the negotiations is just more of the same. 
 
14. (SBU) However, there are two new changes in the 
environment that justify the argument that it is now or never 
for a Honduran IMF agreement.  First, the GOH has now 
basically exhausted the USD 170 million dollars previously 
held by Hondutel (the Honduran state-owned telephone 
company).  These funds have been used to fund budget deficits 
and cash requirements for state takeovers of failed banks 
last year.  From now on, budget deficits are going to need to 
be covered by foreign donations and concessional loans from 
international financial institutions.  Many of these sources 
of funds are tied to having an IMF agreement.  At the same 
time, deferrals on foreign official debt are starting to 
expire, which will increase the demands on the Honduran 
treasury.  The USG, for example, has notified the GOH of a 
series of overdue payments on old DOD debt that must be paid 
in order to avoid Brooke amendment sanctions.  July and 
September payments have now been received, but more payments 
are due in October, and throughout 2004. 
15. (SBU) If the GOH is not able to reach agreement with the 
IMF quickly, President Maduro may be tempted to begin 
printing money to cover expenses or to forego the foreign 
debt payments and let the Brooke sanctions take effect. 
Maduro badly needs to move beyond this issue in order to 
begin spending time and money on the strengthening of public 
security, education and health programs, and delivering on 
his campaign promises of poverty reduction and economic 
growth. 
 
16. (SBU) It is beginning to look likely that the GOH will 
submit to Congress a government salary bill that does not 
fully meet IMF requirements, partially with World Bank 
blessing.  If that is the case, and the Congress adopts the 
legislation (itself a big if), the Fund staff will have a big 
decision to make on whether a half glass is better than none 
at all.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"10386","8/28/2003 19:08","03TEGUCIGALPA2042","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 TEGUCIGALPA 002042 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
LABOR FOR ILAB, ROBERT WHOLEY 
STATE PASS TO USAID, USTR, EXIM, AND OPIC, 
STATE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, ETRD, ELAB, EAID, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras: 2002 Preliminary Macroeconomic Update 
 
 
-------- 
CONTENTS 
-------- 
 
1-7. MACROECONOMIC OVERVIEW 
 
8. ECONOMIC ACTIVITY 
 
9. PRICES AND WAGES 
 
10-12. EMPLOYMENT 
 
13-15. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
 
16. EXPORTS (PRINCIPAL EXPORTS INCLUDING MAQUILA) 
 
17. IMPORTS 
 
18. FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT 
 
19-21. INTEREST RATES 
 
22. NET DOMESTIC CREDIT 
 
23. MONEY SUPPLY 
 
24. EXCHANGE RATE 
 
25-28. PUBLIC SECTOR FINANCES 
 
29-30. EXTERNAL DEBT 
 
31. TOURISM 
 
---------------------- 
MACROECONOMIC OVERVIEW 
---------------------- 
 
1. The Honduran economy grew at a rate of 2.5 percent in 
2002, similar to its 2.6 percent growth rate in 2001. Since 
the population growth rate is approximately 2.6 percent, 
Honduras has enjoyed essentially zero real per capita 
economic growth over the last two years.  Major factors 
influencing the Honduran economic performance were the slow 
international (especially the U.S.) economy, the continuing 
coffee crisis, and low international prices for other export 
products. 
 
2. According to the Consumer Price Index, the inflation rate 
in 2002 was 8.1 percent, similar to the inflation rate for 
the last two years and compatible with the GOH\'s goal of 
maintaining the inflation rate at a stable and acceptable 
level.  The Central Bank continued to depreciate the nominal 
exchange rate of the lempira by 6 percent against the dollar 
in 2002, in order to maintain purchasing power parity with 
the United States.  Interest rates fell by a percentage 
point during the year.  The minimum wage increased by 12 
percent for workers in small agriculture, but approximately 
nine percent for most other workers, more than compensating 
for the rate of inflation. 
 
3. Net international reserves reached USD 130.5 at the end 
of 2002, USD 10 million higher than expected. This level was 
equivalent to 3.8 months of imports. 
 
4. Monetary policy was oriented to maintenance of a stable 
exchange rate and to maintain a normal functioning of the 
payment system.  Open market operations were the principal 
instruments used.  The Central Bank uses an auction system 
to regulate the allocation of foreign exchange. 
 
5. There was a positive flow of net transfers during the 
year, due to an increase in family remittances, but the 
current account showed a deficit of USD 243 million.  The 
commercial deficit in 2002 reached USD 1.4 billion.  There 
was also a decrease in direct investment and net long-term 
loans to the official sector that decreased the balance of 
the capital account as well. 
 
6. During 2002, the balance of the public external debt was 
USD 4.4 billion, 5.7 percent higher than the amount owed at 
the end of 2001.  The GOH continues its policy of taking on 
only foreign concessional loans for projects of high 
priority. 
 
7. After adopting a series of austerity and tax measures, 
the GOH closed 2002 with a central government fiscal deficit 
of Lps. 5.7 billion (USD 345 million) which represents 5.2 
percent of the GDP, down from the six percent registered in 
2001.  The financing of this deficit came mostly from 
foreign loans. 
 
Source: Technical Unit, Ministry of the Presidency, and BCH, 
data published July 2003. 
----------------- 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY 
----------------- 
8. According to GOH data, economic growth in 2002 was 2.5 
percent, slightly less than the rate of 2.6 percent observed 
in 2001.  Honduras\' growth was the highest of the Central 
American countries, except for Costa Rica.  The increase in 
agricultural activity was 4.8 percent due to an increase in 
corn production (22 percent), rice (21.2 percent), and beans 
(43.8 percent).  The production of banana and sugar cane 
declined due to labor conflicts in one of the most important 
banana producing companies and bad weather conditions that 
affected sugar production in the south-central part of the 
country. 
 
GDP REAL GROWTH RATE 
-------------------- 
          (Percent) 
 
1997         5.1 
1998         2.9 
1999        -1.9 
2000         5.2 
2001         2.6 
2002         2.5 
 
GDP BY ECONOMIC ACTIVITY: 
PERCENTAGE INCREASE OVER PREVIOUS YEAR 
--------------------------------------- 
 
ACTIVITY 
                         2000            2001     2002 
 
Agriculture              11.7           -0.5       4.8 
Mining                    1.7           -0.8       5.0 
Manufacturing Industry    5.5            5.2       2.8 
Construction              1.5           -5.2     -14.6 
Electric,Water,Gas       10.6           -1.8       5.6 
Transp.,Storage,Commun.   5.0            5.3       3.2 
Trade,Restaurants,Hotels  3.7            3.0       2.8 
Financial Institutions    2.3            3.1       2.2 
Housing                   3.1            3.9       3.9 
Public Admin. Defense    19.8            8.7       7.2 
Community Services        5.1           12.6       7.2 
 
Source: BCH, July 18, 2003. 
 
---------------- 
PRICES AND WAGES 
---------------- 
 
9. The end of period Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose by 8.1 
percent growth during 2002, slightly lower than the 8.8 
percent growth registered in 2001, continuing the declining 
trend of the past four years.  This result was in part 
obtained by the stability of the real exchange rate, the 
application of prudent monetary policy, an increased 
domestic supplies of basic grains due to increases in 
national production, helping to moderate food prices.  There 
were also informal price controls for part of the year. 
Increases in gasoline prices and public transportation 
offset the favorable effect of the food index. 
 
MONTHLY CPI FOR 2001 AND 2002 
----------------------------- 
 
     END OF      PCT CHANGE         END OF    PCT CHANGE 
2001 PERIOD      SAME MONTH   2002  PERIOD    SAME MONTH 
                 YEAR EARLIER                 YEAR EARLIER 
 
JAN  111.1       10.5        JAN   120.2           8.2 
FEB  112.5       10.3        FEB   121.5           8.0 
MAR  113.5       10.2        MAR   122.2           7.7 
APR  114.2        9.5        APR   123.1           7.8 
MAY  115.6        9.8        MAY   123.7           7.0 
JUN  116.3        9.4        JUN   125.1           7.6 
JUL  116.9        9.3        JUL   126.1           7.9 
AUG  117.7        9.5        AUG   126.9           7.8 
SEP  118.6       10.1        SEP   127.1           7.2 
OCT  118.8        9.7        OCT   127.8           7.6 
NOV  119.4        9.0        NOV   128.6           7.7 
DEC  119.8        8.8        DEC   129.5           8.1 
 
Source: BCH, data published July, 2003. 
 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX  (CPI) 
--------------------------- 
(December 1999=100) 
 
                    PCT 
        AVERAGE     CHANGE 
1997      77.9      20.2 
1998      90.1      13.7 
1999     100.0      11.6 
2000     110.1      11.1 
2001     119.8       9.6 
2002     129.8       7.7 
2003*    132.8       8.3 
 
*Figures for 2003 are annualized to June 
Source: BCH, data published July, 2003. 
 
---------- 
EMPLOYMENT 
---------- 
 
10. Employment data is collected once per year by the 
National Institute of Statistics (INE) through a survey 
conducted each September.  The labor market was closely 
linked with the economic activity of the country, which can 
be observed in the stagnant behavior of the labor market. 
Employment rose by only 2.3 percent, mostly representing new 
labor joining the informal side of the market.  There was 
also a 2.7 percent increase in the economically active 
population in September 2002 with respect to the same month 
in 2001.  Even though there was a decrease observed in open 
unemployment, the increase of almost 3 percentage points of 
underemployment is significant.  It demonstrates that the 
majority of the emerging labor force is entering the 
informal part of the economy. 
 
11. The employment level in the textile industry showed a 
decrease for the second straight year.  According to the 
Maquila Association, in 2002 this industry had a total of 
107,398 direct jobs, which means that 2,685 jobs were lost 
with respect to 2001 (2.4 percent) as a result of the 
closing of 13 companies. 
 
EMPLOYENT INDICATORS 
-------------------- 
 
                    September 2001         September 2002 
                    Urb. Rural  Total      Urb. Rural Total 
 
Economically Active Population (Millions) 
                    1.1   1.2    2.3       1.2   1.2   2.4 
 
Working Pop. (Millions) 
                    1.1   1.2    2.3       1.1   1.2   2.3 
 
Open Unemployment (%) 
                    5.5   2.4    3.9       5.9   1.8   3.8 
 
Visible Sub-employment (%) 
                    4.1   6.8    5.5       5.0   4.7   4.8 
 
Invisible Sub-employment (%) 
                   14.6  33.0   24.0      13.3  37.1  26.6 
 
Economic Active Population with employment problems 
                   24.2  42.2   33.4      24.2  43.6  35.2 
 
UNEMPLOYMENT  (PERCENT OF LABOR FORCE) 
-------------------------------------- 
 
YEAR           PERCENT 
 
1997 Sep.      4.3 
1998 Sep.      3.0 
1999 Sep.      3.3 
2000           N/A 
2001 Sep.      3.9 
2002 Sep.      3.8 
 
Source: National Institute of Statistics, September 2002 
Survey. 
 
12. The latest revision of the minimum wage (an increase of 
12 percent for workers in small agriculture and 
approximately nine percent for most other workers) was 
implemented in spring 2003.  New negotiations will start in 
November of this year for the 2004 increase. 
 
------------------- 
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
------------------- 
 
13. Net international reserves increased by USD 214.0 
million in 2002 to reach USD 1.85 billion, as a result of 
the positive balance in the long-term capital account of the 
private sector and also due to large transfers, especially 
in net family remittances, which increased 32.1 percent 
compared to 2001. 
14. The balance of the capital account was USD 187.8 million 
that represents a reduction of 18.6 percent from 2001 caused 
mainly by a reduction in direct investment and also long- 
term loans to the official sector. 
 
15. The current account deficit in 2002 was USD 243.0 
million, equivalent to 3.7 percent of GDP.  The current 
account balance was a result of various factors: a reduction 
of 0.6 percent in imports, and the increase of 3.0 percent 
in overseas net transfers product of a bigger flow in family 
remittances that rose from USD 533.0 in 2001 to USD 704.3 
million in 2002. 
 
CONDENSED BALANCE OF PAYMENTS (USD MILLIONS) 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
                         2000         2001           2002 
 
TRADE BALANCE          -992.5      -1,222.6       -1,200.0 
TRANSFERS               746.9         929.2          957.0 
CURRENT ACCOUNT        -245.6        -293.4         -243.0 
CAPITAL ACCOUNT          68.4         230.7          187.8 
ERRORS AND OMISSIONS    123.5          62.4          118.7 
GLOBAL BALANCE          -53.7          -0.3           63.5 
INTERNATIONAL RESERVES 
(DECREASE +,INCREASE -)-118.8        -147.3         -214.0 
 
Source: BCH.  Data published July 2003. 
 
------- 
EXPORTS 
------- 
 
16. Honduras\' export value in 2002 was USD 1.37 billion, 
down by 1.5 percent from 2001.  This decrease was due mainly 
to lower exports of banana, shrimp, soaps and detergents 
because of big price declines.  In 2002, Honduras exported 
USD 665.2 million to the U.S., an amount equivalent to 48.5 
percent of total exports. 
 
EXPORTS (FOB, IN USD MILLIONS) 
--------------------------------- 
 
                         TO             PCT OF 
           TOTAL         U.S.           TOTAL 
 
1995      1,220.2        608.2          49.8 
1996      1,316.0        612.4          46.5 
1997      1,445.7        666.2          46.0 
1998      1,549.9        686.0          44.2 
1999      1,164.4        572.4          49.1 
2000      1,436.0        604.2          45.4 
2001      1,391.0        607.6          45.3 
2002      1,370.7        665.2          48.5 
 
Source: BCH.  Data published  July 2003. 
Note: Figures do not include exports of apparel and other 
manufactures in the maquila sector. 
 
BANANA EXPORTS 
-------------- 
 
YEAR       REVENUE          VOLUME          AVG. UNIT PRICE 
          (USD MILLIONS)    40 LBS BOX     (USD) 
 
1998      219.6             28,234                7.78 
1999       38.1              6,750                5.64 
2000      124.2             20,686                6.01 
2001      204.2             25,487                8.01 
2002      172.4             23,453                7.35 
COFFEE EXPORTS 
-------------- 
 
YEAR REVENUE   VOLUME     PRICE    VOLUME        PRICE 
    (USD MILL) 60KG BAGS  (USD)    46KG BAGS     (USD) 
1998 429.8     2,330     184.49    3,039         141.44 
1999 256.1     1,986     128.92    2,591          98.84 
2000 339.4     2,903     116.90    3,787          89.63 
2001 160.7     2,391      67.20    3,119          51.52 
2002 182.5     2,711      67.32    3,536          51.61 
OTHER IMPORTANT EXPORTS 
----------------------- 
 
WOOD 
---- 
YEAR      REVENUE   VOLUME         PRICE 
         (USD MILL)  (FT)          (USD) 
 
1998      17.1      25,540         0.67 
1999      27.5      38,168         0.72 
2000      33.5      44,179         0.76 
2001      33.9      44,026         0.77 
2002      33.7      43,205         0.78 
 
GOLD 
---- 
 
YEAR      REVENUE   VOLUME     PRICE 
         (USD MILL) (OZ.T)     (USD) 
 
1998      0.0       0.0        0.0 
1999      0.0       0.0        0.0 
2000      6.3       24       260.32 
2001     63.8       244      261.68 
2002     80.5       265      303.89 
 
SILVER 
------- 
 
YEAR      REVENUE   VOLUME    PRICE 
         (USD MILL) (OZ. T)   (USD) 
 
1998      7.8       1,525     5.14 
1999      5.4       1,085     4.94 
2000      8.3       1,733     4.77 
2001      7.9       1,846     4.26 
2002      5.1       1,165     4.39 
 
ZINC 
---- 
 
YEAR    REVENUE     VOLUME    PRICE 
       (USD MILL)   (LBS)     (USD) 
 
1998      36.3      85,659    0.42 
1999      50.2      94,786    0.53 
2000      54.5      97,396    0.56 
2001      38.5     101,334    0.38 
2002      29.0      93,556    0.31 
 
SUGAR 
----- 
 
YEAR      REVENUE   VOLUME    PRICE 
         (USD MILL) (KILOS)   (USD) 
 
1998      10.2      21,033    0.48 
1999       5.3      10,509    0.50 
2000       7.8      25,499    0.31 
 
2001      30.4     160,083    0.19 
2002      17.5      97,066    0.18 
 
Source: BCH.  Data published July 2003. 
 
MAQUILA EXPORTS (USD MILLIONS) 
------------------------------ 
 
           VALUE         PERC. 
                         GROWTH 
 
1999      2,158.30         - 
2000      2,361.80       9.43 
2001      2,343.60      -0.77 
2002      2,439.40       4.09 
2003*       994.60      10.73 
* (Figures for 2003 are up to May) 
Source: Honduran Maquila Association 
 
-------- 
IMPORTS 
-------- 
 
17. In 2002 the value of imports FOB totaled USD 2.8 
billion, a decrease of 0.1 percent over 2001.  In 2002, 
Honduras imported USD 1.2 billion from the U.S. equivalent 
to 40.7 percent of total imports. 
IMPORTS (CIF, in USD MILLIONS) 
------------------------------ 
 
                         FROM      PCT OF 
      TOTAL              U.S       TOTAL 
 
1995  1,642.7            705.2      42.9 
1996  1,840.0            857.6      46.6 
1997  2,148.6          1,033.0      48.0 
1998  2,534.8          1,177.3      46.4 
1999  2,676.1          1,182.7      44.1 
2000  2,854.6          1,220.2      42.7 
2001  2,983.9          1,281.7      42.9 
2002  2,976.3          1,213.1      40.7 
 
Note: Figures do not include imported goods for the maquila 
sector. 
 
------------------------- 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT 
------------------------- 
 
18.  According to Central Bank data, FDI flows in Honduras 
in 2002 totaled USD 143 million.  The U.S. continues to be 
the dominant source of FDI in Honduras with investment in 
2002 reaching an estimated USD 54,500.0 million, or 38.1 
percent of total FDI in Honduras.  These totals do not 
include the accumulated investments in the maquila industry, 
which is considerable. 
 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT BY COUNTRY OF ORIGEN 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
(US THOUSANDS) 
 
                1999        2000       2001        2002 
 
United States 113,855.1   64,240.6   52,600.0    54,500.0 
El Salvador    13,907.7    7,878.8    9,240.0    11,798.0 
Guatemala       3,354.5   11,084.8   10,847.0     6,046.0 
Costa Rica      6,442.5   21,186.6   24,106.6     9,831.5 
Panama         19,474.8   15,099.7   18,088.0     8,795.0 
Mexico          4,612.9     -138.8      207.0       223.0 
Spain           5,884.3    7,784.5    9,784.5     5,390.0 
United Kingdom  2,567.4   14,956.7    4,289.0     4,790.0 
Switzerland     6,948.1   -4,050.9   -1,250.0       543.0 
Italy          -3,606.0   13,624.8    7,624.0     6,175.0 
Germany           156.7      218.6      188.6       219.0 
Japan             124.0        0.0    1,150.6     1,188.2 
Canada         55,099.6   36,057.9   15,057.0    18,115.0 
Other Countries 8,515.6   94,056.3   43,068.9    15,246.9 
 
Total         237,337.2  281,999.6  195,001.2   142,860.6 
 
ACCUMULATED INVESTMENT IN TEXTILE INDUSTRY 2001 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
(Information for 2002 is not available yet) 
 
                    AMOUNT         PCT OF 
                   (USD MILLIONS)  TOTAL 
 
Honduras            670.1          47.1 
U.S                 370.2          26.0 
Korea               145.5          10.2 
Hong Kong            43.8           3.1 
Taiwn               55.2           3.9 
China                33.8           2.5 
Singapore            18.8           1.3 
Canada               49.2           3.5 
Colombia              2.0            .1 
Barbados               .1           0.0 
Co-investment        32.9           2.3 
-------------       ------       ------                Total 
1,421.6         100.0 
 
Source: BCH.  Data published July 2003. 
 
-------------- 
INTEREST RATES 
-------------- 
 
19. In 2002, nominal interest rates declined slightly, due 
in part to the Central Bank\'s monetary policy, which 
included the elimination of the obligatory investment 
requirement to the financial system, providing more 
liquidity and resources for the productive sector. 
 
20. In December 2002, the average nominal interest rate in 
local currency for new loans was 20.9 percent and for long 
term deposits was 12 percent, which represents a reduction 
of 1.3 and 2.1 percentage points respectively compared to 
the end of 2001 averages. 
 
21. The average nominal interest rates on new operations in 
foreign currency  - loans and deposits at the end of 2002  - 
- were 9.4 percent and 2.6 percent respectively which means 
a reduction of 2.5 and 2.1 percentage points compared to the 
end of 2001 averages.  This decrease is directly related to 
the continued reduction of interest rates internationally. 
 
ANNUAL INTEREST RATES -FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
--------------------------------------- 
(Weighted averages, local currency) 
 
YEAR          LENDING        DEPOSIT 
 
1998           30.80          16.00 
1999           29.53          15.04 
2000           24.67          12.23 
2001           23.23          11.76 
 
2002 
JAN            23.20          11.44 
FEB            23.16          11.36 
MAR            23.18          11.35 
APR            23.18          11.13 
MAY            23.02          11.13 
JUN            23.05          11.03 
JUL            22.90          10.52 
AUG            22.74          10.15 
SEP            22.54          10.02 
OCT            22.21           9.86 
NOV            22.22           9.78 
DEC            22.11           9.57 
 
Source: BCH.  Data Published July 2003. 
 
------------------- 
NET DOMESTIC CREDIT 
------------------- 
 
22. Domestic credit flows of the financial system (private 
and public sectors), increased by seven percent with respect 
to 2001, closing at Lps. 31.4 billion (USD 1.85 billion). 
Credit to the public sector declined by 10 percent, while 
loans for the private sector grew by eight percent. In 2002, 
the majority of loans from banks to the private sector were 
for real estate investments (23 percent), followed by 
manufacturing industry (15 percent), domestic trade and 
consumption (13 percent), and agriculture and services (10 
percent). 
 
NET INTERNAL CREDIT (MILLIONS OF LEMPIRAS) 
----------------------------------------- 
 
              2000        2001      2002    PERC.    PERC. 
                                            CHANGE   CHANGE 
                                           2001  2002 
INT.CREDIT    25,025.9   29,412.2  31,422.6  18.0   7.0 
PUBLIC SEC.   11,358.4  -11,395.3 -12,499.8   0.0 -10.0 
PRIVATE SEC.  36,384.3   40,807.4  43,922.4  12.0   8.0 
 
------------ 
MONEY SUPPLY 
------------ 
 
23. Money supply growth in 2002 was 11.3 percent, 1.6 
percent less than December of 2001.  Local currency 
deposits, foreign currency deposits and circulating 
currency, increased by 11.9 percent, 11.3 percent and 7.2 
percent respectively. 
 
MONETARY AND CREDIT INDICATORS 
--------------------------------------- 
(PERCENTAGE GROWTH, DEC. OF EACH YEAR) 
 
                         2000           2001          2002 
 
DOMESTIC CREDIT          21.8           15.8           5.1 
    PRIVATE SECTOR       12.2           10.7           6.1 
     LOCAL CURRENCY      14.7           13.4           6.8 
     FOREIGN CURRENCY     5.4            2.9           4.0 
    PUBLIC SECTOR         4.6            0.6          -8.8 
     CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  20.6           35.6           5.7 
     REST OF PUBLIC SEC.-21.3          -36.7         -16.1 
 
MONEY SUPPLY             17.1           12.9          11.3 
    IN LOCAL CURRENCY    16.6            8.3          11.3 
       CURRENCY           0.4            9.3           7.2 
       DEPOSITS          19.7            8.1          11.9 
    IN FOREIGN CURRENCY  18.6           26.3          11.3 
 
 MONETARY INDICATORS 
----------------------------------------- 
(MILLIONS OF LEMPIRAS, DEC. OF EACH YEAR) 
 
                                           PCT CHG  PCT CHG 
               2000      2001      2002      2001     2002 
 
MONEY (M1)   10,942.9   11,514.8  13,191.6    5.0     15.0 
MONEY (M2)   33,482.0   36,314.1  40,444.9    8.0     11.0 
MONEY (M3)   43,924.5   50,115.3  56,733.0   14.0     13.0 
 
-------------- 
EXCHANGE RATE 
-------------- 
 
24. The annual depreciation of the Lempira with respect to 
the dollar in 2002 was 6.3 percent, changing from Lps. 
15.9197 to the dollar at the end of 2001 to Lps. 16.9233 to 
the dollar at the end of 2002. 
 
ANNUAL AND MONTHLY EXCHANGE RATES 
(BANK SELL RATE, LEMPIRAS/USD) 
---------------------------------- 
 
               END OF    YEAR           ANNUAL 
               PERIOD    AVERAGE        DEVALUATION 
                                       (PERCENT) 
 
1998           13.92     13.54          5.4 
1999           14.66     14.35          5.0 
2000           15.31     15.01          4.39 
2001           16.05     15.65          5.14 
2002           16.92     16.47          6.30 
 
---------------------- 
PUBLIC SECTOR FINANCES 
---------------------- 
 
25. The Central Government fiscal deficit at the end of 2002 
was Lps. 5.849 billion (USD 345.7 million), equivalent to 
5.4 percent of GDP, lower than the 6 percent observed in 
2001. 
 
26. The 2002 central government deficit was mainly financed 
through domestic financing (66.2 percent of total) compared 
to foreign financing  (33.8 percent).  Regarding domestic 
financing, it is important to point out that most of the 
resources were obtained through transfers from Hondutel (the 
State-owned telephone company) of Lps. 2.485 billion (USD 
146.8 million) equivalent to almost 60 percent of the 
required resources.  This source of funds is now basically 
exhausted. 
 
27. During 2002, tax collection increased to Lps. 17.3 
billion (USD 1.021 billion) equivalent to 16.0 percent of 
GDP, slightly lower than the 16.2 percent reached in 2001. 
Tax income increased by 7.4 percent (in nominal terms) with 
respect to 2001, compared to a 10.0 percent increase in 
2000.  The decrease in tax income occurred primarily in the 
first semester of 2002 and was largely counterbalanced in 
the second semester as a result of the administrative 
measurements adopted by the application of the new law of 
Financial Equilibrium approved by Congress in May 2002. Part 
of the declines in the first semester were attributed to 
falling income from oil taxes due to oil prices and part 
from scheduled declines in some import duties as a result of 
trade and regional integration agreements. 
28. Total expenditures of the Central Government were Lps. 
26.773 billion (USD 1.6 billion) which were 4 percent higher 
than to 2001, due to the increase of 10.7 percent in current 
expenditures and a reduction of 12.6 percent in capital 
expenditures.  The increase in current expenditures was due 
to a 16.7 percent increase in salaries (primarily teachers). 
There was a decrease of 4.7 percent in goods and services 
expenditures as a result of the measures taken by the 
government to control public sector expenditures, and a law 
approved by Congress in May 2002 to control expenditures. 
 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL ACCOUNT 
------------------------------------ 
(MILLIONS OF LEMPIRAS) 
 
                    2000           2001            2002* 
 
TOTAL INCOME        16,753.0       19,752.0       20,924.1 
  CURRENT INCOME    15,861.5       17,981.6       19,785.8 
   TAX INCOME       14,620.3       16,083.1       17,278.2 
 
CURRENT EXPENDIT.   15,559.0       18,390.4       20,355.7 
   EXPENDITURES     12,687.3       14,830.3       16,282.4 
   SALARIES          7,943.0        9,966.0       11,628.1 
   NET INTERESTS     2,306.4        2,128.9        2,046.9 
 
SAVINGS                302.5         -408.8         -569.9 
 
NET TOTAL EXPENDIT. 21,769.2       25,734.8       26,773.6 
 
SAVINGS (+), DEFICIT (-) 
                    -5,016.2       -5,982.8       -5,849.5 
 
FINANCING            5,016.2        5,982.8        5,849.5 
  NET FOREIGN FINANCE 
                     2,296.9        3,394.5        1,978.6 
  NET DOMESTIC FINANCE 
                     2,719.3        2,588.3        3,870.9 
 
(*Preliminary figures) 
Source: Ministry of Finance 
Exchange rate Dec. 2002 Lps. 16.92 to USD 1.00 
 
------------- 
FOREIGN DEBT 
------------- 
 
29. Honduras\'s foreign debt, which is held by the official 
sector, Central Bank and private sector (financial and non- 
financial) in the year 2002, was USD 4.963 billion, up 3.2 
percent (USD 155.7 million) from 2001; mainly due to the 
U.S. dollar devaluation with respect to other currencies 
that are the components of the baskets of the international 
lending institutions, since net flows (reimbursements minus 
capital payments) increased only by USD 10.2 million.  The 
relation of the total debt to the GDP in 2002 was 75.6 
percent, very similar to 75.1 percent in 2001. 
 
30. Foreign debt service in 2002 was USD 583.5 million, USD 
466.0 million of capital and USD 117.5 million in interest. 
In 2002, under the HIPC initiative, Honduras was scheduled 
to receive total debt relief of USD 48.8 million.  Of this 
relief, USD 35.5 million are resources to be used for the 
financing of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. Honduras has 
not yet reached the HIPC completion point. 
 
HONDURAN FOREIGN DEBT (IN USD MILLIONS) 
---------------------------------------- 
 
TYPE OF CREDITOR    PERC.     2000        2001      2002 
 
MULTILATERAL        63.7     3,069.4     3,118.3   3,162.2 
 
 
BILATERAL           30.0     1,357.1     1,414.6   1,487.5 
 
COMERCIAL            6.3       279.5       275.1     314.0 
 
TOTAL              100.0     4,706.0     4,808.0   4,963.7 
 
TOURISM 
31. Tourism is one of the priority sectors for the GOH, 
which hopes it will generate a substantial number of jobs 
and economic growth.  The three project goals are the 
Caribbean Creation, a Mayan Route and Nature Adventure. 
Each of these projects contain several smaller clusters of 
projects.  The Caribbean Creation involves encouraging 
tourism development in the Bay Islands and the northern 
coast of Honduras, focusing on beaches and reefs.  The goal 
is to increase to one million tourists and USD 500 million 
income in foreign exchange.  The second project is a 
complete Mayan Route from Copan to other archeological sites 
and will involve visitors from cruise ships flying to Copan. 
The third project is marketing and developing eco-tourism on 
the north shore, national parks and in the Copan Ruins area. 
 
           TOTAL VISITORS     FOREIGN        FOREIGN 
          (THOUSANDS)         EXCHANGE       EXCHANGE 
                              INCOME         OUTFLOW 
                             (USD MILLION)  (USD MILLION) 
 
1999      428.1               195.0               94.0 
2000      688.4               259.8              106.7 
2001      672.0               274.6              156.6 
2002      788.1               341.5               N/A 
 
Source: Ministry of Tourism. 
 
PALMER 
"
"10404","8/29/2003 17:46","03TEGUCIGALPA2052","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1615","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, INR/AN/IAA, DRL/PHD, EB, AND L 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/28/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, PREL, PINR, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN ATTORNEY GENERAL PLEDGES ENHANCED 
COOPERATION AND FOLLOW THROUGH ON KEY NARCOTICS/CORRUPTION 
CASES 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1615 
 
Classified By: Political Section Chief Francisco L. Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  Ambassador told Honduran Attorney General 
(AG) Roy Medina August 26 that he was satisfied that the AG 
had taken action to improve the Public Ministry\'s operations 
since their last meeting in late June.  However, he pressed 
AG Medina on the importance of the Ministry bringing to trial 
and winning convictions in some pending high-profile cases. 
He told the AG that it is essential that the Ministry make 
progress in these areas in order to maintain a productive 
relationship with the U.S.  While this meeting cleared the 
air and let the AG know that follow through is absolutely 
necessary, the sad reality is that the AG may well continue 
to do the bare minimum to meet our concerns while seeking to 
run out the clock on his term of office without offending any 
of the large organized crime, drug trafficking, and corrupt 
interests in the country.  This is indicative of the current 
state of affairs in one of the critical institutions of the 
Honduran judicial system.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C)  Ambassador and Deputy Chief of Mission met with 
Honduran Attorney General Medina over lunch at the 
Ambassador\'s residence August 26 to discuss the Embassy\'s 
continuing concern about the poor performance of the Public 
Ministry (PM) in combating organized crime, narcotics 
trafficking, corruption and money laundering and the status 
of U.S. cooperation with the PM.  The Ambassador told Medina 
that he was satisfied that the AG had taken action to improve 
the Ministry\'s operations since their last meeting in late 
June (see reftel).  He gave Medina credit for launching a 
serious effort to improve the operation of the Ministry\'s 
Organized Crime Unit (OCU).  The Ambassador specifically 
cited the removal of the OCU Chief, Mario Chinchilla, and his 
deputy, Rafael Soto, as important first steps, noting that 
the Embassy had lost confidence in them as effective law 
enforcement interlocutors. 
 
3. (C)  The Ambassador pointed out that the OCU needed to 
bring to trial and win convictions in some high-profile cases 
in order to establish much needed credibility.  The 
Ambassador cited recent cases involving Honduran congressmen 
who had been implicated in narcotics cases, including the 
case of Avila Panchame.  AG Medina agreed that the OCU needed 
to improve its record but cautioned that the case against 
Avila Panchame was still a problem.  He pointed out that no 
drugs had yet been found from the plane crash and tests for 
the presence of drugs in the vehicles had been negative.  He 
also mentioned that the PM would be pursuing its corruption 
case against former Commander in Chief of the Honduran 
military Hung Pacheco and cases against prominent Hondurans 
involved in bank failures. 
 
4. (C)  The Ambassador then outlined several key law 
enforcement issues that remain a concern for U.S. policy 
goals and assistance objectives with the Public Ministry.  He 
underscored the importance of establishing a strong working 
relationship the PM\'s Fight Against Drugs Directorate (DLCN) 
and its new director, General Julian Gonzalez Irias (ret.), 
specifically warning Medina the Embassy would not have much 
patience for an obstructionist in the position.  He told 
Medina the planned transfer of the INL-funded canine and boat 
projects from the DLCN to the Ministry of Public Security\'s 
Frontier Police was designed to better align those projects 
with the GOH entities that were best able to support them 
operationally and budgetarily.  He also raised our concern 
about the PM\'s staffing of the Financial Investigative Unit 
(FIU) and the need for a more aggressive asset forfeiture 
effort.  He told Medina there were at least USD 840,000 in 
cash and over a million dollars in captured aircraft, boats, 
and property that could be used by the GOH in the 
counternarcotics program.  The Ambassador also mentioned the 
different pending drug trafficking cases that the Embassy is 
tracking.  He told AG Medina that it is essential that the PM 
make progress in these areas in order to maintain a 
productive relationship with the U.S., stressing that the 
U.S. wanted to work together with the PM. 
 
5. (C)  AG Roy Medina responded that he was committed to 
attacking these pending drug trafficking cases and that he 
shared the Embassy\'s goals and objectives.  He said his 
Ministry wanted to work closely with the Embassy and asked 
that a single Embassy point of contact be designated as the 
PM liaison in order to get the PM\'s side of the story 
whenever a law enforcement or prosecutorial action was being 
questioned.  He confessed that it has been difficult to 
obtain fully satisfactory results for many reasons, such as 
lack of experienced prosecutors, insufficient police work in 
collecting needed evidence, and public corruption.  With 
regard to the transfer of the INL-funded canine and boat 
projects, he claimed that Vice President Armida Lopez 
Contreras, as head of the National Anti-Drug Council, would 
have to have the final say and that the GOH would insist on 
following the process outlined in the 2000 letter of 
agreement.  He also admitted that much remains to be done on 
the financial crimes cases. The work of the FIU is very 
important. 
 
6. (C)  The Ambassador reviewed USG assistance programs 
planned for the PM in the short and medium term, stressing 
that continued progress was essential to ensuring our 
continued support. 
 
7. (C)  COMMENT:  AG Medina has made a real effort to respond 
to the Embassy\'s concerns and to improve the PM\'s ability to 
perform its functions during the last two months.  This 
meeting cleared the air while letting him know that follow 
through was absolutely necessary and that his Ministry needs 
to continue to act on many of the pending legal cases in 
order to demonstrate its partnership with the U.S.  However, 
the sad reality is that AG Medina may well continue to do the 
bare minimum to meet our concerns while seeking to run out 
the clock on his term of office (which ends in May 2004) 
without offending any of the large organized crime, drug 
trafficking, and corrupt interests in the country. END 
COMMENT. 
PALMER 
"
"10408","8/29/2003 21:59","03TEGUCIGALPA2062","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD, S/CT, AND INL/LP 
STATE PASS USTR FOR CENTAM DIRECTOR AND L MOGHTADER 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
TREASURY FOR ETHAN ILZETSKI 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EAID, EINV, PTER, SNAR, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: SUMMARY OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM ASSESSMENT OF 
HONDURAS: HIGHLY FRAGILE AND VERY VULNERABLE 
 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY. On April 28, 2003, the IMF staff submitted 
to its Board of Directors the results of the Financial 
System Stability Assessment (FSAP) performed by a joint 
World Bank-IMF team between October 2002 and February 2003. 
This cable contains a summary of their findings. In the 
report, the Fund classified the financial system in Honduras 
as \"highly fragile\" and \"very vulnerable.\"  The problems 
within the financial sector merit immediate restructuring in 
order to limit their adverse effects on sustainable economic 
growth.  The report contains five sections: (1) Monetary 
Policy and Systemic Liquidity Management, (2) Financial 
Structure and Regulation, (3) Money Laundering and Terrorism 
Financing, (4) Financial System Soundness and Stability, and 
(5) Crisis Management Framework and Recommendation. This 
cable highlights the key findings of the report in order to 
assist Washington policymakers in understanding the critical 
problems in the Honduran financial sector and the key 
objectives of the World Bank\'s new financial sector project 
(approved in June 2003).  This information, while 
unclassified, is highly sensitive and should be kept close 
 
SIPDIS 
hold by policymakers.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Monetary Policy and Systemic Liquidity Management 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. (SBU) Although generally favorable on the role of the 
Central Bank of Honduras (CBH), the FSAP expressed concern 
about its management of the foreign exchange market through 
daily auctions.  The authors noted that, although focusing 
primarily on the stability of the exchange rate to maintain 
price consistency, the program is directed at reducing 
inflation by reducing liquidity in the market, a policy that 
emphasizes control of the money base rather than the 
exchange rate. 
 
3. (SBU) Thanks to foreign investment and other inflows as a 
result of Hurricane Mitch relief efforts, the level of 
foreign currency has contributed to a relatively stable 
foreign exchange market.  However, this could change in the 
future.  The report urged that the restrictions on the 
foreign exchange auction be modified and simplified.  The 
FSAP suggests using the marginal market-clearing price for 
foreign currency (Dutch auction) rather than the individual 
bidding price (American auction) to determine the winning 
bids in the exchange auctions. 
 
4. (SBU) Another monetary policy vulnerability noted is the 
foreign exchange surrender requirement for banks and 
exchange houses.  These institutions are not allowed to 
supply foreign exchange demands with their foreign exchange 
purchases.  As a part of this restriction, the CBH requires 
them to surrender 100 percent of their foreign exchange 
purchases on the next business day.  However, it takes two 
business days for the institutions to receive the purchased 
foreign currency.  The FSAP recommends lowering the 
percentage surrender requirements as well as decreasing the 
time between purchasing foreign currency and acquiring it. 
This would then allow for greater efficiency in the banking 
sector in the short run. 
 
5. (SBU) To limit the growth of the monetary base 
(countering the weekly foreign exchange auctions), the CBH 
used central bank securities (Certificados de Absorcion 
Monetaria, or CAMs) to stabilize the level of net foreign 
assets.  This resulted in large quasi-fiscal costs that have 
created an increased deficit for the CBH and added to the 
vulnerability of the CBH\'s financial position.  To counter 
these potential weaknesses, the FSAP suggests that Honduras 
strengthen the money market to include liquidity management. 
 
6. (SBU) The FSAP proposes increased transparency and 
openness in the Central Bank\'s operations.  The assessment 
also warns against a dollarization policy in Honduras (a 
view shared by the GOH).  Dollarization in Honduras would 
constrain the CBH\'s capacity to implement monetary policy 
and would increase liquidity risks in the financial sector, 
among other problems. 
 
7. (SBU) Another important area of monetary policy falls in 
the domain of debt management.  The report\'s authors 
recommend better strategy coordination between fiscal and 
monetary authorities.  Additionally, the authors suggest 
development of a market-oriented government funding strategy 
that would include development of a secondary bond market. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Financial Structure and Regulation 
---------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) While the FSAP recognizes the improvements in 
National Banking and Insurance Commission\'s regulation of 
the financial sector over the last few years, it mentions 
five critical flaws that require immediate correction. 
First, the FSAP authors suggest that the CNBS consolidate 
its operations to ensure the widespread application of laws 
and regulation monitored by a centralized, regulatory body. 
Second, the capital requirements need to be addressed. 
Reserves are insufficient to absorb expected losses, so 
unexpected losses cannot be covered.  Tightening of the 
capital requirements would help to end the inflated 
accounting of capital and provide sufficient reserves to 
back any expected losses.  Third, loan classification and 
provisioning require improvement.  The Honduran standards 
for loan provisioning fall well below the norms of other 
Central American countries.  After Hurricane Mitch in late 
1998, the government adopted a series of measures granting 
debt forgiveness and tolerated a high number of non- 
performing loans in the banking system.  These policies need 
to be restructured.  Fourth, the report recommends that the 
CNBS promote accountability for minimum corporate governance 
requirements.  For example, a written loan origination 
manual for each bank would help create a sustainable risk 
management system as well as enhance corporate governance in 
the banking sector.  Finally, the CNBS needs to transform 
from a purely supervisory body to a \"more risk-oriented, 
forward-looking\" agency.  To achieve this transformation, 
the CNBS should expand its actions to encompass more than 
checking for compliance. 
 
9. (SBU) The legal framework for the banking system is 
another area addressed in the FSAP.  The report notes the 
severe problems in Honduran property registration.  The 
process is slow, obsolete, subjective, and risky. 
Bankruptcy law is another distinctive problem area (almost 
never used in Honduras).  Companies tend to close their 
business without concern for outstanding debt, partially 
stemming from lack of faith in the judicial system.  To 
combat these inefficiencies and the problems they pose for 
the financial sector, the GOH needs to encourage new 
legislation to update property registration and bankruptcy. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism Financing 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) The FSAP recognized that the March 2002 law to 
combat money laundering (ML) represented a significant step 
for the country in this area.  Under the new law, there are 
now stiffened penalties for money laundering as well as 
increased preventive measures.  The law enhances the 
capacity of law enforcement officials to combat this crime 
and broadened classification of ML offenses (combined with 
expanded mandates for confiscation of assets) will assist 
officials in the investigation and prosecution of suspected 
money launderers. 
 
11. (SBU) The FSAP authors cautioned that the implementation 
process remains riddled with potential setbacks.  Limited 
resources, both in funding and training, could hamper the 
effectiveness of the legislation.  Officials need training 
and experience to combat money laundering.  They also lack 
useful technological resources, such as access to software 
capable of detecting suspicious transactions.  Without such 
technology, employees are reduced to manual means of 
detection, which creates opportunity for human error and 
corruption.  In addition, without strategic cooperation, 
various governmental entities risk duplicating law 
enforcement efforts.  To eliminate this waste of scarce 
resources, the roles and responsibilities of each 
organization need to be clearly delineated. 
 
12. (SBU) The authors emphasized the limited legal scope of 
the Honduran money laundering law in the area of terrorism 
financing.  Terrorism financing is listed as potential 
grounds for a money laundering charge but is not identified 
as a crime in and of itself.  The FSAP recommends that the 
GOH identify a competent body to address this issue and to 
have an explicit mandate to freeze assets of suspected 
terrorists.  Note: The CNBS has in fact issued a large 
number of freeze orders of assets held by terrorists since 
September 2001 and the financial system has complied with 
these freeze orders in a prompt fashion.  No terrorist 
assets have been found in Honduras to date, however, so the 
legal authority has not been tested.  End Note. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Financial System Soundness and Stability 
---------------------------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) The FSAP classifies the financial system in 
Honduras as highly fragile, especially the banking sector. 
Although the capital adequacy ratios and provision coverage 
are improving, the tendency to overstate capital and hide 
losses renders the system vulnerable and limits the 
country\'s potential for economic growth.  With the banks 
earning close to zero profits, a cushion to absorb any 
shocks to the financial sector does not exist. 
 
14. (SBU) The combination of the repeated agricultural loan 
forgiveness measures and the blanket deposit guarantee 
contribute to severe moral hazard and fiscal contingency 
problems.  These programs, designed to assist struggling 
farmers after the devastation of Hurricane Mitch, have 
created large numbers of non-performing loans (NPLs) that 
weaken the asset quality of the banks. 
 
15. (SBU) Cooperatives, which are not regulated by the CNBS, 
appear to have less liquidity than Honduran banks.  Although 
the figures for the cooperatives are not official, the 
liquidity percentage of total assets (16 percent) is 
reported at about half of Honduran banks (31.7 percent).  A 
high number of overdue loans have contributed to this lack 
of liquidity in cooperatives. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Crisis Management Framework and Recommendations 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
16. (SBU) The 100 percent guarantee of deposits, enacted in 
1999, stabilizes the banking sector through protection of 
depositors.  The temporary stabilization should have enabled 
a sustainable restructuring of the system to occur in the 
last three years.  However, only limited restructuring has 
occurred, and the fiscal costs are mounting.  The blanket 
coverage of deposits becomes an incentive to potential risk- 
takers, which contributes to the instability of the banking 
system.  Additionally, the continual coverage of deposits by 
the Deposit Insurance Fund, FOSEDE, has created a negative 
net worth for this fund.  This, in turn, undermines consumer 
confidence in the value of FOSEDE as a true financial safety 
net. 
 
17. (SBU) The FSAP report suggests that the GOH move quickly 
toward a limited deposit insurance system.  The report 
recommends additional transparency within FOSEDE. 
Disclosure of goals and financial information in an annual 
report would instill a higher level of confidence in the 
FOSEDE, which now operates under a veil of confidentiality. 
 
18. (SBU) The transition to a limited deposit insurance 
system requires certain conditions to exist before 
implementation.  First, the report suggests that all 
insolvent banks should close operations.  Second, the CNBS 
should monitor the finances of reporting institutions and 
intervene at the first sign of problems.  Third, FOSEDE must 
have a positive net worth.  Fourth, the financial system 
must have a strong liquidity potential coupled with a stable 
macroeconomic framework.  These elements would help prevent 
difficulties in the transition from a blanket coverage 
policy to a limited deposit insurance guarantee. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
19. (SBU) The FSAP report is a valuable diagnostic tool that 
will help the GOH, the various multilateral institutions in 
Honduras, and bilateral donors in efforts to head off a 
future financial crisis.  A careful reading of the report 
also provides cautionary warnings.  None of these problems, 
which were years in the making, will disappear easily. 
Many, such as cleaning up the bad loan portfolios and 
rationalizing property registers, will require financial 
resources far beyond the GOH\'s means.     Others, the 
transfer from a blanket deposit guarantee policy to a 
limited deposit insurance guarantee, have been shied away 
from in the past because of their potential to 
unintentionally trigger the financial crisis that everyone 
seeks to avoid.  The Embassy, in particular USAID and the 
Economic Section, are staying in close touch with the GOH, 
the World Bank, and the IDB to ensure complementarity among 
our respective assistance programs (including AID-funded 
work with the Banking Commission and a Treasury money 
laundering technical assistance project).  End Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"10409","8/29/2003 22:09","03TEGUCIGALPA2064","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002064 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, HO, IZ 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA COVERAGE ON HONDURAN TROOPS IN IRAQ, AUGUST 29, 
2003 
 
1. All four dailies carried international reports on Honduran 
troops patrolling in An Najaf.  Moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" front- 
page report with photo, \"Hondurans patrolling with U.S. troops;\" 
liberal Tiempo inside story, \"Honduran troops already patrolling 
in Iraq;\" liberal La Tribuna front-page story with photo, 
\"Honduras is the Fifth Military Force in Iraq;\" moderate La 
Prensa inside story reports on an office opened to permit 
communication between the Honduran Forces and families at home. 
 
Palmer 
"
"10484","9/3/2003 16:08","03TEGUCIGALPA2081","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA1938","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, DRL/PHD, INL/LP, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: THIRTEEN MURDERED, MANY OTHERS WOUNDED, AS GANG 
MEMBERS OPEN FIRE ON BUSES IN SAN PEDRO SULA 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1938 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1904 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: On August 30, in three separate attacks in 
different neighborhoods of San Pedro Sula, Hoduras\' 
commercial center, gang members randomly opened fire on three 
\"rapidito\" small buses killing 13 and wounding over thirty 
others.  All three buses appear to be owned by the same 
transportation company.  Police have four suspects in custody 
and are searching for two others. Initial press and police 
reports indicate that these gang members were hired by a 
rival bus company owner to scare others off from using a 
competitor\'s buses.  On September 1, rumors circulating that 
gang members had opened fire on a school, killing three 
children, set off a general panic in the city as parents 
raced to schools to collect their children and business 
shuttered their doors.  Only some two hours later, after 
military and police units were called in to restore calm, did 
some sense of normalcy return to the city\'s center.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
2. (SBU) On August 30, in three separate attacks in different 
neighborhoods of San Pedro Sula, gang members randomly opened 
fire on three \"rapidito\" small buses killing 13 and wounding 
over thirty others.  All three buses appear to be owned by 
the same transportation company.  Police have four suspects 
in custody and are searching for two others.  Initial press 
and police reports indicate that these gang members were 
hired by a rival bus company owner who reportedly offered the 
gang members USD 580 to scare others from using a 
competitor\'s buses.  (Comment:  Bus route permits are 
regulated by the Government of Honduras (GOH) to reduce the 
amount of buses on city streets and offer a modicum of safety 
standards; there is much competition between rival companies 
over who gets which permits. End Comment.) 
 
3. (SBU)  Gang members already under arrest are providing 
police with valuable intelligence, leading to the preliminary 
conclusion that this was not an act of aggression against the 
GOH or between rival gangs, but an ugly multiple murder by 
thugs-for-hire in a city where the murder rate is already one 
of the highest in the Western Hemisphere, and almost four 
times that of Washington, D.C. according to Post\'s estimates 
(ref A). 
 
4. (U)  Insecurity in San Pedro Sula is running so high that 
apparently after a few students set off firecrackers at their 
local school to celebrate Honduran Flag Day September 1, 
rumors rapidly spread that gang members had invaded the 
school and shot three children dead.  This set off a general 
panic in the city as parents raced to schools to collect 
their children and business shuttered their doors.  Only some 
two hours later, after military and police units were called 
in to restore calm, did some sense of normalcy return to the 
city\'s center. 
 
5. (SBU)  Comment:  This is the third mass murder to take 
place in San Pedro Sula since August 4.  President Maduro 
assured the nation that all the resources of the state will 
be brought to bear in an effort to bring those responsible to 
justice but many remain skeptical about the government\'s 
ability to provide security.  Many gang members have been 
incarcerated under the government\'s new anti-gang law (ref 
B), but insecurity remains the public\'s number one concern 
and the GOH does not appear any closer to solving the 
nation\'s increasingly high murder rate.  This rising 
insecurity is also taking a toll on economic development in 
Honduras as potential consumers stay home and some investors 
think twice before investing due to high crime rates and poor 
judicial security.  According to the President of the Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry for the Department of Cortes the 
September 1 business closings alone cost San Pedro Sula 
businesses thousands of dollars. 
 
6. (SBU)  Comment Continued:  Media and other sectors have 
speculated that the murders may have been the result of gang 
members lashing out in response to law enforcement efforts to 
reign in their activities through the new anti-gang law. 
However, this appears to be a turf-related incident between 
competing transportation organizations.  Regrettably, many 
San Pedro Sula residents question GOH explanations of the 
incident and fear that the government may not be able to 
protect the citizenry.  End Comment 
PALMER 
"
"10510","9/4/2003 17:16","03TEGUCIGALPA2380","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03MANAGUA2274|03MANAGUA2575|03MANAGUA2585|03MANAGUA2659|03SECSTATE249219|03TEGUCIGALPA2022","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002380 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, T, WHA, WHA/CEN, PM, AND INR/IAA 
NSC FOR SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/09/2013 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MASS, MCAP, PBTS, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS READY TO MOVE FORWARD ON REGIONAL 
DISARMAMENT; WILL NOT NEGOTIATE BILATERALLY 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2274 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2022 
     C. MANAGUA 2575 
     D. MANAGUA 2585 
     E. SECSTATE 249219 
     F. MANAGUA 2659 
     G. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 041716Z SEP 03 
 
Classified By: PolChief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  According to Government of Honduras (GOH) 
officials, Honduras is still very inclined to move forward on 
regional disarmament, but remains insistent that the process 
proceed through established channels, particularly the 
Central American Security Commission (SICA), and that all the 
Central American (CENTAM) countries proceed in tandem. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) officials acknowledged that 
the current process is proceeding slowly, but strongly argued 
that it at least presents a viable roadmap that the CENTAMs 
can follow. Moreover, the Maduro Administration maintains 
they are much more concerned about trans-national security 
threats, such as organized crime and narco-terrorism, rather 
than excess military inventories, which they claim are not a 
major problem in Honduras.  Apart from its vaunted F-5 fleet 
(of which only 7-8 out of 11 aircraft are operational), 
Honduras\' armed forces are the smallest in the region and its 
weapons inventories among the most modest.  As such, the 
Nicaraguan arms reduction initiative was not well received in 
Honduras (ref A).  The GOH views the proposal as a means to 
divert attention from Nicaragua\'s excess Man Portable Air 
Defense Systems (MANPADS).  Beyond that, the GOH feels that 
the Government of Nicaragua (GON) proposal lacks substance, 
and in its current form, actually sets back progress that has 
already been made through the SICA.  Post will send 
translated synopsis of Nicaraguan proposal via septel.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
------------------------------------ 
Nicaraguan Arms Reduction Initiative 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (S) The GOH takes issue with the Nicaraguan arms reduction 
initiative on many levels.  Politically, GOH officials view 
the Nicaraguan proposal as grandstanding; offering nothing 
new, ignoring long-standing positions, and actually reopening 
important key elements (including agreed upon concepts, 
definitions, and reporting formats) from the existing agenda. 
 In essence, the MFA points out that it basically brings the 
whole process back to square one.  The GOH believes the GON 
knows this and is suspicious that the true GON agenda is to 
undermine the disarmament process and deflect USG and 
regional attention away from its excess stocks of MANPADS. 
Moreover, the GOH remains concerned over the mixed signals 
being sent from the GON by its civilian leadership and 
military establishment.  They cite numerous press statements 
by GON military leaders that seem to contradict elements of 
the GON proposal.  GOH officials tell us that they have 
little confidence in negotiating with the GON civilian 
leadership, whom they feel will not be able to deliver on any 
agreement over the objections of the Nicaraguan military. 
 
3. (S) Militarily, Honduras views MANPADS as a bilateral 
issue between the USG and the GON.  Minister of Defense (MOD) 
Federico Breve has been emphatic that, while he supports a 
rationally balanced program of CENTAM arms control, the GOH 
will not sacrifice Honduras\' fleet of F-5\'s on a bilateral 
basis (ref G).  (COMMENT:  The GOH understands the need to 
reduce MANPAD stocks in Nicaragua.  However, the GOH feels 
that unfair pressure is being applied by the U.S. on 
Honduras.  The MOD has made clear to EmbOffs, SecDef, and 
CJCS that the GOH will continue to resist any effort to 
couple its remaining fleet of F-5\'s for a reduction of 
Nicaraguan SA-7 stocks, which in his view are of little value 
against F-5\'s.  END COMMENT) 
 
------------ 
Beyond F-5\'s 
------------ 
 
4. (C) There is a clear divergence of views on regional 
disarmament.  GOH military and diplomatic sources report that 
Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Guatemala do not believe the 
disarmament process concerns them.  A senior MFA official 
said El Salvador particularly views the process instead to be 
between the GOH and the GON over MANPADS and F-5\'s. 
President Maduro and MOD Breve, in carefully nuanced public 
statements, have indicated the GOH remains ready to discuss 
its fleet of F-5\'s, but only as part of a regional 
discussion.  GOH civilian leaders are also quick to point out 
that the Honduran military is considerably smaller than its 
neighbors, and that the fleet of F-5\'s go a long way toward 
countering its neighbors numerical superiority. 
5. (C) President Maduro has repeatedly stated that military 
hardware in the region is excessive.  However, Maduro feels 
strongly that time would be more productively spent 
concentrating on ways to improve CENTAM cooperation against 
trans-national threats such as organized crime, 
narco-terrorism, and kidnapping syndicates, which affect the 
entire region and pose significant threats to all CENTAM 
countries.  The constant violation of CENTAM territory by 
narcotraffickers is a particular area where Maduro would like 
to see increased regional cooperation.  (COMMENT:  Maduro\'s 
comments reflect the extent to which SOUTHCOM Combatant 
Commander General Hill\'s and WHA Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Fisk\'s initiatives on regional military integration have 
penetrated strategic thinking here.  GOH officials have noted 
on numerous occasions that war between any of the CENTAM 
countries is now unthinkable as well as unsustainable.  END 
COMMENT) 
 
6. (S) Post notes that Honduras\' over-rated fleet of F-5\'s 
should also be put in perspective.  Honduras maintains a 
fleet of 10 F-5\'s at the Coronel Hector Caraccioli Moncada 
Air Base in La Ceiba on the Caribbean coast.  Of these, only 
seven-to-eight are currently operational with a readiness 
rate of only 72 percent.  The remaining fleet will 
deteriorate further because of a lack of spare parts, making 
it likely that within a few years Honduras will not be able 
to effectively deploy these assets.  It is also highly 
improbable the GOH will invest scarce resources into 
replacing this fleet with more modern jet aircraft. 
Moreover, Honduran combat pilots train on these aircraft only 
one hour a month due to high fuel costs. 
 
7. (C) COMMENT:  While open to discussing disarmament issues 
on a regional basis, Honduran MFA and MOD officials express 
some exasperation and frustration that the GON has 
successfully convinced the USG to link MANPAD destruction to 
either a reduction in Honduras\' F-5 inventory or a broader, 
and more politically tedious and difficult, regional arms 
balancing process.  The bottom line is that Honduras will 
resist any effort to discuss disarmament issues on a 
bilateral basis, particularly with the GON.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"10511","9/4/2003 17:16","03TEGUCIGALPA2383","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03MANAGUA2274|03MANAGUA2575|03MANAGUA2585|03MANAGUA2659|03SECSTATE249219|03TEGUCIGALPA2022|03TEGUCIGALPA2380","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002383 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, T, WHA, WHA/CEN, PM, AND INR/IAA 
NSC FOR SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MASS, MCAP, PBTS, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: ENGLISH SYNOPSIS OF NICARAGUAN ARMS CONTROL PROPOSAL 
 
REF:      A. MANAGUA 2274 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2022 
     C. MANAGUA 2575 
     D. MANAGUA 2585 
     E. SECSTATE 249219 
     F. MANAGUA 2659 
     G. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 041716Z SEP 03 
     H. TEGUCIGALPA 2380 
 
 
1. Below is an informal translation of the substantive parts 
of the Nicaraguan arms control proposal of July 2003, 
formally titled \"The Program to Limit and Control Arms in 
Central America to Achieve a Reasonable Balance of Forces and 
Foster Stability, Mutual Confidence, and Transparency\"(ref 
A).  Post reported in refs G and H the Honduran response to 
the Nicaraguan proposal. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Synopsis of Nicaraguan Arms Control Proposal 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. Objectives: 
 
The document represents a formal proposal by the Government 
of Nicaragua to limit and control armaments in Central 
America to achieve a reasonable balance of forces and 
establish mutual confidence, transparency, and 
institutionalize civilian control of the military.  The 
Nicaraguan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Defense, 
and other government ministries that handle national defense 
issues endorsed the document.  It was signed on July 16, 
2003. 
 
----------- 
The Process 
----------- 
 
Reasonable Balance of Forces 
 
- Outline national reasonable balance of forces 
- OAS concurrence given potential national and regional 
threats 
- Presenting national arms inventories to SICA according to 
the format approved by the Council of Foreign Ministers (Aug 
6, 2003) 
- Format and define the inventories of the public security 
institutions (Aug 6, 2003) 
- Present the arms inventories of the public security 
institutions 
- Establish maximum limits for national armed forces 
 
------------ 
Arms Control 
------------ 
 
- Establish a mechanism to verify, limit, and control arms 
inventories in each country and at the regional level.  Also 
develop ways to secure arsenals against theft and 
proliferation.  This can be accomplished by state entities 
working with the OAS. (Proposed time-line:  Three months for 
creation of state entities; six months for regional 
organization) 
- Determine a process to destroy, transfer, or securely store 
excess arms in concordance with national laws and 
international treaty obligations. 
- Determine prohibited offensive weapons that are 
destabilizing to the region 
- Establish a moratorium on the acquisition of new offensive 
weapons 
- Proceed with the gradual and progressive destruction of 
arms that are determined to be prohibited 
- Implement a standardized methodology to track national 
defense spending (done through the UN or the OAS) 
- Destruction of seized arms from illicit activities that 
fall outside of the agreed upon regional balance of forces 
- Establish a uniform national registry for explosives 
 
------------------------------------- 
Modernization and Professionalization 
------------------------------- 
 
- Continue the modernization and professionalization of 
military and public security forces, taking into account 
national law, traditional and non-traditional threats, while 
also focusing on humanitarian aid and response to natural 
disasters 
 
---------------------------- 
Other Confidence Building Measures 
---------------------------------- 
 
- Strengthen the mechanisms for peaceful resolution of 
conflicts in the Treaty on Democratic Security in Central 
America 
- Develop a regional code of ethics for transparency in the 
transfer of arms 
- Pass national laws for the control of arms with the overall 
objective of reaching a standardization of such regulations 
- Ratify, or speed up the implementation of, the following 
international treaties regarding arms control: 
     Treaty on Democratic Security in Central America; 
     United Nations Registry of Conventional Arms; 
     Standard Report on Military Expenditures; 
     Inter-American Convention Against the Fabrication and 
     Trafficking in Illicit Firearms, Munitions, Explosives, 
     and Other Related Material; 
     Inter-American Convention for the Transparency in the 
     Acquisition of Conventional Arms; 
     Model Regulations for the International Control of 
     Firearms, Components, and Munitions from the Inter- 
     America Convention to Control Drug Abuse; 
     1972 Convention against the Development, Production, or 
     Storage of Biological or Toxic Weapons and for Their 
     Destruction; 
     1993 Convention against the Development, Production, 
     Storage, or Use of Chemical Weapons and for Their 
     Destruction; 
     The last two Protocols of the 1980 Convention Regarding 
     Prohibitions and Restrictions Against the Deployment of 
     Certain Conventional Arms Considered Excessively Harmful 
     or Indiscriminant; 
     1997 Convention Against the Use, Storage, Production, or 
     Transfer or Anti-Personnel Mines and for Their 
     Destruction. 
 
-------------- 
Implementation 
-------------- 
 
- The Central American Council on Security (SICA) and its 
relevant subcommittees would oversee the implementation of 
this agreement. 
 
- For Implementation:  Ministry\'s of Foreign Relations, 
Defense, Government and Security in conjunction with Chief of 
the military and police. 
 
- For Compliance:  The above-mentioned body will have the 
support of SICA with the General Secretary of SICA acting as 
a permanent officer for the Council. 
 
Annex I 
 
------------------------- 
Foundation and References 
------------------------- 
 
- Reaffirms the principles and agreements of the Treaty on 
Democratic Security in Central America, particularly those 
established in Title III 
- Reaffirms the international rights established in the 
United Nations Charter and the Organization of American 
States 
- Affirms the decisions established by the Presidents, 
Council of Foreign Ministers, and SICA in their February 19, 
2003 Communiqu adopting the model format for arms 
inventories 
- Refers to the Declaration of the Fifth Conference of 
Defense Ministers of the Americas in Santiago, Chile 18-22 
November 2002 in reference to transparency in the acquisition 
of weapons and defense budgets. 
 
Annex II 
 
Glossary 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Legal Framework for Arms Control Agreement 
------------------------------------------ 
 
The legal framework for this agreement is laid out in the 
Treaty on Democratic Security in Central America which 
obligates each party to the Agreement to deploy armed forces 
in a balanced and reasonable manner for the establishment of 
peaceful, democratic, and prosperous atmosphere in the 
region. 
 
-----Reasonable Balance of Forces 
 
A reasonable balance of forces for each country depends on 
the necessities of each state to confront threats to the 
national interest and the ability to economically sustain 
them. 
-----Maximum Force Levels 
 
During the process of reaching reasonable balanced forces 
each state will define its necessary force levels to confront 
potential threats.  In some cases this could lead states to 
determine that their current force structure is insufficient 
and that in the short term augmentation is necessary. 
However, this would need to proceed with caution so as not to 
be perceived as seeking offensive weapons or skewing the 
military equilibrium.  The idea of collective defense should 
be kept in mind when analyzing transnational threats. 
 
-----Moratorium 
 
To establish a moratorium on the acquisition of newly 
classified offensive weapons it is understood that the 
modernization of the armed forces to replace obsolete 
equipment and allow for regional interoperability is allowed 
within the confines of lawful activity and potential threats 
each state faces. 
 
-----Offensive Arms 
 
Offensive arms are defined as any weapons (sea, air, land) 
that could constitute a possible threat, could be considered 
destabilizing, or could throw of regional equilibrium. 
 
-----Surplus Arms 
 
It is up to each country to determine appropriate force 
levels as long as they are not in violation off international 
treaties. 
 
3. Annex III of the proposed agreement gives detailed 
descriptions of the following parameters, which serve to 
guide the work on these issues: 
 
     Constitutional and Judicial Aspects; 
     Considerations in Determining Necessary Force Levels for 
     Each State; 
     Planning of Optional Force Levels; 
     Implementing of a Reasonable Balance of Forces System; 
     Sustainability of a Reasonable Balance of Forces System; 
     Proposed Methodology and Development of a Reasonable 
     Balance of Forces System. 
 
Palmer 
"
"10519","9/4/2003 21:52","03TEGUCIGALPA2109","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","02TEGUCIGALPA1076","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR DS/OFM/VTC/TC - W. NEMETH 
 
INFO WHA/EX/PMO AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OFDP, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT:  HONDURAN SALES TAX -- FULL RECIPROCITY STILL 
ELUSIVE FOR U.S. MISSION 
 
REF:      A) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 01076 
 
-     B) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 01621 
-     C) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 02034 
-     D) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 02443 
-     E) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 03378 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  MORE THAN A YEAR AFTER HONDURANS CHANGED ITS 
SALES TAX LAWS AND REVOKED LOCAL TAX CARDS FOR THE 
DIPLOMATIC COMMUNITY, EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA IS STILL 
STRUGGLING WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES TO ESTABLISH RECIPROCAL 
TAX TREATMENT FOR THE U.S. MISSION.  THE JUNE 2002 TAX LAW 
PROMPTED REVOCATION OF HONDURAN TAX CARDS IN WASHINGTON. 
IN DECEMBER 2002 POST RECOMMENDED THAT DS/OFM RESTORE FULL 
PRIVILEGES TO HONDURAN DIPLOMATS, BASED ON WHAT WE 
INTERPRETED AS A GOOD FAITH EFFORT TO PROVIDE RECIPROCAL 
TREATMENT IN TEGUCIGALPA.  AFTER ANOTHER NINE MONTHS OF 
MINOR CHANGES AND ADDITIONAL ADJUSTMENTS, FULL SALES TAX 
RELIEF IS STILL UNAVAILABLE TO THE U.S. MISSION AND ITS 
EMPLOYEES.  IN ADDITION, THE GOVERNMENT OF HONDURAS HAS 
DECIDED TO DISCONTINUE EXCISE TAX EXEMPTIONS ON THE SALE 
OF GASOLINE TO THE U.S. MISSION, TO THE TUNE OF OVER 
92,000 DOLLARS PER YEAR IN ADDITIONAL COSTS.  GASOLINE TAX 
IS THE SUBJECT OF A SEPARATE MESSAGE TO DS/OFM.  IN THE 
INTEREST OF OBTAINING BETTER COOPERATION FROM LOCAL TAX 
AUTHORITIES IN TEGUCIGALPA, DS/OFM SHOULD CONSIDER 
ADJUSTING ITS TAX TREATMENT OF HONDURAN DIPLOMATS IN THE 
UNITED STATES.  (END SUMMARY) 
 
2.  BACKGROUND:  ON JUNE 5, 2002, A NEW HONDURAN LAW 
REVOKED ALL POINT-OF-SALE TAX EXEMPTION CARDS, INCLUDING 
THOSE FOR FOREIGN DIPLOMATS AND DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS.  THE 
LAW TOOK EFFECT IMMEDIATELY, BEFORE A WORKABLE REPLACEMENT 
SYSTEM COULD BE DEVELOPED AND IMPLEMENTED.  REFS A AND B 
DESCRIBE THE NEW LAW, WHICH ALSO INCLUDED RESTRICTIONS ON 
VEHICLE IMPORTATION AND USE.  FOR THE PAST FIFTEEN MONTHS 
EMBASSY AND AID ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF HAVE WORKED 
DILIGENTLY WITH THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (MFA) AND 
THE HONDURAN TAX DIRECTORATE (DEI) TO RE-ESTABLISH TAX 
RELIEF MECHANISMS FOR THE U.S. MISSION AND ITS STAFF. 
MOST OF THE CONTROVERSY CENTERS AROUND THE 12 PERCENT 
SALES TAX, BUT THERE ARE OTHER LOCAL TAXES INVOLVED, E.G., 
HOTEL TAX, AIRPORT TAX AND GASOLINE TAX. 
 
3.  INITIAL RESPONSE:  SEVERAL WEEKS AFTER THE HONDURAN 
LAW WAS PASSED AND IMPLEMENTED, DS/OFM REVOKED HONDURAN 
TAX CARDS IN THE UNITED STATES PENDING A FAVORABLE 
RESOLUTION IN HONDURAS.  IN DECEMBER 2002 EMBASSY 
TEGUCIGALPA RECOMMENDED RESTORATION OF THE HONDURAN TAX 
CARDS IN THE U.S.  WE BELIEVED AT THE TIME THAT THE 
HONDURAN GOVERNMENT WAS MAKING A GOOD FAITH EFFORT TO 
RESTORE TAX EXEMPTIONS IN TEGUCIGALPA.  THE MFA AND DEI 
HAD IMPLEMENTED A SYSTEM OF TAX COUPON BOOKS FOR 
DIPLOMATIC PERSONNEL.  ALTHOUGH CUMBERSOME TO USE AND 
DIFFICULT TO REPLACE, THE COUPONS PROVIDED POINT-OF-SALE 
TAX RELIEF SIMILAR TO THE U.S. TAX CARD SYSTEM.  LAST 
DECEMBER, THE U.S. MISSION ALSO WAS RECEIVING REGULAR 
REFUNDS FOR TAXES ALREADY PAID, BOTH FOR PERSONAL AND 
OFFICIAL PURCHASES.  DS/OFM RESTORED THE HONDURAN TAX 
CARDS BASED ON THE EMBASSY\'S RECOMMENDATION. 
 
4.  RESIDUAL BUREAUCRACY:  THE NEW TAX RELIEF SYSTEMS IN 
HONDURAS REQUIRE NEW, MULTI-STEP PROCEDURES ON THE PART OF 
THE EMBASSY AND ITS ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES.  FOR OFFICIAL 
PROCUREMENT, THE EMBASSY HAS TO SEND PURCHASE ORDERS TO 
THE DEI OFFICE FOR PRE-APPROVAL OF A SALES TAX EXEMPTION, 
INSERTING AN EXTRA STEP INTO AN ALREADY LENGTHY 
PROCUREMENT PROCESS.  FOR LOCAL CASH AND CREDIT CARD 
PURCHASES, THE EMBASSY HAS TO PAY THE TAX AND SUBMIT A 
REIMBURSEMENT APPLICATION AFTERWARDS.  TAX-EXEMPT 
INDIVIDUALS ARE ISSUED COUPON BOOKS TO BE USED FOR POINT- 
OF-SALE TAX DISCOUNTS.  BUT COUPONS CAN ONLY BE USED IN 
CONJUNCTION WITH THE USER\'S DIPLOMATIC CARNET, A DOCUMENT 
THAT TAKES THE FOREIGN MINISTRY 4-5 MONTHS TO PRODUCE. 
ADDITIONALLY, THE COUPON BOOKS CANNOT BE REPLENISHED UNTIL 
THE USER SUBMITS ORIGINAL RECEIPTS (ONE FOR EVERY COUPON 
ALREADY USED) AND A SPREADSHEET DETAILING EACH PURCHASE 
AND THE AMOUNT OF TAX EXEMPTED. 
 
5.  RECENT DEVELOPMENTS:  SINCE DECEMBER THERE HAVE BEEN 
NEW SETBACKS.  THE DEI EFFECTIVELY TERMINATED THE PARALLEL 
TAX REIMBURSEMENT SYSTEM IN APRIL, LEAVING THE MISSION 
UNABLE TO OBTAIN AFTER-THE-FACT TAX RELIEF FOR OFFICIAL 
CREDIT CARD AND PETTY CASH PURCHASES.  GIVEN THE TIME IT 
TAKES TO OBTAIN A DIPLOMATIC CARNET, TERMINATION OF THE 
REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM ALSO DEPRIVED NEW ARRIVALS OF SALES 
TAX RELIEF FOR THE FIRST 4-5 MONTHS OF THEIR TOURS. 
EMBASSY AND AID OFFICIALS PROTESTED THIS ACTION TO THE 
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, EVENTUALLY OBTAINING A 
WRITTEN COMMITMENT TO REINSTATE THE REIMBURSEMENT SYSTEM 
FOR CASH PURCHASES AND NEWCOMERS PENDING ISSUANCE OF 
DIPLOMATIC IDS.  HOWEVER, THE EMBASSY MUST NOW OBTAIN AN 
INTERIM PERMIT FOR NEWCOMERS TO USE THIS BENEFIT. 
 
6.  RECENT DEVELOPMENTS (CONTINUED):  IN APRIL THE FINANCE 
MINISTRY PROPOSED AND THE NATIONAL CONGRESS PASSED ANOTHER 
NEW TAX LAW.  DECRETO 51-2003 IMPOSES SALES TAX ON RENT 
AND ON SERVICES SUCH AS BANKING, MEDICAL SERVICES, FREIGHT 
FORWARDING AND SMALL PACKAGE DELIVERY.  AS WITH THE JUNE 
2002 TAX LAW, NO REIMBURSEMENT SYSTEM FOR DIPLOMATIC 
MISSIONS WAS CONTEMPLATED AS PART OF THIS NEW LEGISLATION. 
THE US MISSION WAS SUDDENLY LEFT WITHOUT THE ABILITY TO 
SEND AND RECEIVE TAX-FREE AIR FREIGHT, FEDEX SHIPMENTS OR 
TO OBTAIN OTHER SERVICES USING NON-STANDARD PROCUREMENT 
DOCUMENTS SUCH AS AIRWAY BILLS.  ONE AID OFFICER HAD HIS 
OUTGOING AIR FREIGHT DELAYED BY ONE MONTH WHILE THE 
EMBASSY FRANTICALLY DEVELOPED A WORK-AROUND WITH THE DEI. 
WE NOW HAVE A NEW TAX RELIEF SYSTEM IN PLACE, BUT AS 
ABOVE, IT REQUIRES AN ADDITIONAL STEP -- DEI PRE-APPROVAL 
OF A BLANKET PURCHASE AGREEMENT FOR ALL SHIPPING 
TRANSACTIONS. 
 
7.  A NEW BOMBSHELL -- CANCELLATION OF GASOLINE TAX 
RELIEF:  IN JUNE, THE FOREIGN MINISTRY NOTIFIED DIPLOMATIC 
MISSIONS THAT IT WOULD NO LONGER DISCOUNT THE TAX PAID ON 
GASOLINE, AS IT CONSIDERED THIS AN \"INDIRECT TAX\".  THE 
AMOUNT IN QUESTION IS OVER 1.05 US DOLLARS PER GALLON, 
APPROXIMATELY 40 PERCENT OF THE PRICE PAID AT THE PUMP. 
THE WITHDRAWAL OF THE EMBASSY\'S CURRENT GASOLINE TAX 
DISCOUNT WILL COST THE U.S. MISSION AND ITS MEMBERS MORE 
THAN 90,000 DOLLARS PER YEAR IN ADDITIONAL GASOLINE 
CHARGES FOR OFFICIAL AS WELL AS PERSONAL VEHICLES.  THE 
ISSUE INVOLVES USER FEES, AMONG OTHER THINGS FOR HIGHWAY 
RECONSTRUCTION, AND IS THE SUBJECT OF A SEPARATE MESSAGE 
FROM POST TO DS/OFM. 
 
8.  ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATION:  IN REF D, THE EMBASSY 
STATES, \"WE HAVE EVERY REASON TO BELIEVE THE MFA AND THE 
DEI WILL WORK WITH THE DIPLOMATIC COMMUNITY TO IRON OUT 
THE REMAINING PROBLEMS.\"  IN RETROSPECT, THIS STATEMENT 
WAS OVERLY OPTIMISTIC AND HAS, THUS FAR, NOT PROVEN TRUE. 
RATHER THAN IRONING OUT THE REMAINING PROBLEMS, THE 
HONDURAN GOVERNMENT HAS PUT ADDITIONAL HURDLES IN FRONT OF 
THE U.S. AND OTHER DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS.  NEW BUREAUCRACY 
HAS ADDED TO THE BURDEN OF SEEKING TAX RELIEF FOR BOTH 
OFFICIAL AND PERSONAL PURCHASES.  THERE IS A GROWING 
INEQUITY BETWEEN THE TAX TREATMENT OF THE U.S. EMBASSY AND 
ITS STAFF IN TEGUCIGALPA AND THE TREATMENT OF HONDURAN 
DIPLOMATS IN THE UNITED STATES, WHO PRESUMABLY ENJOY FULL 
POINT-OF-SALE TAX DISCOUNTS.  IN OUR DISCUSSIONS WITH THE 
HONDURAN GOVERNMENT WE NOW DEAL FROM A POSITION OF 
RELATIVE WEAKNESS.  POST ASKS DS/OFM TO LOOK FOR WAYS OF 
READJUSTING ITS TREATMENT OF THE HONDURAN MISSION TO 
ESTABLISH GREATER EQUITY BETWEEN THE TWO GOVERNMENTS. 
 
Palmer 
"
"10520","9/4/2003 21:54","03TEGUCIGALPA2110","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002110 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR DS/OFM/VTC/TC - W. NEMETH 
 
INFO WHA/EX/PMO AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OFDP, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT:  EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA MAY LOSE GASOLINE TAX 
EXEMPTION 
 
 
1.  This is an action request -- see paragraph 7 below. 
 
2.  SUMMARY:  Honduran tax law changes jeopardize the tax 
relief Tegucigalpa currently enjoys with respect to 
gasoline purchases.  The U.S. Mission may soon lose its 
current gasoline tax exemption, a discount of about 40 
percent from the price paid by regular customers without 
tax-free status.  We request OFM\'s guidance on how best 
to prevent the loss of this benefit, an annual cost 
difference of over 90,000 dollars per year for official 
and personal purchases.  This message supplements a 
separate, more general cable on bilateral sales tax 
issues.  END SUMMARY 
 
3.  A special relationship:  By buying in bulk, Embassy 
Tegucigalpa has always been able to purchase duty-free 
gasoline for its official vehicles.  In 1999 we 
negotiated a special procedure with the government of 
Honduras and Texaco, whereby three different types of 
taxes and import duties were waived for individual 
purchases at two local gas stations.  The customer 
presents a special Embassy-generated discount card and 
all three gasoline taxes are discounted at point-of sale. 
The current price paid for official and personal gasoline 
purchases is 28 Lempiras per gallon (about 1.60 U.S. 
dollars), a savings of 40 percent over the regular retail 
price of 46 Lempiras (2.64 U.S. dollars).  We are one of 
only two diplomatic missions that receive tax-free 
gasoline, mostly because the U.S. Mission\'s buying power 
makes it worthwhile for companies like Texaco to do the 
associated tax exemption paperwork.  Since gasoline taxes 
are levied under a separate law, unrelated to the regular 
sales tax, our gasoline discount remained in place 
despite last summer\'s tightening of Honduran sale tax 
laws. 
 
4.  Historical background:  The Honduran government has 
traditionally granted the U.S. Mission gasoline tax 
exemptions on consumption taxes as well as import duties. 
A value-added tax known as \"Fondo Compensatorio de 
Subsidios\" (Subsidy Compensation Fund) was not exempted 
for the U.S. Mission until 1995.  Relief from this tax 
was granted annually as a special consideration to the 
U.S. Mission, rather than an obligation under 
international law.  In 1998, a government decree 
converted this tax into the \"Aporte para la Atencin de 
Programas Sociales y Conservacin del Patrimonio Vial\" 
(Contribution for Social Programs and National Highway 
Conservation), establishing its rate at US 0.80 per 
gallon.  This surcharge is part of the present formula 
used to determine the cost of gasoline and one of the 
three types of taxes from which the U.S. Mission has been 
exempt since 1999. 
 
5.  Others want in:  The Honduran government has been 
n 
under increasing pressure to offer duty-free gasoline to 
other foreign missions.  Last year\'s tax law changes, 
followed by substantial increases in the local 
bureaucratic requirements for sales tax relief, prompted 
other missions to begin looking for tax advantages 
similar to those enjoyed by the U.S. Mission.  A separate 
message describes other effects of the June 2002 tax law 
changes on the U.S. Mission. 
 
6.  The Honduran perspective:  A portion of this tax was, 
in fact, a sales tax, and all of it was ad valorem.  It 
was changed to an indirect tax in April, 2003, as an 
intentional policy to flatten out the income stream and 
stabilize government revenues.  Honduras is not the only 
country in the world that taxes gasoline heavily.  The 
gasoline tax is part of the Honduran government\'s efforts 
to balance its budget and qualify for an IMF program. 
 
7.  The crackdown:  On June 9th of this year, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs sent a diplomatic note to the 
Dean of the Diplomatic Corps clarifying the Honduran 
government\'s present policy on duty-free fuel products. 
Honduras recently abolished all other consumption and 
import taxes on fuel products, at the same time raising 
the \"Patrimonio Vial\" to over 1.05 dollars per gallon, 
about 40 percent of the retail cost of gasoline.  The 
June note stated that this was an indirect, value-added 
tax and thus no further exemptions would be allowed.  The 
Ministry cited Article 34 of the Vienna Convention, 
stating that a diplomatic agent shall be exempt from all 
taxes and duties except indirect taxes that are normally 
incorporated in the price of goods or services.  Ministry 
officials have verbally informed the Embassy that this 
interpretation precludes any continuation of tax relief 
on gasoline for the U.S. Mission, at least after our 
current bulk purchase permit expires in early March, 
2004. 
 
8.  If it walks like a duck...  Tegucigalpa believes any 
tax that can be easily identified and quantified is a 
direct tax within the meaning of the Vienna Convention. 
We understand that there are highway repair fund 
surcharges incorporated into the cost of gasoline in the 
United States.  But we also understand that these user 
fees are only a fraction of overall U.S. fuel costs, as 
opposed to the 40 percent \"Patrimonio Vial\" in Honduras. 
We also find it highly coincidental that this surcharge 
was raised just as other taxes were being eliminated, 
conveniently allowing the same revenue stream to the GOH 
but under the guise of a user fee or indirect tax. 
 
9.  Guidance requested:  Tegucigalpa needs to develop an 
effective strategy for preventing the elimination of fuel 
tax exemptions by the Honduran government.  Our current 
bulk exemption expires in early March.  Please provide 
talking points, diplomatic note language and other 
guidance, backed, if needed, by reciprocal tax treatment 
of the Honduran mission in Washington.  Many thanks. 
 
Palmer 
"
"10559","9/5/2003 15:52","03TEGUCIGALPA2113","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002113 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTIONS ON ROGER NORIEGA OP-ED, SEPTEMBER 3, 
2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Mario Rietti in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily 
\"Tiempo\" (owned by former and future Liberal Party presidential 
candidate Jaime Rosenthal) on 9/1 and 9/2 entitled \"Stronger 
Partnerships.\"  \"Honduras is and has always been the best partner 
of the U.S. in the Western Hemisphere, and we as Hondurans share 
the common values of freedom and democracy that have stimulated 
sustainable development in the great Northern country.\" 
 
\"During his campaign for the presidency, Ricardo Maduro outlined 
seven key points of his governmental plan to promote sustainable 
development in Honduras.  Unfortunately, once elected, Maduro has 
forgotten some of the promises he made to foster development in 
Honduras, such as environmental sustainability, equitable 
economic growth, sustainable human development and other policies 
to promote equal opportunities for everyone, good governance, 
economic freedom, and investment in people.\" 
 
\"To create and maintain a sustainable means of living, eradicate 
poverty and strengthen local communities, we must promote civic 
participation in sustainable development, creating open, 
accessible and effective mechanisms to build a democracy with 
equal opportunities for all.\" 
 
\"Now, as Roger Noriega and others like our Cardinal Oscar Andres 
Rodriguez say, Honduras needs to transform its strategies and 
economic and political institutions, building stronger and 
sustainable partnerships with the U.S., Europe, Japan and other 
allies like the Republic of China.  Only then will we achieve 
long-term sustainable human development that will permit us to 
generate economic growth through free trade and adequate fiscal 
policies with good governance, transparency and accountability.\" 
 
\"We all, liberals and nationalists, share the same ideals of 
participative democracy and economic and political freedom that 
must always go together to build sustainable partnerships that 
can let us negotiate with the International Monetary Fund and 
combat poverty, which is still our main foe in regard to human 
rights in a poor and severely indebted country such as Honduras.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10622","9/9/2003 21:40","03TEGUCIGALPA2143","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03State249216","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002143 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: ETRD, HO, WTRO 
SUBJECT: Honduran attendees to Cancun WTO Ministerial 
 
REF: State 249216 
 
The Honduran delegation to the WTO Ministerial in 
Cancun will consist of: 
 
Norman Garcia, Minister of Trade and Industry, 
 
Melvin Redondo, Director of the Commercial Policy Division 
and Chief Negotiator for CAFTA, Ministry of Trade and 
Industry, 
 
Jeronima Urbina, Sub-director of the Commercial Policy 
Division, Ministry of Trade and Industry, 
 
Dacio Castillo, Permanent Representative of Honduras to the 
WTO, 
 
Brenda Napky, Assistant to the Permanent Representative of 
Honduras to the WTO, and 
 
Federico Fiallos, Agriculture Negotiator for CAFTA. 
 
Palmer 
"
"10648","9/10/2003 17:09","03TEGUCIGALPA2154","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1863","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, IO, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/11/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINS, PINR, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: LEONIDAS ROSA BAUTISTA TO BE NAMED NEW HONDURAN 
FOREIGN MINISTER 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1863 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: The Honduran Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MFA) confirmed with PolOff September 5 that President Maduro 
would be naming Leonidas Rosa Bautista as the new Honduran 
Foreign Minister.  The MFA had originally indicated that Rosa 
Bautista would be sworn in on September 12, but is it 
possible that the actual date could slip into the following 
week due to some disarray within the ranks of the Government 
of Honduras (GOH). Rosa Bautista will be replacing Guillermo 
Perez-Cadalso Arias who resigned July 22 to become president 
of the National Autonomous University of Honduras 
(UNAH)(reftel).  Rosa Bautista was not a name that had been 
circulated widely as a possible replacement to Perez-Cadalso 
and some two weeks before the announcement, Rosa Bautista had 
told the Honduran press that he was not interested in the 
job.  Rosa Bautista is an activist in the National Party (PN) 
who currently holds a seat in the National Congress.  He is 
associated with the more traditional, entrenched wing of the 
PN known as the \"dark side\" who have repeatedly clashed with 
President Maduro over necessary government reforms.  Rosa 
Bautista,s appointment should help ease some of the tensions 
between the Congress and the government.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) Leonidas Rosa Bautista, born February 4, 1947 in the 
Department of Lempira, is a lawyer by profession and a career 
\"traditional\" Honduran politician.  He is a key member of the 
more traditional side of the PN known as the \"dark side.\" 
Currently, Rosa Bautista represents the Department of 
Francisco Morazan in the National Congress.  He is a 
conservative, long-time activist PN member who at one time 
(1993) considered a bid for the presidency, although his 
candidacy did not make it that far and he did not win his 
party\'s nomination.  He also participated in the 1982 
National Constituent Assembly, which drafted Honduras, 
current democratic constitution.  Rosa Bautista was not a 
name that had been circulated as a possible replacement to 
Perez-Cadalso (reftel) and some two weeks before the 
announcement he had told the Honduran press that he was not 
interested in the job. 
 
3. (C) Key Embassy contacts in Congress describe Rosa 
Bautista in the following ways.  He prefers to negotiate 
rather than confront political opponents.  He is considered a 
very astute and difficult negotiator who does not easily cede 
his positions and is extremely effective at using 
parliamentary maneuvers to advance his agenda.  However, he 
will yield to a consensus on issues about which he has not 
yet developed a position. 
 
4. (C) Embassy bio files hold a reference to a May, 1993, 
AmEmbassy Oslo cable (reftel not available) that linked Rosa 
Bautista to a case of corruption/fraud involving $700,000 of 
Norwegian aid funds.  Rosa Bautista was the Chairman of the 
Board of an agricultural equipment company, INVERSA, that 
failed to deliver any equipment purchased with Norwegian aid 
funds.  INVERSA did subsequently deliver a few broken down 
pieces of equipment after the Norwegian aid agency protested. 
 
5. (C) More disturbing information relates to the actions of 
Rosa Bautista,s wife, Irma Violeta Suazo de Rosa.  She is a 
former Supreme Court Justice (1997-2001) who actively sought 
appointment to the current Honduran Supreme Court.  However, 
the selection committee rejected her after a U.S. NGO, 
International Justice Mission, which lists Rep. Frank Wolf 
(R- VA) and Ambassador Tony Hall on its letterhead, led an 
international effort that exposed her involvement in the 
obstruction of justice, intimidation of lower court judges, 
and the fixing of a court decision in a drunk-driving case 
involving the boyfriend of her daughter.  The boyfriend 
killed a seven-year old child while driving drunk.  Suazo de 
Rosa intervened to prevent police from investigating the 
accident, interceded with a lower court judge to obtain a 
dismissal of the case, and then used her position as a 
Supreme Court justice to try to prevent appellate judges from 
hearing the case on appeal. 
 
6. (U) Some of Rosa Bautista,s declared priorities include: 
attracting increased international investment; finalizing 
border demarcations with El Salvador and Nicaragua; and 
persuading the U.S. to grant Hondurans residing in the United 
States under Temporary Protected Status permanent residency. 
 
7. (U) Prior to joining the national legislature, Rosa 
Bautista worked as a lawyer and professor of law, at one time 
(early 1990,s) serving as the head of the Honduran 
equivalent of the National Bar Association.  Included among 
Rosa Bautista,s Honduran clients are various high profile 
businesses and individuals, including ex President Carlos 
Flores. 
 
8. (U) Rosa Bautista graduated with a law degree from the 
National Autonomous University of Honduras in 1970 and, in 
1963, received a Bachelor of Science and Letters degree from 
a local college in the Department of Lempira.  Rosa Bautista 
is married to Irma Violeta Suazo de Rosa  (also an attorney) 
and they have three children. 
 
9.(U) Rosa Bautista speaks some English. 
 
10. (C) COMMENT: Rosa Bautista is an influential member of 
Congress and well liked by the old school politicians in that 
body.  He is aligned with the leader of the \"dark side\" 
faction of the PN congressional delegation Rodolfo Irias 
Navas, who has repeatedly clashed with President Maduro over 
necessary government reforms.  Rosa Bautista,s appointment 
should help ease some of the tensions between the Congress 
and the government.  Maduro,s decision to choose Rosa 
Bautista, rather than a private sector businessman who could 
promote investment and trade in Honduras, is evidence of the 
President\'s effort to build better relations with the more 
traditional elements within the National Congress.  It will 
also remove a key \"dark side\" member from Congress and should 
ease somewhat Maduro,s negotiations with his own 
congressional delegation, as Rosa Bautista,s replacement 
will be closely aligned with the Maduro faction in Congress. 
END COMMENT 
PALMER 
"
"10673","9/11/2003 17:59","03TEGUCIGALPA2162","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03STATE258046","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 002162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, DS, INR, EB/TRA, WHA, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/11/2013 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, EAIR, HO 
SUBJECT: POSSIBLE AL-QAIDA AVIATION THREAT TO THE U.S. 
(S/ES 200322654) 
 
REF: STATE 258046 
 
1. (S) Post demarched key GOH officials in several ministries 
September 10 with reftel information concerning a possible 
Al-Qaida aviation threat to the U.S.: 
 
-- PolOff delivered reftel talking points to MFA Director 
General for Foreign Affairs Mario Fortin who said he would 
immediately forward the information to the Ministry of the 
Presidency.  Fortin emphasized that Honduras would do 
whatever it could to assist the U.S. in the war against 
terrorism. 
 
-- EconOff delivered reftel talking points to Cesar Vasquez, 
Director of Civil Aviation.  Vasquez emphasized that Honduran 
aviation authorities are already operating at a level of 
heightened security awareness, and asked if there were 
specific actions that the USG was requesting.  EconOff 
reiterated that officials should review their current 
security posture, specifically with regard to flights which 
might be used in the kind of attacks described.  The issue 
will be discussed further with visiting TSA Representative 
Victor Guardia at an airport security meeting already planned 
for September 11th.  (Note:  In addition to direct flights to 
Houston and Miami (daily) and New Orleans (four times a 
week), the following commercial aircraft depart Honduras: an 
Airbus 320 daily to El Salvador, a Boeing 737 twice a week to 
Nicaragua, and a Boeing 737 daily to Costa Rica.  A chartered 
flight also flies once or twice a month from the island of 
Roatan to Milan, Italy.  There are no direct commercial 
flights from Honduras to Canada or Europe. End Note.) 
 
-- Law Enforcement Program Coordinator delivered reftel 
talking points to Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez. 
Alvarez said he would order increased checkpoints in border 
regions, placing extra emphasis on travelers\' origin, 
destinations, and travel documents.  He also plans to meet 
with airport officials to place extra security measures at 
international airports in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.  He 
will place U.S.-trained Frontier Police at airport boarding 
gates to do random questioning and searches, and will 
encourage airlines to advise the Frontier Police when a 
suspicious person or persons with suspicious travel plans 
purchase tickets or check-in. 
 
2. (S) The Ambassador is seeking a meeting with President 
Ricardo Maduro to discuss this and other issues.  President 
Maduro returned September 10 from a short trip to the U.S. 
 
3. (S) Minister Alvarez also said that he has stepped up 
police protection for the U.S. and British Embassies from now 
through the weekend, due to the 9/11 anniversary. 
PALMER 
"
"10698","9/12/2003 19:31","03TEGUCIGALPA2179","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002179 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON 9/11, SEPTEMBER 12, 2003 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
9/12 entitled \"A date we should never forget\".  \"Yesterday, the 
world remembered two events that changed history, and they are 
not only related because they happened on a September 11, but 
also because both of them are terrorist acts: the coup d\'tat 
against Allende in 1973, and the devastating attack against the 
U.S. in 2001.\" 
 
\"While the U.S. and other countries still remember with anger and 
pain the everlasting image of commercial planes used as gigantic 
missiles which shattered the symbol of the American economic 
power and partially destroyed the Pentagon, their symbol of 
military power, Chile and Latin America commemorated the military 
blow against democratic institutions that was the starting point 
of one of the most vicious military regimes in history.\" 
 
\"Still, the Americans and the relatives of the 3,000 victims weep 
for their loved ones two years after such tragedy, and angered by 
the fact that the mastermind of the attack, Osama bin Laden, is 
still on the loose and making threats from his inexpugnable 
retreat.  Meanwhile, in Latin America and other countries, the 
relatives of the thousands of victims of the Pinochet regime also 
remembered their loved ones and President Salvador Allende, who 
preferred to die before giving up the Chilean democracy to the 
repressive military leaders.\" 
 
\"We hope we never see similar events in the future.  Neither 
Chile nor the U.S. should become victims of terrorist attacks by 
Muslim fanatics or those who try to foster their own expansionist 
and imperialistic agenda.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna \" on 
9/12 entitled \"A war economy\".  \"We have arrived to a new 
anniversary of the terrorist acts on that dreadful September 11 
against the World Trade Center in New York and the Pentagon. 
This brutally destructive event changed the world in several 
ways.\" 
 
\"The 9/11 attacks altered the global economy, causing serious 
losses to tourism and distrust in the market, which debilitated 
the national economies worldwide that now exist under the 
influence of geopolitical factors and the risk of terrorist 
attacks.\" 
 
\"We are now aware we are living in a world that has become more 
dangerous.  Now, more than ever before, we are living under a 
constant threat of terrorism.\" 
 
\"The U.S., which suffered the most of the negative consequences 
of the terrorist attacks, the most human losses, the destruction 
of properties, and the inestimable damage to businesses, trade 
and industry, is still going through a framework of a war 
economy.\" 
 
\"As President Bush said it from the beginning, the struggle 
against terrorism is expensive, long-lasting, and requires a 
great deal of sacrifice.  The feeling of pain, anxiety and 
distress is immense when we remember those painful hours during 
that September 11 that change the world.  We hope it does for the 
best.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10844","9/18/2003 16:34","03TEGUCIGALPA2215","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002215 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND 
IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR AGASH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, SEPTEMBER 17, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
9/17 entitled \"Flexibility\".  \"In this new round of CAFTA 
negotiations taking place in Managua, the Central American 
negotiators and businessmen have expressed their concern for the 
delay of the negotiations on the issue of textiles.  According to 
unofficial sources, the U.S. is implementing a strategy to slow 
down the negotiations on sensitive issues, in an attempt to deal 
with all of them in the last round, which will take place in 
December in Washington, where the Central American ministers and 
presidents will be under an intense political pressure to resolve 
them.\" 
 
\"In Managua, the U.S. lead negotiator has urged her Central 
American counterparts to be flexible to prevent the collapse of 
this agreement.  She also referred to what has just happened in 
Cancun during the WTO meeting, complaining that some Central 
American countries that are members of the G-21 went with a lot 
of demands, but they aren\'t flexible enough to consider the 
demands of others.\" 
 
\"It is obvious that the U.S. is still reluctant to eliminate the 
subsidies for their agricultural products, and it has put up a 
obstacles for the exportation of textiles from Central America. 
These problems are very detrimental for our agriculture which is 
the main means of subsistence of our poor, and also our textile 
industry which is one of the few areas we can be fairly 
competitive in the framework of this agreement.\" 
 
 
2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
9/17 entitled \"The U.S. stuns negotiators by rejecting previous 
agreements within CAFTA\".  \"Some agreements that were almost 
finalized in the latest rounds were suddenly changed by the U.S. 
negotiating team, while the Central American counterparts were 
not aware of those changes.  Carlos Sequeira, lead Nicaraguan 
negotiator stated, `We are surprised, we were ready to finalize 
the texts we had already agreed upon.  Now, we have to keep 
working on these issues. We are now standing in a different 
ground\'.\" 
 
\"The Central American negotiation teams have stated that the U.S. 
changed the texts on the issues of public contracts and 
concessions, which was agreed upon on the last round. Melvin 
Redondo, the Honduran lead negotiator said, `There are new 
proposals of the final texts of some issues we had already 
discussed.  However, the negotiations are still open, and there 
is still time to present other proposals\'.\" 
 
\"Despite these disagreements, the negotiations have progressed. 
For instance, the teams reached an agreement on the regulations 
to determine the measures and weigh standards to be used in the 
trade of goods and services among all countries.  There was also 
some progress on the environmental, labor and services issues.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10846","9/18/2003 18:57","03TEGUCIGALPA2219","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002219 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND 
IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR AGASH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, SEPTEMBER 18, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
9/18 entitled \"Central America insists in protecting its 
agriculture against U.S. subsidies\".  \"The sensitive issue of 
market access was the main feature of the third day of the CAFTA 
round.  Once again, Central America insisted in protecting its 
sensitive industries against the `unfair competition\' of U.S. 
products receiving subsidies from the U.S. government.\" 
 
\"The concern of the Central American delegations increased after 
the WTO meeting in Cancun, where there was no agreement on the 
issue of subsidies to exports and other aid received by producers 
from rich countries, mainly in the U.S. and Europe.\" 
 
\"Unknown sources stated that the U.S. has agreed to eliminate its 
subsidies to the exportation of agricultural products, but it\'s 
been reluctant to abolish other subsidies.  Apparently, this 
issue will not be addressed until the eighth and ninth rounds.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10851","9/18/2003 21:12","03TEGUCIGALPA2221","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA654","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002221 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2013 
TAGS: PBTS, ES, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS CONFIDENT ICJ WILL RULE IN ITS FAVOR; 
CONTENT WITH PROGRESS ON BORDER DEMARCATION WITH EL 
SALVADOR 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 654 
 
     B. EL SALVADOR 2226 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; Reasons 1.5 (b) and 
(d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: Honduran officials are confident the 
International Court of Justice (ICJ) will uphold its original 
1992 decision demarcating the border between Honduras and El 
Salvador and are dismissive of El Salvadoran claims that new 
material unknown to the Court at the time would have been a 
decisive factor in the original proceedings.  Honduras is 
also very pleased with the progress thus far by the 
OAS-sponsored effort (lead by NIMA specialist John Gates) to 
assist the two countries in demarcating their borders, 
predicting that the whole process should come to a conclusion 
by the end of 2004.  END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------ 
El Salvador\'s ICJ Appeal 
------------------------ 
 
2. (C) On September 17 PolOff met with Miguel Tosta Appel, 
President of the Honduran Special El Salvador-Honduras Border 
Demarcation Commission, to discuss the pending El Salvador 
appeal of the 1992 ICJ decision demarcating the border 
between the two countries.  Appel optimistically predicated 
that the ICJ would uphold its original decision because El 
Salvador had not produced any new documentation unavailable 
during the 1992 decision that would have been a decisive 
factor in the original proceedings.  Appel prognosticated 
that El Salvador\'s appeal was more a face-saving effort to 
demonstrate to the Salvadoran people that all avenues had 
been exhausted before finally implementing the Court\'s 1992 
decision rather than a serious effort to convince the ICJ to 
reverse its earlier findings. 
 
3. (U) Public hearings were held from September 8-12 in The 
Hague on El Salvador\'s Application for Revision of the ICJ\'s 
original 11 September 1992 decision concerning the border 
dispute between El Salvador and Honduras.  At issue are 30 
square miles on the Gulf of Fonseca that El Salvador claims 
it was wrongfully denied in the 1992 decision.  To bolster 
its claim, El Salvador has produced a map and other documents 
from a Chicago library that it claims represents new material 
unknown to the Court when if first made its original decision. 
 
4. (C) Commissioner Appel, who was also a member of the 
original Honduran delegation to The Hague in 1992, opined to 
PolOff that Honduras and El Salvador were both fully aware of 
the Chicago material prior to 1992, but neither side choose 
to bring it to the Court\'s attention (He was unsure why El 
Salvador had not referenced the Chicago material in 1992). 
Appel dismissed any differences between the Chicago material 
and the documents that formed the backbone of the Court\'s 
original 1992 judgment to the lack of effective copying 
material, noting that \"copy machines didn\'t exist in the 
1790\'s.\" 
 
------------------------------ 
OAS Border Demarcation Effort 
------------------------------ 
 
5. (SBU) On August 18 Honduras and El Salvador began 
implementing the OAS-directed border demarcation decision for 
the first of six disputed areas ordered by the 1992 ICJ 
decision (ref B).  Assisting in the effort is OAS envoy, NIMA 
specialist John Gates.  Commissioner Appel praised Gates\' 
professionalism and predicted that the process of demarcation 
and placement of border markers should come to a conclusion 
by the end of 2004 if the Government of El Salvador (GOES) 
and the Government of Honduras (GOH) sufficiently fund the 
effort. 
 
6. (C) Commissioner Appel acknowledged that some of the 
border areas under review (particularly in the second area 
and the Gulf of Fonseca) are politically sensitive for El 
Salvador but he did not think Gates would deviate, even 
partially, from the original 1992 ICJ decision.  Appel added 
he believes both the GOH and GOES will fully abide by Gates\' 
decisions regardless of the final outcome, referring to a May 
agreement between the GOH and GOES that Gates\' decisions 
would be final. 
 
7. (C) Commissioner Appel did not belabor the slow progress 
on border demarcation, saying he understood the politics 
behind what he believes to be El Salvador\'s past 
\"foot-dragging\" on implementing the 1992 agreement.  Appel 
was confident, however, that progress would increase 
significantly, particularly after the expected ICJ decision 
not to revisit its original 1992 findings. 
 
8. (C) Comment:  The ICJ\'s initial ruling gave two-thirds of 
the 168 square miles in dispute to Honduras, including 
territory on the Gulf of Fonseca with access to vital Pacific 
Ocean coastal and fishing areas, which explains Honduran 
resentment that El Salvador has been slow to implement the 
initial 1992 decision.  The GOH is extremely confident that 
El Salvador\'s appeal to the ICJ to revisit the Gulf of 
Fonseca area seems to have little chance of success.  The 
completion of the appeals process will remove the final legal 
obstacle to completing the border demarcation process.  The 
rest depends upon the political will of the two governments 
and the resources available to implement the agreement. 
PIERCE 
"
"10852","9/18/2003 21:49","03TEGUCIGALPA2222","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, DS/OP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, PREL, PTER, PHUM, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATION OUTSIDE EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 
REGARDING THE DISAPPEARANCE OF FATHER JIM CARNEY 
 
 
On September 17 approximately 100 demonstrators, mostly from 
the Popular Block, gathered peacefully outside the Embassy to 
protest the lack of information over the disappearance of 
leftist Jesuit priest, Father Jim Carney, (aka Father 
Guadalupe) in 1982-83.  Father Guadalupe left the U.S. to 
come live and work with leftist guerrillas in Honduras.  The 
demonstration was led by Joseph Connolly, brother-in-law of 
Father Guadalupe, who is also a U.S. citizen.  Mr. Connolly 
delivered a letter addressed to the Ambassador demanding the 
Embassy release any documents it has relating to the priest\'s 
disappearance.  Mr. Connolly then delivered an anti-U.S. 
speech to the crowed and led them in anti-U.S. slogans. 
PIERCE 
"
"10877","9/19/2003 16:08","03TEGUCIGALPA2231","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","03STATE249843","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191608Z Sep 03
","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/OP/WHA, S/CT, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2013 
TAGS: ASEC, HO, PGOV, PTER 
SUBJECT: SECURITY ENVIRONMENT PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE (SEPQ) 
 
REF: A. 03 STATE 249843 
 
     B. 03 TEGUC 02102 
     C. 03 TEGUC 912 (SEPQ 04/15/03) 
     D. 03 TEGUC 01144 (POPULAR REVOLUTIONARY FORCES INFO) 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission, Roger Pierce, Reason 1.5 (C) 
               and (D). 
 
(U) The following responses are keyed to the Security 
Environment Profile Questionnaire contained in Reftel (A) and 
were discussed by EAC Reftel (B). 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
 
1. (SBU)  Demonstrations: 
 
(1-A.)  Yes.  Additionally, there are a number of 
organizations and groups under the loose collective 
leadership of (and affiliated with) the Bloque Popular that 
have been carrying out anti-American demonstrations, as well 
as demonstrations targeting local issues.  The following 
organizations have been involved in anti-American political 
activities to varying degrees.  They are listed in 
alphabetical order, utilizing Spanish acronyms where 
applicable (Updated list follows): 
 
ARTISTAS DE LA UNAH 
Artists of the National Autonomous University of 
Honduras (UNAH) 
 
BLOQUE POPULAR 
Popular Bloc 
 
COCOH 
Farmers\' Cooperatives Union 
 
CODECOH 
Honduran Consumer Protection Committee 
 
CODEH 
Honduran Committee for Human Rights 
 
COFADEH 
Honduran Committee of Family Members of the Detained 
and Disappeared 
 
COHAPAZ 
Honduran Committee for Action for Peace 
 
COLPROHSUMA 
A small Teachers\' Union 
 
COMPA-H 
People of the Americas Convergence Movement 
(COMPA)- Honduras 
 
COPEMH 
Honduran Association of Secondary School Teachers 
 
COPINH 
Civic Council of Popular Organizations and 
Indigenous Groups of Honduras (also appears as COPIN) 
 
COPRUMH 
Professional Association Teachers\' Union 
 
CGT 
General Coordinator of Honduran Workers (the largest of 
Honduras\' three national labor confederations) 
 
CTH 
Confederation of Honduran Workers (the strongest of the 
three National Labor Confederations) 
 
CUTH 
United Confederation of Honduran Workers (the most left of 
the three National Labor Confederations) 
 
FPR 
Popular Revolutionary Forces, A shadowy alleged 
revolutionary group.  See Reftel D for details. 
 
FUTH 
United Federation of Honduran Workers (the largest 
component of CUTH, above) 
 
FSM 
Feminist Movement (details needed) 
 
FUR 
University Revolutionary Front 
 
FUTH 
United Federation of Honduran Workers (the largest 
component of CUTH, above) 
 
GRUPO LOS NECIOS DE LA UNAH 
UNAH Fools Group - Activist group in UNAH that \"cheerleads\" 
and motivates demos 
 
MEH 
Honduran Student Movement 
 
PARTIDO DE LOS TRABAJADORES DE LA FACULTAD DE PEDAGOGIA 
DE LA UNAH Teaching Faculty Workers\' Party of UNAH 
 
RADIO GUALCHO 
Leftist/Activist radio station (1510Mhz) that works 
closely with Bloque Popular and is actively involved in 
most demonstrations 
 
REPRESENTANTE DE FRENTE Y REFORMA DE LA UNAH 
Reform Front Representative of UNAH 
 
SERUNAH 
New UNAH coalition group, like Bloque Popular 
 
SETROINFOP 
Details Needed 
 
SITRAINA 
National Agrarian Institute Workers\' Union 
 
SITRAIHSS 
Institute of Social Security Workers\' Union 
 
SITRAUNAH 
UNAH Workers\' Union 
 
SITRAUPEN 
A Workers\' Union (details needed) 
 
STIBYS 
Beverage and Associated Industries Workers\' Union 
(plays a key organizing and logistics role for many 
demos) 
 
SITRAPANI 
Child Welfare Association Workers\' Union 
 
UD 
Democratic Unification Party (remnants of the Communist 
Party of Honduras and other former Marxist parties; 
represented in the National Congress) 
 
UNAH 
National Autonomous University of Honduras 
 
URP 
Revolutionary People\'s Union 
 
 
NOTE: The most anti-U.S. groups are: MEH, URP, UD, Bloque 
Popular, STIBYS, COPINH and COMPA-H. 
 
(1-B.) Yes.  There have been more than seven demonstrations 
in Tegucigalpa since December 2002, either at the Embassy or 
nearby locations.  Demo dates:  12/5/02, 01/25/03, 01/30/03, 
02/15/03, 03/8/03 and 03/27/03. 
 
(1-C.)  Over half of the demonstrations have taken place at 
or near the Embassy. 
 
(1-D.)  The size of anti-American demonstrations at the 
Embassy varies from twenty to over three hundred 
participants.  The larger demos usually consist of supporters 
from six to more than twelve different organizations, which 
operate as a loosely structured coalition under the guidance 
of Bloque Popular. 
 
(1-E.)  While there are demonstrations based on local issues, 
such as civil service salaries, privatization, IMF 
requirements, etc.  U.S. actions in Iraq and the Central 
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) have become the current 
focus.  The following statements/demands have been made 
repeatedly during past demos at the Embassy:  No to war in 
Iraq, No to war, Stop plan Colombia, Pro-Human rights, World 
Peace, Stop Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), 
U.S. Forces out of Honduras (Soto Cano AB), Burning US flags, 
U.S. Military out of Cuba, U.S. destroy your WMD, Stop 
intervention in Venezuela, Stop Standard Fruit exploiting the 
indigenous people, No to CAFTA, No to privatization. 
 
(1-F.)  Generally peaceful, but demonstrators have burned 
U.S. flags, painted slogans on Mission outer perimeter walls 
and utilized homemade mortars to detonate large fireworks 
charges that are propelled high into the air before exploding. 
 
(1-G.)  N/A. 
 
(1-H.)  N/A. 
 
(1-I.)  Yes. 
 
(1-J.)  Yes.  Occasionally they will pass by the Embassy. 
 
(1-K.)  The size varies from a few hundred to 5-10 thousand 
people. 
 
(1-L.)  Generally peaceful but fences, grillwork and windows 
have been destroyed near the National Congress and many tires 
burned.  At times suspected plain-clothes police have been 
held and beaten by hard-core protestors within the 
demonstrations. 
 
(1-M.)  N/A. 
 
2. (SBU)  Macro Conflict Conditions: 
 
(2-A.)  NO. 
 
(2-B.)  N/A. 
 
(2-C.)  N/A. 
 
(2-D.)  N/A. 
 
3. (SBU)  Host Country Capabilities: 
 
(3-A.)  No. 
 
(3-B.)  Yes.  Training by US Border Patrol(BorTac) Teams 
good, but GOH security infrastructure needs major 
improvements. 
 
(3-C.)  Yes. 
 
(3-D.)  No.  However, GOH intelligence units have an 
institutional awareness of and a modest capability of 
penetrating indigenous radical groups. 
 
(3-E.)  Yes. 
 
(3-F.)  No. 
 
(3-G.)  Yes. 
 
(3-H.)  Average/Below Average. 
 
(3-I.)  Average/Ineffective. 
 
(3-J.)  Average/Ineffective.  A new unit within the Ministry 
of Public Security called the Frontier Police has been 
established to handle border patrol duties.  The unit is 
making positive steps towards border control but lack of 
funding and manpower are limiting the effectiveness of the 
unit. 
 
4. (SBU)  Indigenous Terrorism-Anti American Terrorist 
Groups: 
 
(4-A.)  No. 
 
(4-B.)  N/A. 
 
(4-C.)  N/A. 
 
(4-D.)  N/A. 
 
(4-E.)  N/A. 
 
(4-F.)  N/A. 
(4-G.)  N/A. 
 
(4-H.)  N/A. 
5. (SBU)  Other Indigenous Terrorist Groups: 
(5-A.)  No. 
(5-B.)  N/A. 
 
(5-C.)  N/A. 
 
(5-D.)  N/A. 
 
(5-E.)  N/A. 
 
6. (C/NF)  Transnational Terrorism-Transnational Terrorist 
Indicators: 
 
(6-A.)  No.  However, there are rumors that there are Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty (ETA), IRA, and Chiapas (Zapatistas) 
sympathizers in Honduras who could be involved in advising 
indigenous groups.  Some Hondurans are studying in Cuba and 
also conceivably could be receiving training in subversion 
and terrorism, although it is more likely they are being 
indoctrinated as agents of influence.   As this Cuban program 
for Hondurans is in its infancy, there have been no 
indications that such training is taking place. 
 
(6-B.)  N/A. 
 
(6-C.)  N/A. 
 
(6-D.)  N/A and NO. 
 
(6-E.)  N/A. 
 
(6-F.)  The only known hostile intelligence presence of note 
is Cuban.  While the Cuban mission appears to have extensive 
contacts with leftists and indigenous groups, there is no 
indication they are planning or supporting terrorism. 
 
(6-H.)  There is no shortage of weapons in Honduras.  It 
would also not be difficult for hostile terrorist elements to 
import weapons and/or explosives from neighboring countries. 
PIERCE 
"
"10884","9/19/2003 20:01","03TEGUCIGALPA2233","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND 
IIP/T/ES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON WTO, SEPTEMBER 19, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Roger Marin Neda in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily 
\"El Heraldo\" on 9/19 entitled \"Running after a mirage\".  \"There 
were no great expectations before the failed WTO meeting in 
Cancun, although we are aware that free trade is fundamental for 
economic growth and poverty reduction.\" 
 
\"For some, the failure of the Cancun meeting began in 1996 when 
the EU and Japan requested the inclusion of several new issues in 
the original WTO agreement: policies to promote competitiveness, 
transparency in government purchases, and deregulation of foreign 
investment and trade.  Developing countries saw more obligations 
without more rights, more costs than benefits, increased risks of 
legal penalties, and restrictions for their labor and 
environmental policies.\" 
 
\"The U.S. presented a much better proposal: the progressive 
elimination of tariffs on manufactures until 2015, and a 76% 
reduction of tariffs on agricultural goods for the next five 
years. It was a sound proposal, but it didn\'t address the issue 
of agricultural and cotton subsidies.  A New York Times editorial 
stated that, `businesses, workers and taxpayers should be 
angered, because this administration is far more enthusiastic to 
support the most indefensible protectionism than protecting the 
national interests, by promoting growth through greater trade\'. 
Undoubtedly, the U.S. was more flexible and open, and I believe 
their proposals would have been viable if the demands from Japan 
and the EU didn\'t place such heavy burden on the developing 
countries.\" 
 
 
\"One of the biggest surprises of the Cancun meeting was the G-21, 
where half of the global population and two-thirds of the 
agricultural producers live.  The G-21 demonstrated its unity, 
strength and boldness, even though countries like China, Brazil, 
India and South Africa have very different economies and cultural 
values, and it\'s uncertain that they will share a medium or long- 
term common position, as they did in Cancun.\" 
 
\"It will be unrealistic for developing countries to have long- 
term expectations in the G-21.  It\'ll be like going after an 
illusion, a mirage.  It\'s like expecting that the equality of 
global trade on agricultural goods will bring immediate benefits 
to the producers.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"10912","9/22/2003 19:37","03TEGUCIGALPA2250","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","02Tegucigalpa2043|03Tegucigalpa2563","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002250 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:MLARSEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EINV, KPRV, HO 
SUBJECT: Big Bang, Motorola Wants Out - Honduras Telecom 
Highlights 
 
REF: A) 02 Tegucigalpa 02043  B)02 Tegucigalpa 02563 C) 02 
 
Tegucigalpa 03151 
 
1. (U) Summary.  Within the next week, President Maduro is 
expected to make a \"Big Bang\" announcement on the opening of 
the telecommunications market to private carriers wishing to 
enter into joint ventures and begin servicing communities as 
sub-contractors of Hondutel.  Two American companies already 
in business with Hondutel have recently had mixed results in 
investment disputes with the state-owned monopoly.  AT&T 
succeeded at having their circuits reconnected, but the 
company, along with Sprint, still does not have approval to 
locate phone booths in public locations including call 
centers.  Domestically, Hondutel and the two cellular 
service providers, Celtel and Megatel, are having 
difficulties reaching an agreement amongst themselves on 
connection rates.  Motorola wants to sell its shares as 
technical advisor to the European firm, Millicom, but has 
not yet succeeded in securing approval for the sale from 
Conatel.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Big Bang Announcement - Opening the Market 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) The announcement of the opening of the 
telecommunications sector, originally scheduled for April 
25, then August 11, is now scheduled to occur before the end 
of September.  President Maduro is expected to announce the 
official opening of the telecommunications market for joint 
ventures with Hondutel, Honduras\' state-owned telephone 
monopoly.  Under the proposed program new carriers, both 
foreign and domestic, will be able to register with 
Honduras\' regulatory body, Conatel, as sub-contractors for 
Hondutel.  (Note: Though full privatization is not 
anticipated until December 2005, this is seen as a positive 
step towards the liberalization of the telecom sector.  End 
note.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
American Company Investment Disputes with Hondutel 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
3. (U) The U.S. telecommunications company Sprint approached 
the Embassy in mid-May requesting assistance with its 
international calling booths that were removed from 
Hondutel\'s public calling centers.  Sprint notified Embassy 
officials that AT&T had its phone booths removed as well. 
AT&T representatives also requested assistance after being 
notified of Embassy advocacy on behalf of Sprint.  Embassy 
and State EB/CIP officers raised the American companies\' 
concerns with Hondutel\'s President, Alonso Valenzuela on 
multiple occasions. 
 
4. (U) Valenzuela, along with a team of Hondutel attorneys 
responded to the complaints by noting that according to 
Honduran law, as Honduras\' state-owned monopoly, Hondutel 
has exclusive rights to all public telephones and calling 
centers unless otherwise stipulated by private agreement. 
In an effort to prepare for privatization in 2005, Hondutel 
claims it is trying to \'get its house in order\' by 
rectifying all outstanding irregularities such as the 
unauthorized use of public call centers by third party 
companies.  Unfortunately, to date, neither Sprint nor AT&T 
have been able to provide copies of the requested 
documentation showing authorization to use the calling 
centers, nor have they registered as a sub-contractor with 
Conatel.  Therefore the Embassy considers this issue closed. 
Any and all companies wishing to open their own calling 
centers will be allowed to do so after the big bang 
announcement and the program goes into effect. 
 
5. (SBU) AT&T raised its additional dilemma regarding an 
unresolved payment dispute in the amount of USD 7.3 million 
dating back to the 1980\'s.  When negotiations between AT&T 
and Hondutel broke down, AT&T decided to stop payments to 
Hondutel from August 2002 through April 2003 to recover 
funds it claims Hondutel owes (Hondutel in return claims 
AT&T owes it USD 12.8 million).  In May 2003, as a response 
to the six months of non-payment, Hondutel shut off all AT&T 
circuits, both incoming and outgoing.  Partially as a result 
of Embassy and Department advocacy, Hondutel and AT&T 
returned to the negotiating table which led to the eventual 
reconnection of AT&T circuits in August.  AT&T agreed to pay 
the six months of service from August to April, with the 
understanding that both parties would continue negotiations 
on the 20 year old settlement dispute. 
 
6. (SBU) As an additional part of the agreement, both 
Hondutel and AT&T agreed to speak with their respective 
governments concerning the need to move rates closer to 
costs and regional averages.  Hondutel states that it 
understands the need to reduce rates but indicates the GOH 
is not yet supportive of this position.  However, Hondutel 
has agreed to approach the GOH on the matter.  AT&T has also 
forwarded a letter to the Embassy detailing AT&T\'s position 
and the importance of getting rates closer to costs. 
Comment:  US - Honduran settlement rates of USD 0.23 per 
minute contribute to extraordinarily high per minute call 
rates.  The GOH understands the impact on competitiveness 
and the investment climate but is likely to resist giving up 
too much Hondutel revenue at this juncture as the GOH is 
trying to reduce its budget deficit and reach agreement with 
the IMF on fiscal targets.  A gradual approach will be 
needed.  End Comment. 
 
-------------------------- 
Cellular Service Providers 
-------------------------- 
 
7. (U) On April 25, 2003, the Swedish-Honduran consortium 
Megatel-EMCE won the bid for a cellular service contract, 
the second such existing contract in Honduras (refs b,c). 
The only other cellular provider, Celtel, has been operating 
in Honduras since 1996.  Though Megatel\'s contract 
stipulates the company must be fully operational by June 
2004, the company has stated it will begin operations before 
Christmas 2003.  Conatel confirmed the projected early start- 
up date, but noted problems emerging between Celtel, Megatel 
and Hondutel related to connection rates.  There also 
appears to be some discontent with Hondutel and Celtel 
regarding international connection rates.  Eighty percent of 
current cellular users buy prepaid cards in lieu of signing 
a contract with Celtel.  In order to make it feasible for 
these users to receive or complete international calls, 
Hondutel and Celtel (and presumably Megatel should they use 
the same pricing structure) would need to reduce 
international call rates by 20 cents per minute.  Per 
Hondutel, the current international rate to the U.S. is 84 
cents per minute.  Due to tariff pricing issues, all three 
companies are having difficulty reaching interconnection 
agreements. 
 
------------------ 
Motorola Wants Out 
------------------ 
 
8. (SBU) As part of a worldwide corporate move, Motorola has 
decided to relinquish its role of operator in foreign 
markets, opting instead to be solely a provider of equipment 
and accessories.  When Motorola informed GOH officials and 
Conatel of its desire to sell its shares as technical 
advisor to the European firm, Millicom, a surprising refusal 
was handed down by Conatel officials stating Motorola is 
technically the main concessionaire of the 10-year contract 
published in 1996, not the technical advisor, therefore 
Motorola can not sell out its shares. 
 
9. (SBU) Rocafuerte Inc. (which later became Celtel) won the 
bid for the 10-year cellular contract in 1996.  When the 
contract was officially published in Honduras\' federal 
register, La Gazetta, in June of 1996, Motorola Inc. was 
listed as the main concessionaire instead of Rocafuerte Inc. 
In order to correct the error in concessionaire, in 1999, 
Conatel issued a resolution changing Celtel as the main 
party, and, at the same time extended the contract from the 
original 10 years to 25 years.  Apparently, for political 
reasons, the attorney general\'s office sued the board 
directors who issued the resolution, stating they had acted 
in a way exceeding their authority.  The resolution has 
remained in judicial limbo ever since.  Now that Motorola 
wants to sell its shares to Millicom, Conatel is reluctant 
to give authorization for the sale since it was never 
clarified that Motorola is actually the technical advisor, 
not the main concessionaire. 
 
10. (SBU) Conatel officials indicated that Celtel / Motorola 
has two options.  The first option would be for Celtel to 
submit the contract to congress for rectification.  Celtel 
chooses not to pursue this option as a change in 
concessionaire, though obvious, would be considered a 
fundamental change to the contract, therefore giving 
congress the ability to change anything else in the contract 
it chooses.  As Celtel believes some members of the congress 
may have outside economic interests in cellular service, 
they are leery of submitting the contract for open 
rectification.  The second option is to wait until the 
Supreme Court rules on the legality of the 1999 resolution. 
Conatel officials claim once the case is decided it can go 
ahead and issue authorization for the sale. 
 
Pierce 
"
"10966","9/24/2003 20:14","03TEGUCIGALPA2266","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002266 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MADURO TALKS DRUGS IN COLOMBIA WHILE 
POLICE NAB ANOTHER 20 KILOS 
 
1. On September 16 President Maduro met with Colombian 
President Alvaro Uribe in Cartagena, Colombia to discuss 
better coordination between the two nations\' counterdrug 
efforts.  Honduras is a major transshipment zone for illicit 
narcotics making their way north from Colombia to U.S. 
shores, although drug use is growing rapidly within Honduras. 
 This year, Honduras has experienced an alarming increase in 
illicit air-tracks, many of which originate from Colombia. 
 
2. According to Honduran press reports, President Uribe 
assured Maduro that recent interdiction efforts coordinated 
with the USG should have a significant impact on the amount 
of illicit air-tracks originating from Colombia.  (NOTE: 
Ostensibly, Uribe was referring to Colombia\'s new air bridge 
denial shoot-down policy.  END NOTE)  Uribe also indicated to 
Maduro that Colombia would increase counterdrug coordination 
with Honduras, but according to Minister of Defense Federico 
Breve, the details are yet to be worked out. (COMMENT:  We 
understand from GOH officials this exchange was the first 
discussion of such cooperation between the two governments. 
END COMMENT) 
 
3.  In the interim, two more drug traffickers were arrested 
September 20 near the Copan ruins in possession of eleven 
kilos of cocaine, which police discovered hidden in the gas 
tank of one of the suspect\'s vehicles.  Both suspects (Ilder 
Mejia and Wilmer Orlando Tabora) are Guatemalan citizens. 
Also confiscated were three cellular phones, a 45-caliber 
pistol, and some USD 1,940 in Honduran currency. 
 
4. Honduran Frontier Police also made their first drug 
seizure at the INL funded Container Freight Tracking System 
(CFTS) facility in Pavana which opened this April. A routine 
search of a passenger bus which originated from Costa Rica 
yielded nine kilos of cocaine, dispersed among three Honduran 
passengers. The INL Canine Unit alerted police to the 
presence of the drugs. 
PIERCE 
"
"10988","9/25/2003 22:38","03TEGUCIGALPA2289","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1497","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002289 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/25/2013 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: COWABUNGA:  TWO SEPARATE DRUG SEIZURES YIELD 13 
KILOS OF HEROIN AND APPROXIMATELY 1,026 KILOS OF COCAINE 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1497 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  On September 24, in two separate actions, 
Honduran police seized 13 kilos of heroin and approximately 
1,026 kilos of cocaine.  In both operations, Honduran 
authorities displayed unprecedented cooperation and 
coordination, working closely together and with U.S. 
counterdrug assets and State Department INL officials at 
Post.  Already, Honduras has confiscated more cocaine this 
year (4,748 kilos) than in the last five years combined.  The 
heroin seizure is the first significant heroin bust in the 
country\'s history.  The Maduro administration\'s determination 
to combat drug traffickers can now be accurately 
characterized as a confirmed fact, as well as the Honduran 
military\'s committed participation for drug-interdiction 
operations.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (C) The September 24 seizure of 13 kilos of heroin, with a 
U.S. street value of some USD 5 million, is the first 
significant heroine bust in Honduran history.  The operation 
was a success due to highly coordinated cooperation between 
the INL-sponsored vetted unit and the Honduran Frontier 
Police.  The vetted unit, having received intelligence that 
the heroin was being transported in a van, located the 
vehicle and then called in the Frontier Police to make the 
arrest. 
 
3. (U) Along with the heroin, two suspects were apprehended: 
Jose Antonio Fajardo Enamorado of Honduras (46); and Mauricio 
Castillo Romero from Guatemala (24).  The two men were 
arrested in the Department of El Paraiso, shortly after 
driving across the border from Nicaragua.  According to press 
reports and Honduran authorities, both suspects were to be 
paid USD 6,000 per kilo for transporting the drugs.  The 
heroin originated from Colombia, and Honduran authorities 
believe the drugs were connected to the same cartel 
associated with convicted PARLACEN Congressman Cesar Diaz 
(reftel).  Diaz is currently serving a ten-year prison 
sentence in Nicaragua on narcotics trafficking charges. 
 
4. (C) Separately, on the same day, Honduran authorities 
seized approximately 1,026 kilos of cocaine after a go-fast 
boat (originally tracked by SOUTHCOM\'s TAT assets) beached 
off Punto Gordo, on the north side of the Island of Roatan. 
The craft became tangled in mangroves after attempting to 
evade a Honduran Air Force helicopter that had been deployed 
to track it. The go-fast crew of five fled into the forest, 
abandoning its cargo.  This latest confiscation brings the 
total amount of cocaine seized this year in Honduras to 4,748 
kilos, more than the last five years combined. 
 
5. (U)  The U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Harriet Lane, which had 
earlier that day assisted in the seizure of another go-fast 
with traces of cocaine, guarded the craft until Honduran 
authorities arrived on the scene. 
 
6. (U) COMMENT:  The cooperation between the U.S., the 
Honduran military, and the Honduran police is clear evidence 
that the Maduro administration is strongly committed to 
combating drug trafficking, directing its institutions to act 
accordingly.  This cooperation represents a giant leap 
forward in Honduran determination to effectively interdict 
drugs transiting the country. END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"11018","9/26/2003 16:56","03TEGUCIGALPA2293","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002293 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR A/S FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS ARCOS 
DEPT. FOR INL AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OVIP, PREL, SNAR, PTER, PHUM, SMIG, HO 
SUBJECT:  REQUEST INVITATION FOR HONDURAN MINISTER OF PUBLIC 
SECURITY ALVAREZ TO MEET WITH DHS SECRETARY RIDGE 
 
Ref: Arcos-Palmieri/Parks-Banda emails (various) 
 
1.  This is an action request.  Please see para. 5. 
 
 
2.  During a recent visit to Honduras, prior to assuming 
office, DHS Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, 
Cresencio Arcos was very favorably impressed by the counter 
terrorism and anti-alien smuggling efforts being undertaken 
by Honduran law enforcement authorities.  Post believes it 
would be very beneficial to United States national security 
interests in this region to highlight contributions of one 
of our Central American partners to the war on terrorism. 
Given the deployment of Honduran troops in Iraq in support 
of coalition efforts to rebuild that country and the 
excellent level of bilateral cooperation with the Honduran 
government, we request that Honduran Minister of Public 
Security, Oscar Arturo Alvarez, visit Washington, DC, from 
October 21-25 to meet with DHS Secretary Ridge and other DHS 
and State officials to discuss programs and review counter 
terrorism efforts in Honduras. 
 
 
3.  Per ref e-mails, Post asks DHS assistance in arranging 
meetings with Assistant Secretary Arcos, Commissioner Bonner 
of Border Patrol, Chief of U.S. Border Patrol Gustavo De La 
Vina, and others regarding law enforcement issues in 
Honduras and to discuss successful joint operations as well 
as future joint participation in the 
 
 
 
 
 
areas of port security, illegal arms transfers, alien 
smuggling, trafficking in persons, counter terrorism as well 
as counter narcotics operations. Post will arrange meetings 
with State Department offices separately. 
 
4.  Post is prepared to cover cost of travel for the 
Minister, including airfare, lodging and per diem.  Per ref 
e-mails, we understand that DHS recommends an Embassy escort 
accompany the Minister.  The process for Minister of 
Security Alvarez to request official permission to travel 
from the government requires some lead time. 
 
5. Action request: Post respectfully requests that a formal 
DHS invitation for Honduran Minister of Public Security 
Alvarez to meet with DHS Secretary Ridge be extended no 
later than October 5. 
 
PALMER 
"
"11019","9/26/2003 17:00","03TEGUCIGALPA2294","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03State252932","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR DCHA/DG, EGAT, AND LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB (TFAULKNER) 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PGOV, PHUM, OTRA, AFIN, HO 
SUBJECT:  Embassy Tegucigalpa Welcomes DOL Regional Basic 
Education Project Targeting Child Laborers 
 
Ref: (A) State 252932 
 
(B) Olsen/Faulkner e-mail 9/11/03 
(C) Tegucigalpa 2025 
 
1. Post strongly supports the Department of Labor\'s proposed 
regional basic education project targeting child laborers 
and children at risk of working in Central America and 
welcomes the proposed visit of DOL officials/consultants 
(ref A). 
 
2. DOL is currently funding ILO/IPEC programs to combat 
child labor in the following sectors: coffee in Santa 
Barbara, melons in Choluteca, commercial sexual exploitation 
of children in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula, and child 
divers in the Mosquitia.  (ILO/IPEC also has programs funded 
by other donors to help combat child labor in garbage dumps 
and domestic service in Tegucigalpa.)  In addition, 
USAID/Washington is funding a successful one-year pilot 
project in Valle to provide educational opportunities to 
working children, which ends in December 2003.  Post 
understands that further USAID/Washington funding for this 
project is unlikely. 
 
3. Post suggests that DOL consider (1) working with ILO/IPEC 
to expand its program in Choluteca to encompass the USAID 
project in neighboring Valle and add sugar cane farms and 
child victims of commercial sex exploitation in the area 
which borders both El Salvador and Nicaragua, or (2) expand 
work combating commercial sexual exploitation of children in 
Tegucigalpa, San Pedro Sula, and other large population 
centers which would augment the USG\'s support for increased 
GOH efforts against trafficking in persons (both domestic 
and international).  Post notes that while assisting 
children working in commercial agriculture (a sector key to 
CAFTA) is a high priority, most child laborers work in the 
informal sector.  Another option would be to begin a new 
program to assist children in the informal sector, many of 
whom might be street children or at risk to become street 
children. 
 
4.  Note:  Please see ref C for more information on child 
labor in Honduras.  End Note. 
 
Palmer 
"
"11023","9/26/2003 22:26","03TEGUCIGALPA2301","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA1904|03TEGUCIGALPA1938|03TEGUCIGALPA2081","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002301 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/PHD, INL, INL/LP, AND DS 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, SNAR, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN MINISTER OF PUBLIC SECURITY CLAIMS MURDER 
RATE HAS DECLINED IN TWO MAIN CITIES SINCE ANTI-GANG LAW 
PASSED 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1904 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1938 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2081 
 
1. Although still exceptionally high (ref B), according to 
Minister of Public Security (MOPS) Oscar Alvarez September 
23, the murder rate in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula 
declined approximately 24 percent since the passage of 
anti-gang legislation in early August (ref A).  (Note:  As 
reported in ref B, the methodology used to collect murder 
statistics varies between different government agencies (as 
well as NGOs) which leads to significant discrepancies.  End 
Note.) 
 
2. According to MOPS Alvarez, since the new anti-gang law 
came into effect 222 people have been arrested.  Of those, 56 
percent have been detained for prosecution while the 
remaining 44 percent have been freed.  MOPS Alvarez indicated 
to DCM that the GOH was targeting gang leaders while 
attempting to convince the rank-and-file to abandon the gangs. 
 
3. While MOPS Alvarez is reporting declining murder rates, 
Casa Alianza (a child advocacy NGO that tracks the murder of 
children and youth) states that children and youth murder 
rates have remained constant, except for a decline in July. 
Casa Alianza also attributed only 16 percent of the 64 youth 
and children murders in August to gang members, while 80 
percent still have no identified killer. 
 
4.  COMMENT:  Personal security remains the number one 
concern of the average Honduran and the passage of anti-gang 
legislation was extremely popular.  Popular sentiment, and 
the GOH, tend to blame gangs for the scourge of violence that 
has gripped the country.  This, however, is a debatable 
conclusion.  If a significant decline in the overall murder 
rate proves to be more than a short-term phenomenon, it will 
go a long way toward giving credence to GOH assertions that 
gangs are to blame for most of the violence.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"11047","9/29/2003 14:24","03TEGUCIGALPA2302","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002302 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND EB/TRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON, EINV, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: INTERAIRPORTS AT AGE THREE: A NEW CONTRACT, A NEW 
START? 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: InterAirports, the international consortium 
that operates Honduras\' four international airports, has 
recently renegotiated its contract with the GOH.  The new 
contract would resolve many of the issues that have troubled 
InterAirports in its three years of operation, specifically 
the matter of a financing guarantee to allow InterAirports to 
continue work on renovations.  The renegotiated contract has 
been heavily criticized in the press as offering too much to 
InterAirports and not enough to the GOH, but GOH and 
Congressional leaders believe the chances of passage are 
good, indicating there were only a few points of concern. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) EconOffs have held several meetings in recent weeks 
and months to discuss the ongoing negotiations between 
InterAirports and the GOH.  From InterAirports EconOffs have 
met with the General Manager Elida Howell, a Honduran, and 
Carlos Vidal Ferreira, the leader of the recent negotiations, 
a Portuguese national who works for Soares de Costa, the 
largest partner in the consortium.  From the GOH, EconOff met 
with Vice Minister for Transportation Eduardo Pavon, and 
Ambassador and EconCouns discussed the issue briefly with the 
President of Congress at a mid-September luncheon.  EconOff 
has also received a copy of the renegotiated InterAirports 
contract that is currently awaiting approval by Congress. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
3. (SBU) In October 2000, operation of Honduras\' four 
international airports (in Tegucigalpa, San Pedro Sula, La 
Ceiba and Roatan) was granted to an international consortium 
called InterAirports.  The consortium is made up of Soares de 
Costa S.A. (of Portugal, with roughly 25 percent ownership), 
Calmaquip Engineering Corporation (USA, 22 percent), SERLIPSA 
Swissport S.A. (Peru, 20 percent), Pacific Architects and 
Engineers, Inc. (USA, 18 percent), San Francisco Airports of 
Honduras (USA/Honduras, 10 percent) and the local businessman 
Raul Torres Lazo (Honduras, 5 percent).  Currently American 
businesses comprise just over 50 percent ownership of the 
consortium, though this will likely fall to 40 percent in the 
months ahead (see paragraph 11 below).  While InterAirports 
is responsible for maintenance and operations at the 
airports, safety and security remain the responsibility of 
the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGAC), currently 
under the leadership of Cesar Vasquez (see septel for an 
overview of airport security issues in Honduras). 
 
4. (SBU) Initial problems faced by InterAirports included a 
sharp increase in cargo and handling fees that was not well 
explained to the public, which led to a public backlash and a 
court case.  In August 2001 the fees were lowered and 
InterAirports secured a public declaration from leading 
private sector figures that the new rates were fair and 
reasonable, but the damage in the court of public opinion was 
already done.  Comment: InterAirports claims the government 
had raised the fees previously but left the blame to the 
consortium.  End comment. 
 
5. (SBU) A further dispute then developed over the 
renovations to the four airports that InterAirports had 
agreed to undertake.  As explained by InterAirports President 
Vidal Ferreira, these renovations were to be funded by three 
sources: equity from InterAirports\' shareholders, cashflow 
from their operations, and a bank loan, which was to be 
obtained using the airports concession as collateral. 
However the GOH refused to allow the concession to be used as 
collateral (despite a provision in the contract which, 
according to InterAirports, required the government to 
authorize the financial guarantee).  While the issue remained 
unresolved, InterAirports was prevented from obtaining 
financing and could not proceed with renovations.  As project 
due dates specified in the concession contract passed without 
progress on the renovations, InterAirports found itself 
subject to fines of USD 20,000 per day, which began accruing 
on May 16th.  InterAirports, in the meantime, began 
preparations for submitting the dispute to international 
arbitration in London. 
 
6. (SBU) InterAirports and the GOH subsequently agreed to a 
renegotiation of the concession contract in order to address 
the financial guarantee, to rebalance the responsibilities 
and income attributed to the consortium, and to allow the 
lowering of some fees in order to increase competitiveness. 
These negotiations began in June 2003 and ended in late July, 
though the fact that negotiations were taking place was not 
made public until August.  The GOH was represented in these 
negotiations by Minister of Tourism Thierry Pierrefeu, who 
together with InterAirports General Manager Howell made a 
presentation to Congress in late August on the benefits of 
the new contract.  A vote is expected in the next few weeks. 
 
-------------------------- 
What\'s in the new contract 
-------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) The new contract resolves the current dispute by 
explicitly stating that InterAirports may use its concession 
as a guarantee to receive financing for the renovation 
projects, something that was not stated in sufficiently clear 
terms in the original contract.  While the new contract does 
not address the punitive fines directly, it effectively 
eliminates the issue by rescheduling the due dates for the 
projects that InterAirports is contracted to undertake. 
(According to the new schedule renovations to the airports in 
San Pedro Sula, La Ceiba and Roatan would be completed in 
2004, and to Toncontin International Airport in Tegucigalpa 
by July 2005.) 
 
8. (SBU) The new contract also reduces, by an average of 45 
percent, the landing and parking fees charged, a change which 
the GOH hopes will make Honduran airports more competitive in 
the region and help the country attract more air traffic. 
(International landing fees are reduced from USD 4 to USD 
2.40 per ton, international parking fees are reduced from USD 
1 to US 40 cents per ton per hour, with somewhat smaller 
reductions in fees for national flights.)  In return, 
however, InterAirports is allowed to keep a larger share of 
its revenue: the percentage paid to the GOH is reduced from 
39.7 percent to 34.4 percent. 
 
9. (SBU) Cargo fees are unchanged from the level that was 
negotiated with the private sector in 2001.  While these fees 
continue to receive criticism, Howell stressed in her 
presentation before Congress that they are lower than the 
fees charged in either El Salvador or Costa Rica, the other 
two Central American countries in which the airports are 
privately owned. 
 
--------------------- 
Goodbye San Francisco 
--------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Another aspect of the new contract which has 
received significant attention is the requirement that a new 
partner take the place of San Francisco Airports of Honduras 
(a.k.a. SFO Honduras) within two months of the contract\'s 
approval.  The involvement of SFO Honduras has been 
controversial from the start.  The fact that SFO Honduras is 
a legally separate entity from the San Francisco 
International Airport was interpreted in the Honduran press 
as some kind of trick, in which the GOH had been fooled into 
believing that InterAirports included members with experience 
and expertise in operating a major international airport, 
when in fact this was not the case.  Some critics of 
InterAirports continue to argue that the granting of the 
concession to InterAirports in 2000 was not legally valid, 
since SFO Honduras does not qualify as an \"operator\" as 
defined by the terms of the concession. 
 
11. (SBU) In reality, Howell said that InterAirports has had 
no problems working with SFO Honduras, and the legal 
separation between SFO Honduras and the San Francisco 
International Airport has been misinterpreted and is typical 
in the industry.  (The company most likely to take San 
Francisco\'s place in the consortium, Vancouver Airport 
Services, is itself legally separate from the Vancouver 
International Airport Authority.)  Furthermore, San Francisco 
had already decided to pull out of InterAirports, for their 
own reasons, before the contract renegotiations began in 
June.  Thus, InterAirports was able to offer the replacement 
of SFO Honduras as a free bargaining chip in the 
negotiations, presenting as a concession something that was 
going to happen anyway. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Perceptions of the Public and the Press 
--------------------------------------- 
 
12. (SBU) InterAirports still must contend with consistently 
negative portrayal in the press, fueled by the former 
operators, some members of the business community, and the 
consortium\'s Honduran \"partner\".  The press has created the 
public perception that the company has cheated the government 
and the people of Honduras.  Media reaction to the new 
contract has focused on the fact that InterAirports will not 
have to pay the fines for falling behind schedule on 
renovations, and on the reduction of the share of revenues 
that the GOH will receive.  The press does not mention the 
GOH\'s failings to meet its contractual obligations. 
Headlines such as \"They\'re raising fees, and they won\'t even 
be punished!\" are unfortunately typical - misstating the 
facts (since the new contract doesn\'t raise fees) while 
indignantly criticizing the government for being too soft on 
a company that ought to be penalized.  In August, a newspaper 
cartoon portrayed InterAirports as a fat, laughing 
businessman, riding on the back of a departing plane, 
carrying a suitcase bulging with U.S. dollars. 
 
----------------------------- 
The New Contract and Congress 
----------------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) In a meeting on September 22nd, Vice Minister of 
Transportation Eduardo Pavon explained that the vote in 
Congress is being delayed so that members of Congress can 
prepare for the negative public reaction that approval of the 
contract will generate.  Pavon said that Congressmen need 
some time to develop justifications and explanations of the 
contract so that they will be able to answer \"to the people\". 
 However in private meetings, according to Pavon, leaders of 
both major parties (National and Liberal) and several minor 
parties have expressed their support for the new contract, 
and he expressed confidence that it will eventually be 
approved. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
14. (SBU) The GOH and InterAirports appear to have 
successfully stepped back from the brink.  The assignment of 
Minister of Tourism Pierrefeu to repair the relationship and 
sell Congress on the benefits of a revised contract was 
advantageous.  It is finally looking as if a resolution is in 
sight, although, in typical Honduran fashion, the contract\'s 
progress through Congress is slow.  The Embassy remains 
convinced that success in this concession is vital to pave 
the way for privatization in other important sectors.  End 
comment. 
Palmer 
"
"11130","10/1/2003 22:07","03TEGUCIGALPA2333","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA2289","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002333 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: IN YET ANOTHER DRUG BUST, HONDURAN POLICE SEIZE 
201 KILOS OF COCAINE:  4,949 KILOS SO FAR IN 2003 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 2289 
 
1. (U) On September 30 in the Department of Colon on the 
Caribbean coast, Honduran Frontier Police seized another 201 
kilos of cocaine.  This time, the drugs were hidden aboard a 
truck in multiple secret compartments.  Police were alerted 
to the drug\'s presence by a local source of information who 
reported the truck contained drugs. 
 
2. (U) As the vehicle approached a makeshift police 
checkpoint, Honduran authorities motioned the truck to stop. 
The driver refused and continued onward.  Police then pursued 
the vehicle on foot and opened fire, knocking out a tire. 
The driver then stopped and fled on foot with another 
passenger.  Police gave chase but were unable to apprehend 
the suspects.  The police then searched the vehicle and found 
the hidden cocaine. 
 
3. (SBU) Honduran press has reported the seized cocaine is 
packaged with similar markings to the approximately 1,026 
kilos police confiscated in Roatan on September 24 (reftel), 
although Post does not believe the shipments to be related. 
This brings the total amount of cocaine seized this year in 
Honduras to 4,949 kilos, more than the last five years 
combined. 
Palmer 
"
"11153","10/2/2003 14:49","03TEGUCIGALPA2340","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002340 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND 
IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR AGASH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON ROBERT ZOELLICK\'S VISIT TO CENTRAL 
AMERICA, OCTOBER 1, 2003 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
10/1 entitled \"Softening\".  \"This week, USTR Robert Zoellick is 
visiting Central America in an attempt to convince the regional 
governments of the need to make progress on CAFTA negotiations.\" 
 
\"In addition, Zoellick will try to dissuade Guatemala and Costa 
Rica from taking part in the G-22, which includes other Latin 
American countries led by Brazil.  This group proposed the total 
elimination of agricultural subsidies during the latest WTO 
meeting in Cancun, an issue that has been a nuisance for 
Washington.\" 
 
\"During his trip to the region, Zoellick will meet with the 
Central American presidents, the Ministers of Economy, 
Congressmen, CAFTA negotiators, businessmen and civil society 
representatives, trying to soften the position of these sectors 
by stressing the benefits Central America will obtain through a 
free trade agreement with the U.S.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"11154","10/2/2003 14:49","03TEGUCIGALPA2341","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PD TASK FORCE, IIP/G/WHA 
DIPASQUALE, EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR AGASH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, ETRD, PGOV, PARM, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON WTO AND ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT, OCTOBER 
1, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 
10/1 entitled \"The U.S. and Its Stick and Carrot Policy\".  \"The 
continuous implementation of the traditional stick and carrot 
policy by the U.S. in its external affairs has recently been 
evidenced by two events: the exoneration from penalties for four 
poor countries that signed agreements with Washington to 
guarantee the impunity of Americans responsible for crimes 
against humanity and the threats against Guatemala and Costa Rica 
for being members of the now-powerful G-22, the group of 
countries that are fighting in the WTO to eliminate agricultural 
subsidies.\" 
 
\"In regard to the boycott of the ICC, the White House had 
threatened to withhold military aid to 35 countries if they 
didn\'t sign an Article 98 agreement.  Four of those countries: 
Honduras, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo and 
Georgia gave in, and this week Washington informed them that they 
had achieved their reward, their carrot.\" 
 
\"On the other hand, Guatemala and Costa Rica are being threatened 
with the Washington stick for having the nerve to be part of the 
G-22, a group that seeks more equitable trade among poor and rich 
countries.  Obviously, the failure of the Cancun meeting has 
infuriated the U.S. and other rich countries that encountered a 
unified group of countries that aren\'t willing to be manipulated 
anymore.  We hope that both countries remain with the G-22 
because, as it was demonstrated in Cancun, the only option for 
the victims of agricultural subsidies is to remain united.\" 
 
\"We wonder how come Honduras, whose peasants would be severely 
affected competing with subsidized products from rich countries, 
is not a member of the G-22? We hope it\'s not because of the 
traditional preventive fear of our governmental authorities.\" 
 
\"In one way or another, the traditional stick and carrot policy 
is still yielding positive results, even though there is a 
worldwide cry against the unfairness of globalization.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"11191","10/3/2003 19:31","03TEGUCIGALPA2355","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE268181","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC AND EB 
PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/03/2013 
TAGS: ETRD, EAGR, ECON, ELAB, PREL, HO, WTO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN VIEWS OF WTO CANCUN MINISTERIAL 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 268181 
 
     B. (B) STATE 270764 
     C. (C) STATE 257469 
 
Classified By: Ambassador L. Palmer for reasons 1.5(B) and (D) 
 
-------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1. (C) In the wake of the breakdown of the Doha agenda 
negotiations at the Cancun WTO ministerial, Honduran 
officials seemed most interested in the impact on the 
agricultural talks in the Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) negotiations.  The GOH will now push 
strongly in the CAFTA talks for special safeguards or 
continued tariff protection for products that receive U.S. 
export subsidies and/or domestic supports.  GOH trade 
officials also are very keen to understand how Brazil\'s 
leadership role in the G-20 plus group (called G-21 or G-23 
here) will affect USG strategy in the Free Trade Agreement of 
the Americas (FTAA).  Within the Doha (DDA) negotiations, 
Honduras is seeking a certain form of special and 
differentiated treatment in the agricultural tariff 
reductions.  Honduras steered clear of being drawn into the 
G-21 during Cancun.  To the extent that USG negotiators can 
be responsive to its approach, Honduras may become an ally 
for constructive and ambitious DDA agricultural negotiations. 
 End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Cancun May Make the CAFTA Agriculture Talks Easier 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
2. (C) Honduran Trade Policy Director and chief CAFTA 
negotiator Melvyn Redondo went straight to the Managua round 
of the CAFTA negotiations directly from Cancun with one 
question for the USDEL: How is the USG going to respond to 
Central American concerns about U.S. agricultural subsidies 
and domestic supports in the CAFTA \"now that it is clear that 
there will be no reductions agreed to in the WTO?\" 
Negotiatiions over a limited agricultural safeguard are now 
seen as a potential answer to that question.  Comment:  Thus, 
from one point of view, it appears that the Cancun 
developments may make it easier to reach agreement on 
agriculture in the Central American talks.  End Comment. 
 
------------------------------- 
But What Does It Mean for FTAA? 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) EconOffs met with Minister of Industry and Trade 
Norman Garcia and Redondo on September 30.  They delivered 
Ambassador Zoellick\'s Financial Times op ed piece on Cancun 
and the CAFTA Labor Track II demarche as requested in refs b 
and c.  Garcia asked about the USG\'s strategy for moving the 
FTAA negotiations along.  EconCouns reiterated the USG\'s 
commitment to pursuing an FTAA on the established timeframe. 
 
------------------------------- 
Honduras\' Objectives in the WTO 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Going into Cancun, the GOH\'s key objective for the 
Ministerial was to fight for special and differentiated 
treatment, vis-a-vis agricultural tariff reduction, for 
developing countries like Honduras that already have 
relatively low bound and applied tariffs.  In a September 5 
meeting with EconCouns, Redondo said that the number of 
developing countries with similar tariff structures was very 
small and mentioned Sri Lanka as an example.  He added that 
Honduras would not be required to cut industrial tariffs 
because of its income level.  After Cancun, Garcia and 
Redondo seemed a bit bemused by their Central American 
colleagues\' involvement in the G-21 and a bit glum that their 
\"good behavior\" hadn\'t been recognized (this was a dig at the 
fact that USTR Zoellick is not visiting Honduras in his early 
October trip to the region). 
 
5. (C) Comment: The GOH\'s trade team is very thin, and CAFTA 
has been the focal point of its trade policy this year.  In 
any case, Honduran trade policy in the WTO is typically very 
narrowly focused.  In Doha, for example, Honduras\' prime 
focus was to maintain and expand the country\'s exception for 
free trade zones under Article 7 of the Subsidies Agreement. 
In the DDA negotiations themselves, the key objective has now 
shifted to protection from further tariff reduction on 
approximately 20 categories of \"strategic\" and \"sensitive\" 
agricultural products, in recognition of Honduras\' relatively 
modest tariff levels compared to other developing countries. 
If  the USG is able to be responsive to this approach, 
Honduras may become an ally for constructive and ambitious 
DDA agricultural negotiations.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"11315","10/9/2003 15:50","03TEGUCIGALPA2384","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03Tegucigalpa2283","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002384 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/IL, EB/TPP, AND H 
STATE PASS USTR FOR AUSTR VARGO 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, EAID, PREL, OREP, HO 
SUBJECT:  CODEL MEMBERS MEET WITH HONDURAS\' THREE LABOR UNION 
CONFEDERATIONS AND GOH OFFICIALS TO TALK CAFTA 
 
REF: (A) Tegucigalpa 2283 
 
     (B) Tegucigalpa 1487 
     (C) Tegucigalpa 426 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  CODEL Kolbe visited San Pedro Sula, 
Honduras September 27 as part of a Central American trip. 
After touring the Elcatex maquila owned by the Canahuati 
family and meeting with leaders of the Honduran Maquila 
Association, members of the delegation met at the maquila 
with leaders of the three labor confederations of Honduras: 
CGT, CTH, and CUTH.  The meeting was a productive discussion 
of challenges for the exercise/protection of core labor 
rights and CAFTA.  Chairman Kolbe also met with key GOH 
officials to discuss the Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) and the Millennium Challenge Account.  GOH 
officials noted that in addition to textiles benefits, CAFTA 
needed to provide additional market access for Honduran 
agricultural products, while providing protection and time 
for adjustment for vulnerable small producers.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) CODEL Kolbe, led by Representative Jim Kolbe (R-AZ), 
Chairman of the Appropriations\' Subcommittee on Foreign 
Operations, Export Financing and Related Programs, visited 
San Pedro Sula, Honduras September 27.  The delegation also 
included Representatives Earl Blumenauer (D-OR), Pete Stark 
(D-CA), Mike Thompson (D-CA), and Candice Miller (R-MI).  As 
part of their schedule, the Representatives discussed CAFTA 
with members of the maquila association, labor leaders, and 
GOH officials, and attended a reception in their honor hosted 
by the maquila association.  Other parts of the CODEL\'s visit 
to Honduras included site visits to a non-traditional 
agriculture farm and a HIV/AIDS project. 
 
Maquila Association Highlights CAFTA Textile Benefits 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3. (SBU) At the Elcatex maquila, Jesus Canahuati, President 
of the Honduran Maquila Association and Vice President of the 
umbrella private sector organization COHEP, gave a 
presentation to the CODEL on textiles and apparel discussions 
in the CAFTA negotiation.  (Note: Jesus Canahuati\'s father, 
Juan Canahuati, is the owner of the maquila and owner of the 
first free zone in Honduras, and his brother Mario Canahuati 
is currently the Honduran Ambassador to the United States. 
End note.)  The presentation focused on the size and growth 
of the Honduran maquila industry, the impact of CBI and CBTPA 
upon the industry\'s development, and the importance of CAFTA 
for the industry\'s future.  Canahuati emphasized the impact 
that the removal of quotas in 2005 will have on the Central 
American textile and apparel industry, stressing the need for 
a good CAFTA agreement to allow the region to compete with 
China and other Asian countries. 
 
4. (SBU) Canahuati also highlighted the interconnection 
between the Honduran and U.S. economies, pointing out that 56 
percent of Honduran imports are from the U.S.  Unlike the 
situation in Asia, growth in the Honduran maquila sector (and 
the Honduran economy as a whole) leads to continued jobs in 
the U.S. textile sector as well as other export-oriented 
sectors of the U.S. economy.  After the presentation, the 
CODEL had the chance to tour the non-unionized maquila, which 
includes spinning, dyeing, printing and cutting operations. 
All of the thread, and much of the equipment, used in the 
factory was made in the U.S. 
 
CODEL Talks CAFTA and Core Labor Rights With Unions 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
5. (U) Representatives Blumenauer, Miller, Stark, and 
Thompson met with the three Honduran labor confederations: 
General Workers\' Central (CGT) - CGT Secretary General Daniel 
Duron, CGT Regional Coordinator in the North Zone of Honduras 
Julio Figueroa, and CGT National Executive Committee member 
Enrique Castillo; Confederation of Honduran Workers (CTH) - 
Labor Federation of the National Workers of Honduras 
(FESITRANH) Labor Advisors David Cisneros and Armando 
Galdamez, (CTH SecGen Dinora Aceituno was unable to attend 
the meeting); and United Confederation of Honduran Workers 
(CUTH) - CUTH Secretary General Israel Salinas, CUTH 
Secretary for the Popular Sector Baudilio Andara, and CUTH 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretary for Conflicts and Oversight Armando Alvarenga. 
 
SIPDIS 
Mrs. Deborah Stark, Mrs. Janet Thompson, several 
congressional staffers on the delegation, EconOff, and AidOff 
sat in on the meeting, and LabAtt led the meeting and 
translated.  Representative Kolbe was meeting with maquila 
representatives and did not attend the meeting with the labor 
leaders. 
6. (SBU) The meeting with labor leaders focused on CAFTA and 
labor rights.  Labor leaders first expressed their views on 
the labor situation in Honduras, focusing on poor economic 
growth, ongoing GOH negotiations with the IMF that was 
leading the GOH to propose reforming the civil service pay 
and benefits for teachers and doctors, and their concerns 
about CAFTA and labor rights.  The representatives then took 
turns asking questions about specific complaints labor 
leaders had about (a) the exercise/protection of core labor 
rights, and (b) CAFTA and labor rights. 
 
7. (SBU) CGT SecGen Daniel Duron thanked the U.S. Congress 
for including the protection of labor and environmental 
rights as part of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA).  However, 
Duron expressed skepticism that CAFTA provisions would force 
stricter enforcement of labor laws in Honduras.  CUTH SecGen 
Israel Salinas stated his opposition to CAFTA, but at the 
maquila association reception that evening he took a softer 
line.  All three union confederations said they worried about 
Honduras not being able to compete with the U.S. in CAFTA, 
especially with respect to agriculture. 
 
8. (SBU) Congressmen Blumenauer, Stark, and Thompson 
emphasized the importance of the protection of core labor 
rights and encouraged union leaders to share with them 
specific complaints.  Union leaders said the anti-union 
sentiment in the business community combined with inadequate 
enforcement of labor laws made it a difficult environment for 
labor unions.  Labor leaders also said that Ministry of Labor 
bureaucratic procedures and a weak budget for inspections 
made a difficult situation worse for organizing new unions. 
Note:  According to the Ministry of Labor, union 
representation has declined from approximately 15 percent to 
approximately eight percent of the economically active 
population.  End Note. 
 
Kolbe Discusses CAFTA with President of Congress . . . 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
9. (SBU) Chairman Kolbe met with Vice President Alberto Diaz 
Lobo, President of the National Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" 
Lobo, and Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza.  Kolbe 
provided background on the importance that he and his 
committee attach to the negotiation of a successful CAFTA 
agreement.  He also explained the status of the Millennium 
Challenge Account (MCA) authorization and appropriation 
language in the U.S. Congress.  Pepe Lobo noted that 
conclusion of the free trade agreement was vital for the 
survival of the textile and apparel sector in Honduras and to 
the growth of employment in manufacturing.  However, to sell 
the CAFTA agreement in Honduras, CAFTA will also need to 
provide significant additional market access for Honduran 
agricultural products, while providing protection and time 
for adjustment for vulnerable small producers. 
 
. . . And MCA With Minister of the Presidency 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Cosenza emphasized the importance of prompt action 
on the MCA.  He explained that the Honduran government is 
working closely with the Embassy to ensure it meets the 
eligibility criteria, and to develop solid grant proposals. 
AID Director commented that Honduras\' first proposal may be 
for funding of the Logistical Corridor connecting El Salvador 
and Guatemala with Honduras\' port at Puerto Cortes on the 
Caribbean coast with a modern trucking corridor, along with 
improvements at the port itself.  Cosenza explained that 
Honduras has embarked on a port security program that will 
ensure Honduras\' ports meet the criteria in the U.S.\' 
Maritime Transportation Security Act and are successfully 
certified after July 1, 2004.  He asked for the establishment 
of a U.S. Customs Service office at Puerto Cortes. 
 
Enforcement of Labor Laws is Critical 
------------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Comment:  The CODEL visit provided a realistic view 
for the members of the importance of CAFTA to Honduras, and 
particularly to the survival of the textile and apparel 
sector after quotas are removed in 2005.  They also were able 
to see the development challenges that Honduras faces, and 
the fears of many here about the ability to compete with U.S. 
products after liberalization, particularly in agriculture. 
The CODEL was well informed about the devastating effect in 
the countryside of the historically low world prices for 
coffee and were impressed by the USAID-funded agricultural 
diversification projects underway.  At least one member of 
Congress commented that the three-country trip had convinced 
her to support the CAFTA agreement when it reaches the 
Congress for ratification. 
 
12. (SBU) The private sector gave a generally positive 
assessment of labor relations in Honduras.  Several of the 
Congressmen who attended the labor meeting, however, 
commented that they were glad to have the opportunity to 
\"hear both sides of the story\".  Labor leaders welcomed the 
opportunity to voice their concerns about labor rights and 
CAFTA directly to U.S. congressional representatives, 
following on past meetings when they had done the same with 
EmbOffs and experts from the Departments of State and Labor 
(refs B-C).  Post has urged the Ministry of Labor to improve 
the enforcement of labor laws and work with the business 
community to improve respect for core labor rights (ref A). 
Post will continue to engage the GOH, labor, and business on 
this key part of CAFTA.  End Comment. 
 
13. (U) This cable was not cleared with members of the CODEL. 
 
Palmer 
"
"11316","10/9/2003 15:51","03TEGUCIGALPA2385","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002385 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, EPET, EINV, ECON, PGOV, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduran Gasoline Pricing: Tempest in a Teapot 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  In September, former Industry and Trade 
Minister for President Maduro Juliet Handal began a public 
campaign to criticize the Honduran government\'s method of 
establishing maximum gasoline prices.  Handal has argued in 
press conferences and appearances in front of the Honduran 
National Congress, that the GOH\'s pricing formula 
incorrectly uses a wrong reference price for the cost of 
gasoline, that other Central American countries have 
switched to a different reference price and that the cost of 
gasoline for consumers could be lowered significantly if the 
policy were corrected.  Industry contacts maintain that 
Handal\'s arguments are wrong in almost all the particulars. 
Chevron-Texaco (the largest oil products importer in 
Honduras) has provided data to the GOH to use as appropriate 
to clarify the situation and demonstrate that the costs of 
oil products in Honduras are similar to those used in other 
Central American countries.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
The Attack: GOH Missing the Boat on Gas Price Regulations 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
2. (U) Juliet Handal\'s argument to the press and the 
Congress has been that a 1996 report, sponsored by 
international organizations such as the UN\'s Economic 
Commission for Latin America (ECLAC), demonstrated that 
Central American countries could lower Honduras\' cost of 
gasoline by at least 500 million lempiras (USD 28.5 million) 
by using the Gulf port reference price instead of the 
Caribbean posting (which is usually higher).  Handal has 
claimed that all other Central American countries have 
switched to this system, and Honduras\' delay in doing so is 
costing the public dearly.  Handal has been working closely 
with old-style Latin American economist Miguel Angel Funes, 
a long-time critic of multinationals, especially oil 
companies. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
The Response: She Got All Her Facts Wrong 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Privately, executives of Chevron-Texaco (which has 
a 70 percent market share in petroleum products sold in 
Honduras) have told emboffs that the argument is incorrect 
on all counts.  First, the GOH, in regulating the market, 
only sets a maximum pump price for gasoline - any gasoline 
retailer is free to sell gasoline at a lower price.  The 
maximum price is calculated based on a complex formula that 
includes many factors beyond this cost of imported product 
measure. 
 
4. (SBU) Chevron-Texaco explains that the Gulf Coast posting 
is a measure of the cost in larger importers; it is based on 
large shipments of a single fuel product, with lower risk 
and insurance, and different fuel specifications.  The 
Caribbean posting, in contrast, best fits the average cost 
of gasoline imported into a small market like Honduras 
(30,000 barrels a day).  The government is free to use any 
reference price it would like in the formula; however, 
according to Texaco, some kind of premium would have to be 
added to fully reflect the real cost of imported product. 
The actual source of supply appears to be unrelated to the 
argument - Chevron-Texaco usually sources its oil purchases 
for Honduras from Venezuela. 
 
5. (SBU) According to Texaco Caribbean Assistant Manager 
Mario del Cid, who provided econoffs with a copy of a 
presentation created for Honduran President Maduro\'s 
economic advisors, Handal\'s and Funes\' claim that the other 
Central American countries use the Gulf Port posting is 
totally off base as well.  Del Cid said that Guatemala (and 
probably Nicaragua) are free markets and no reference price 
is used at all.  El Salvador did try, after release of the 
ECLAC report in 1996 to change to using a Gulf posting with 
a 4.5 cent premium; the oil companies challenged the low 
level of the premium (arguing for one of 5.3 cents) and the 
government eventually went to a free market.  Costa Rica, 
del Cid said, is a special case because the oil market is a 
state-run monopoly. 
 
6. (SBU) A chart in the Texaco presentation that compares 
gasoline prices in Central America and eight other countries 
shows that the net price of gas (pump price minus taxes) in 
Honduras is similar to the net price in other Central 
American countries, with Guatemala\'s and Costa Rica\'s 
slightly lower and El Salvador\'s and Nicaragua\'s slightly 
higher.  The pump price in Honduras and Costa Rica are the 
highest (almost $2.50 per gallon) because of the taxes 
levied in those countries.  The tax on gasoline in Honduras 
is now usd 1.05 per gallon (changed in April from an ad 
valorem to a flat tax). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
The Motivation: Simply An Attempt to Get in the Limelight? 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
7. (SBU) It is not clear exactly what triggered Handal\'s 
decision to attack the government on this particular issue 
without talking directly with the major oil companies to 
hear their side of the story.  She served for approximately 
eight months as Minister of Industry and Trade at the 
beginning of the Maduro administration.  There was friction 
from the start between Handal and President Maduro\'s closest 
advisors, particularly Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza, and she had problems with Presidential access.  The 
trigger for her resignation was the GOH\'s announced 
intention of taking the responsibility for trade 
negotiations out of her Ministry.  Prior to government 
service, she served as President of the umbrella private 
sector organization COHEP and frequently used her position 
as a bully pulpit to call for policy changes from the Flores 
government that preceded Maduro. It is possible that she 
decided to use this issue simply to get back into the public 
limelight during this early period of the Presidential 
campaign, when pre-candidates are forming their circle of 
advisors.  The same is generally believed of Miguel Angel 
Funes, a consultant who has been on a job hunt for some 
time. 
 
8. (SBU) Embassy Comment.  We expect the debate to calm down 
shortly as the true facts come to light.  The U.S. companies 
operating in Honduras - Chevron-Texaco and Exxon - have not 
requested Embassy advocacy, but rather are working closely 
with the GOH. End Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"11453","10/16/2003 17:38","03TEGUCIGALPA2432","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE258046|03TEGUCIGALPA2302","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002432 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TRA, S/CT, WHA/CEN, DS, AND CA/OCS/ACS/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/16/2013 
TAGS: EAIR, PTER, PGOV, ASEC, CASC, HO 
SUBJECT: AIRPORT SECURITY IN HONDURAS: TSA ATTEMPTS TO 
NUDGE GOH ALONG 
 
REF: A. STATE 258046 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2302 
 
Classified By: EconCouns Robin Matthewman for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) Summary: In recent visits to Honduras, TSA 
Representative Victor Guardia and other TSA inspectors have 
visited or inspected three of Honduras\' four international 
airports, and raised several airport security issues with GOH 
officials.  In some areas, particularly the September 
inspection of the airport at San Pedro Sula, Honduras has 
performed well.  However there are certain remaining areas of 
concern, particularly the need to construct a fence to 
enhance the protection of the runway at the Roatan airport, 
and the lack of an adequate, up-to-date national airport 
security plan.  These problems have persisted in part due to 
the lack of strong leadership from the office of the Director 
General of Civil Aviation (DGAC).  TSA and embassy officials 
will continue to push the GOH to take steps to strengthen 
airport security and place a higher priority on this 
important issue.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Over the past several months, TSA Representative 
Victor Guardia, as well as other TSA inspectors, have made 
several visits to Honduras to conduct airport assessments and 
discuss airport security issues with GOH officials.  TSA 
Representative Guardia visited the island of Roatan in April, 
and had meetings with Ministry of Transportation officials 
and the Director of Civil Aviation in Tegucigalpa in May and 
September.  TSA inspectors conducted a comprehensive 
assessment of the airport in San Pedro Sula in September, and 
are planning to conduct an assessment of the airport in 
Roatan in late October.  EconOff accompanied Guardia in the 
meetings above, and held a separate meeting in September with 
the Vice Minister of Transport (to whom the Director of Civil 
Aviation reports) to discuss certain concerns at a higher 
level. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
San Pedro Sula Airport Receives Good Marks 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3. (SBU) In September, two TSA inspectors performed a 
comprehensive assessment of Ramon Villeda Morales 
International Airport in San Pedro Sula.  The overall sense 
of the inspectors was \"very positive\", and while the 
inspectors made a few minor recommendations, there were no 
open items to report at the end of their assessment.  Open 
items from the previous assessment, including a proper I.D. 
badge control system and the security of the catering area, 
had been adequately corrected. 
 
4. (C) The inspectors happened to be in the airport when 
information about a security threat (ref a) prompted airport 
authorities to implement their \"contingency plan\", raising 
their security posture from Level 1 to Level 2.  Note: this 
contingency plan, in accordance with ICAO standards, has four 
levels of operations: Level 1 for normal operations, Level 2 
for increased awareness, Level 3 in response to specific 
intelligence information, and Level 4 for direct threat.  End 
note.  The inspectors were pleased with the organization and 
execution of the exercise, noting that employees seemed to 
know what they were supposed to do and that resources were 
being allocated wisely. 
 
------------------------------ 
But Progress is Slow on Roatan 
------------------------------ 
 
5. (U) The Juan Manuel Galvez airport on the island of Roatan 
presents a less positive example of airport security in 
Honduras.  Fourteen families actually live on the grounds of 
the Roatan airport, and until recently there was nothing at 
all separating their houses from the airport runway.  As a 
result, residents of these houses were able to walk around or 
cross the runway area to the other side where the ocean forms 
the airport\'s perimeter line. 
 
6. (U) TSA Representative Victor Guardia first observed this 
state of affairs during a visit to Roatan in April 2003, and 
as an immediate, if temporary, solution, recommended that 
guards be stationed between the houses and the runway 24 
hours a day.  These guards were put in place quickly and have 
remained in place ever since.  Guardia then personally 
brought the problem to the attention of the Minister and 
Vice-Minister of Transport and the Director General of Civil 
Aviation (DGAC) during another visit in May. 
 
7. (U) The ideal long-term solution would be to remove the 
families from the airport grounds entirely, but the 
government apparently has neither the financial resources to 
provide compensation, nor the political will to fight the 
legal and public relations battle that this would entail.  As 
a medium-term solution, Guardia recommended the construction 
of an internal fence to separate the residential area from 
the runway and other sensitive parts of the airport. 
InterAirports, the consortium which operates Honduras\' four 
international airports, declared their willingness to build 
such a fence, identified the money to pay for the project and 
selected a contractor.  They estimate that construction will 
take 4 to 5 weeks, and since July they have been ready to 
begin building the fence at any time.  However, they have 
requested from the DGAC written authorization to proceed 
before they begin construction.  (Note: Given the problematic 
legal climate in Honduras generally, especially in the Bay 
Islands and especially in matters of property disputes, this 
request seems entirely justified.  End note.) 
 
8. (U) Twice in recent months Civil Aviation Director Cesar 
Vasquez has assured USG officials that written authorization 
would be granted and delivered to InterAirports in a matter 
of days, only to be delayed.  As of early October, the 
authorities on Roatan are apparently unwilling to grant 
written authorization to build the fence without another 
face-to-face meeting with Vasquez.  According to Vice 
Minister of Transport Pavon, the families resident on the 
airport grounds were promised indemnification by the previous 
administration.  They feel that, once the internal fence is 
constructed, the government will forget about the issue 
entirely and ignore the families\' claims for compensation. 
The families do not trust the government\'s promises, and feel 
that allowing the fence to be built would cost them their 
only bargaining chip.  Meanwhile the runway, which services 
direct weekly flights to the United States, remains protected 
by 24-hour guards, but not by any permanent structure. 
 
9. (U) Airport authorities have responded promptly to other 
suggestions made by Guardia to enhance the security of the 
airport perimeter, which as of October is now reportedly 
secure.  Note: TSA is planning to perform a comprehensive 
assessment of the airport on Roatan from October 22-28.  This 
will be the first full assessment of the airport since 1998, 
since for several years there were no direct flights from 
Roatan to the United States.  The inspectors will also 
inspect Sol Air and Taca, the air carriers operating flights 
from Roatan to the U.S.  End note. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
At the National Level: In Need of a Plan, and Leadership 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
10. (C) At the national level, the largest outstanding 
airport security issue is the lack of an adequate National 
Civil Aviation Security Program (NCASP).  The current plan 
has not been revised since 1997, and is in many ways obsolete 
- Director of Civil Aviation Cesar Vasquez himself admits as 
much.  For example, the current NCASP tasks the \"airport 
police\" with certain security functions, but the \"airport 
police\" have not existed as a unit since the police and armed 
forces of the country were re-organized in 1999.  The current 
plan also falls short of numerous ICAO standards, such as the 
requirement that regular inspections of the nation\'s airports 
be carried out, or the need for a formal training program for 
airport employees with security functions. 
 
11. (C) The need for a revised, ICAO-compliant NCASP was 
formally brought to the attention of Director of Civil 
Aviation Vasquez back in August 2002.  As of TSA 
Representative Guardia\'s most recent visit in September 2003, 
however, very little progress had been made on drafting a new 
plan.  Vasquez could only report that he plans to hire a 
consultant to revise the NCASP, and that the terms of 
reference for this consultant are currently being drafted. 
TSA Representative Guardia stressed that he is willing to 
 
SIPDIS 
assist with the process, and that the essential required 
content of the plan is already clearly defined in the ICAO 
Annex 17. 
 
----------------------------------- 
InterAirports Tries to Fill the Gap 
----------------------------------- 
 
12. (U) In the absence of an adequate NCASP, InterAirports 
wrote their own operational plan, and sent it to the DGAC in 
October 2002 for comments and approval.  The DGAC waited 8 
months before replying, then returned the plan to 
InterAirports in May 2003 without a single change or 
recommendation, and with the Director of Civil Aviation\'s 
signature back-dated to October 2002 to remove the appearance 
that the DGAC had been slow to respond.  This lack of 
leadership on behalf of the DGAC led the InterAirports 
Operations Manager to comment recently that the company 
\"feels like an orphan\" when it comes to airport security - 
trying to do the right thing, but without any direction or 
guidance from the GOH\'s lead agency for airport security. 
(See ref b for more information on InterAirports\' current 
relationship with the GOH.) 
 
13. (SBU) Comment: The status quo on airport security appears 
to be workable, but far from perfect.  Embassy plans to work 
closely with TSA to push the GOH to take steps to strengthen 
airport security and raise the profile of this important 
issue.  End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"11552","10/21/2003 15:00","03TEGUCIGALPA2459","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE283733","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002459 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/IL, AND EB/TPP 
STATE PASS USTR FOR AUSTR VARGO 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, SENV, ETRD, EAID, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT:  CAFTA LABOR/ENVIRONMENT QUESTIONS: INFORMATION 
FROM HONDURAS 
 
REF: State 283733 
 
1. Below are Post\'s responses to the questions raised in 
paragraphs 5-6 of reftel. 
 
---------- 
Labor Laws 
---------- 
 
2. The Ministry of Labor can levy fines against companies 
that violate the country\'s labor laws.  These fines can 
range from 20 to 10,000 Lempiras (USD 1.14 to USD 570) per 
violation, depending on the seriousness of the violation. 
Articles 359, 469, 500, and 625 of the Labor Code (reformed 
by decree 978 on July 14, 1980) govern sanctions and fines 
for labor issues.  Along with a fine, the Ministry can 
impose corrective measures that must be undertaken by a 
company.  The ministry can also suspend labor union board 
members or suspend a union\'s registration for violations. 
Serious labor violations (such as threats or violence 
against union organizers) could be classified as crimes and 
could result in criminal proceedings and a jail sentence. 
 
3. The Ministry of Labor can reach administrative decisions 
on allegations of unfair dismissal and fine companies but 
only a court can order reinstatement of workers.  (Note: 
There is no quasi-judicial system in Honduras.  End Note.) 
 
------------------ 
Environmental Laws 
------------------ 
 
4.  The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment can 
levy fines against parties which violate the country\'s 
environmental laws.  These fines can range from 1,000 to 
1,000,000 Lempiras (USD 57 to USD 57,000), depending on the 
seriousness of the violation.  The Ministry can also suspend 
or cancel the environmental permits issued by the Ministry 
which are required for many kinds of businesses to operate. 
Again, the length of the suspension depends upon the 
seriousness of the violation. 
 
5.  Most violations of environmental law are considered 
misdemeanors.  Extremely serious cases, however, could be 
classified as crimes and result in criminal proceedings and, 
theoretically, a jail sentence.  The Ministerio Publico 
(Prosecutor General\'s Office) does have an office 
specifically responsible for environmental crimes, and has 
brought criminal charges in cases involving burning of 
forests and deliberate destruction of the coral reef off the 
north coast.  To post\'s knowledge, however, no one in 
Honduras has ever been sent to jail for violation of 
environmental laws. 
 
6.  Under the Honduran legal system, an \"acta\", in and of 
itself, is nothing more than a legal declaration or finding. 
It is not, by itself, analogous to the U.S. concept of a 
compliance agreement.  The law does, however, make provision 
for an \"acta de acuerdo\" or \"acta de compromiso\" which would 
be roughly similar to a U.S. compliance agreement: an 
agreement by which the offending company agrees to come into 
compliance with the law.  (Even under an \"acta de acuerdo\", 
the company is required to pay a fine.) 
 
7.  While provision for an \"acta de acuerdo\" exists in the 
law, it is apparently very uncommon in practice: a legal 
contact who worked for the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment until very recently knows of not a single case 
in which an \"acta de acuerdo\" was established.  Instead, 
companies seem to prefer to deny the allegations entirely 
and, if unsuccessful in doing so, pay the required fine and 
submit to corrective measures (\"medidas de mitigacion y 
correcion del dano\") imposed by the Ministry, which must be 
undertaken before the Ministry will re-issue the company\'s 
environmental permit. 
 
------ 
Amparo 
------ 
 
8. In Honduras an \"amparo\" (Article 183 of the Constitution) 
can only be filed against a governmental entity, not against 
a private company.  Also, for environmental issues, an 
\"amparo\" can only be brought once the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Environment has twice found an environmental 
complaint to be without basis. 
 
9. For example, if an environmental NGO believes that a 
certain company is violating the nation\'s environmental 
laws, the NGO must first file a complaint with the Ministry 
of Natural Resources and Environment, presenting evidence of 
their complaints against the company.  The Ministry will 
then undertake an investigation to determine if the 
complaint is valid.  If the Ministry rejects the complaint, 
the NGO may then file a \"recurso de revision\" or \"recurso de 
reposicion\", to request that the Ministry re-evaluate the 
case.  If the Ministry again rejects the complaint, then and 
only then may the NGO bring an \"amparo\" against the Ministry 
(not against the company) to claim that its constitutional 
rights are being violated.  The \"amparo\" is brought directly 
to the Supreme Court. 
 
Palmer 
"
"11555","10/21/2003 15:07","03TEGUCIGALPA2460","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002460 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA/OTP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduran Ratification of the Montreal Convention: 
Maybe Next Year 
 
REF: State 261967 
 
1.  EconOff delivered talking points in reftel to the 
Honduran Vice Minister for Transportation, Eduardo Pavon, on 
September 20th, and to the Director of Civil Aviation, Cesar 
Vasquez, on October 15.  Pavon asked for more information 
about the treaty.  EconOff obtained a copy of the treaty in 
Spanish and some additional information, and sent it to the 
Vice Minister. 
 
2)  Vasquez indicated that the GOH has no objection to 
ratifying the convention, and the only reason the GOH has 
not done so already is the slow pace at which the Congress 
operates.  Vasquez says there are currently four or five 
other international conventions pertaining to civil 
aviation, none of them controversial, that the GOH has not 
ratified.  Vasquez plans to bundle these conventions 
together and have the Minister of Transportation present 
them to Congress in the next month.  Even in the best case 
scenario, however, Vasquez thinks that the earliest they 
could be ratified would be early 2004.  Comment: Emboffs 
will continue to urge ratification at all appropriate 
opportunities.  End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"11558","10/21/2003 16:29","03TEGUCIGALPA2461","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN TKELLY, SAN SALVADOR FOR FCS DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/16/2013 
TAGS: EINV, EFIN, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: MERENDON MINING REQUESTING RETRACTION IN ICP 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (U) This is an action request (see paragraph 2). 
 
2. (SBU) Summary and Action Request: The Embassy has received 
complaints from Canadian citizen Merendon Mining Corp. Ltd. 
President Gary Sorenson and now from his U.S. attorney, 
William Rogers of the law firm Arnold and Porter, regarding 
the content of an International Company Profile (ICP) on 
Merendon de Honduras.  Both Sorenson and Rogers have urged 
the issuance of a new ICP and indicated their intention to 
pursue multiple routes to achieve this goal (apparently a 
reference to a possible legal challenge).  Copies of the ICP 
and all pertinent correspondence are being faxed and fedexed 
to both the Department of Commerce and State desk officers. 
An interim response was sent to Rogers on October 13 (text 
provided in para 10).  The Embassy requests guidance from the 
Department of Commerce General Counsel\'s office on any 
further action that should be taken. End Summary and Action 
Request. 
 
Background on Merendon 
---------------------- 
 
3. (C) Merendon Mining Corp. Ltd. and Merendon de Honduras 
are both part of Merendon Group, along with several related 
companies in Honduras, Venezuela and Peru.  Merendon and its 
president Gary Sorenson are involved in a legal dispute with 
Amcit Angel Lorie over unrepaid funds that Lorie lent to 
Sorenson in the United States.  The dispute spilled over into 
Honduras when Lorie began to seek title to Merendon property 
in Honduras; in 2001, Lorie began requesting Embassy advocacy 
with the Honduran judicial system.  Correspondence from Mr. 
Lorie on the underlying issues in the dispute (included in 
the information sent to Washington) raised questions about 
business practices by both Mr. Lorie and the Merendon 
companies. 
 
4. (C) In 2000 and 2001, the Economic section of the Embassy 
was informed of indications of money laundering activities by 
Merendon, as well as an ongoing Canadian government 
investigation into the company.  In 2002, Sorenson came in to 
meet with Econcouns about notices he had received, from 
prominent Honduran banks, closing the company\'s accounts. 
The apparent purpose of the visit was to see if the U.S. 
government was in some way involved.  Note: These bank 
account closings occurred immediately after the strengthened 
Honduran money laundering law was passed by Congress and 
entered into force, in early 2002.  Sorenson expressed his 
belief that the Honduran banks and authorities do not 
understand his company\'s mutual and equity fund approach to 
raising capital for his company.  End Note. 
 
5. (C) We have since learned that some Merendon financial 
transactions are being reviewed by the Honduran Financial 
Information Unit (FIU).  To date, however, the FIU has not 
found sufficient evidence of money laundering to prepare a 
case.  We have also learned that Sorenson was found guilty of 
securities fraud in Canada in October 2000 for selling 
securities without permission of the Alberta Securities 
Commission.  He was restricted from participating in the 
parent company\'s board of directors in Canada for two years. 
 
6. (C) Merendon\'s operations in Honduras are unusual.  The 
company does not do any actual mining (extraction) in 
Honduras, except for some possible purchase of product from 
placer operations.  Thus, the company was importing gold from 
other places for refining and re-export.  This type of 
activity is distinct from all other Canadian mining companies 
operating in Honduras (with mining permits to explore or 
exploit particular deposits).  Merendon has expanded into 
Venezuela during the 2002-2003 time period, a difficult time 
for foreign investment.  And here in Honduras, we understand 
that Merendon is currently discussing investments in a hotel 
project on the island of Guanaja owned by a U.S. citizen.  No 
other foreign mining companies operating in Honduras are, to 
our knowledge, branching out into hospitality services. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
Requests for International Company Profile Report on Merendon 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
 
7. (SBU) Thus, the Embassy had a variety of questions and 
concerns about Merendon operations in Honduras when Emboffs 
became aware that the FCS section received from the Commerce 
Department Export Assistance Center in Reno, NV, a request 
for an ICP on Merendon for Kevin Wilson representing U.S. 
company Rockwell Holdings.  For four weeks, the FCS section 
repeatedly called company officals in attempts to obtain the 
requested data for the ICP.  Based upon the previously known 
concerns and four weeks\' of delays in finally returning the 
information, the FCS office of Embassy Tegucigalpa submitted 
the referenced ICP. 
8. (SBU) The Embassy has received demands for Embassy 
retraction of negative comments from Amcit Peter Johnson (not 
a representative of Merendon or Rockwell Holdings), Canadian 
government employee Shad Prashad -- currently on detail to 
Merendon, Gary Sorenson, and most recently on September 25, 
William Rogers.   All of these parties have inaccurately 
charged that the Embassy has distributed the report publicly 
and therefore has done harm to the company.  We understand 
from communications with the Commerce Department\'s Honduras 
desk officer that an ICP is only released to the requesting 
client and is not made public.  The post should not discuss 
the report with anyone other than the client. 
 
9. (SBU) It might be useful to note that the original 
requestor of the ICP, Mr. Kevin Wilson, wrote to Merendon\'s 
Florida attorney, Mr. Larry Adair on June 18, 2003.  In the 
letter, Mr. Wilson explains that he requested the ICP by 
pretending to be a potential investor.  He indicated that he 
did this in order to create an easy-to-follow guide of 
independent sources that any potential lender could contact 
to perform their own due diligence on Merendon.  His request 
to the Reno Export Assistance Center appears to have been a 
trial run.  Mr. Wilson is not himself an Amcit or a true 
potential investor. 
 
10. (SBU) Begin Text of Interim Response to William Rogers. 
Mr. William D. Rogers 
Arnold and Porter 
555 Twelfth Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
 
Dear Mr. Rogers: 
 
Thank you for your letter of September 25, 2003 concerning 
the International Company Profile (ICP) of your client, 
Merendon Mining, written by the Commercial Section of the 
U.S. Embassy.  As you indicated in your letter, the ICP was 
requested by Mr. Kevin Wilson through the Commerce 
Department\'s office in Reno, Nevada.  We have been told by 
the Department of Commerce that this report was not published 
and has not been distributed to anyone other than Mr. Wilson. 
 The Embassy similarly has not provided copies to any other 
outside party.  The Embassy has also been instructed by the 
Department of Commerce to refer any inquiries regarding the 
ICP to the Department of Commerce. 
 
We are forwarding the complete package of information 
provided by Mr. Sorenson, along with your letter, to the 
legal department of the Department of Commerce for review. 
 
Please do not hesitate to contact the Department of Commerce 
directly should you have any further questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
(signature) 
 
Larry L. Palmer 
Ambassador 
 
End Text of Interim Response to William Rogers. 
Palmer 
"
"11561","10/22/2003 0:02","03TEGUCIGALPA2467","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 09 TEGUCIGALPA 002467 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S, D, P, WHA, EB, CA, INL, DRL, PM, AND WHA/CEN 
NSC FOR SHANNON 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2013 
TAGS: OVIP, PREL, PGOV, ETRD, PTER, SNAR, PHUM, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECREATRY POWELL\'S VISIT 
 
 
Classified By: Political Councelor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, nearly 
half way through his constitutionally mandated single 
four-year term, faces an uphill battle in one of the poorest 
and most corrupt countries in the Western Hemisphere.  His 
administration, having never been quite able to muster the 
political support necessary to move forward on an ambitious 
domestic agenda, has stalled and is making little progress on 
the myriad challenges facing the nation.  Bilateral relations 
between the U.S. and Honduras are excellent; Honduras was the 
first country in the Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an 
ICC Article 98 Agreement with the United States.  Honduras\' 
support for the international counterterrorism effort is 
steadfast and the Government of Honduras (GOH) has sent 
troops to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Key Issues in Bilateral Relationship 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C) The central themes in our bilateral diplomatic efforts 
in Honduras are combating international crime by 
strengthening governance and attacking corruption, assisting 
American citizens, fostering economic development, promoting 
regional stability, promoting trade and investment, and 
combating terrorism.  However, the underlying difficulty to 
realizing USG objectives is improving the administration of 
justice and rule of law.  President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
government is rhetorically committed on all of these issues, 
but has made very little substantive headway in addressing 
the many problems Honduras faces.  While Maduro has also 
spoken out strongly on tackling corruption, he faces 
formidable challenges from entrenched economic and political 
interests in moving his reform agenda forward. 
 
------------------------------- 
Status of the Maduro Government 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) President Maduro faces relentless criticism from the 
political opposition over his government\'s policies and 
continued dissatisfaction from his own party\'s Members of 
Congress because of his administration\'s technocratic and 
insular style.  Despite an excellent relationship with the 
current President of Congress and his leadership team, the 
Congress\' rank-and-file membership is a focal point of 
political opposition to his policies.  Overall, the 
unicameral body is a corrupt institution riddled with 
avaricious politicians, and Maduro\'s National Party does not 
control a majority.  In July, Maduro\'s coalition partner, the 
Christian Democrats, defected thereby denying Maduro a 
majority in Congress.  Ongoing political problems within his 
own party are serious and are undermining his broader 
political agenda.  Maduro\'s technocratic cabinet is 
politically tone-deaf and continues to eschew the necessary 
political negotiations that are required to advance 
legislation.  Maduro\'s personal life has likewise intruded 
into the political sphere.  His October 2002 wedding to a 
Spaniard was criticized by many Hondurans who viewed the 
President as distracted by his personal life.  A recent 
public squabble between the First Lady and the very popular 
Minister of Culture (Maduro\'s ex-fiancee) was an excruciating 
embarrassment for the President. 
 
4. (SBU) The President\'s popularity remains low.  Faced with 
negligible progress in his efforts to promote economic growth 
or reach an IMF agreement, Maduro\'s team is hoping that a 
U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) can serve 
as a catalyst to spur regional economic cooperation and 
integration.  Public security is one area that the public has 
awarded grudging credit to Maduro\'s team.  He has fulfilled 
his promise to launch a \"zero tolerance\" law and order 
campaign.  Notwithstanding his crackdown on street crime, 
criminal investigations are usually inadequate and case 
closure rates, in particular for homicides, remain extremely 
low. 
 
---------------------------- 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Maduro is a good and reliable friend of the U.S. on 
counterterrorism.  The GOH has responded quickly to all USG 
requests regarding terrorist threats and financing, and to 
date no terrorist assets have been found in Honduran 
financial institutions.  The GOH, however, still needs to 
take action to sign and/or ratify the two outstanding 
international conventions/protocols and two OAS conventions 
(1971 and 2002) against terrorism.  It is also of vital 
importance for Honduras to improve security at its maritime 
ports, particularly Puerto Cortes. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
6. (C) The GOH is very supportive of key USG foreign policy 
goals and is a member of the Coalition of the Willing.  In 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), the GOH deployed 
some 370 troops to the vicinity of An Najaf as part of the 
Spanish Brigade operating under the Polish Division.  The 
troops departed Honduras August 10-13 and are scheduled to be 
rotated with a second contingent in February 2004.  Central 
American units from El Salvador, Nicaragua, and the Dominican 
Republic are also serving under Spanish command.  In August, 
CJCS GEN Myers and Secretary Rumsfeld visited Honduras to 
thank the GOH for its support of OIF.  Their visits were well 
received and provided important political support for 
Maduro\'s Iraq policy. 
 
7. (C) While President Maduro has consistently supported 
overall USG foreign policy objectives, particularly U.S. 
efforts to create a stable and peaceful Iraq, the general 
population at large, however, is far less enthusiastic. 
Recent polls demonstrate that a majority of Hondurans do not 
support the troop deployment to Iraq.  If Honduran troops 
suffer casualties there, the Maduro government will be 
subjected to intense domestic criticism which could undercut 
its staying power in Iraq. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Bilateral Political/Military Issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) Honduras was the first country in all the Western 
Hemisphere to sign and ratify an Article 98 Agreement with 
the United States.  In January of 1999, the constitution was 
amended to abolish the position of military commander in 
chief of the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF), thus codifying 
civilian authority over the military.  Honduras now has a 
civilian Minister of Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint 
Staff who heads the HOAF.  Civilian control over the HOAF is 
complete.  This transition has resulted in greater 
transparency and fiscal accountability. 
 
9. (SBU) The current MOD, Federico Breve, enjoys a good 
relationship with the HOAF military leadership, but the 
Office of the Minister of Defense continues to lack a staff 
that could provide institutional memory and continuity 
between the change in political administrations.  Despite 
some reticence from the HOAF, President Maduro (together with 
MOD Breve) have reoriented the armed forces away from a more 
traditional focus towards the new wide range of 
trans-national threats, including counterterrorism, 
narcotrafficking, and combating international criminal 
organizations.  The HOAF is also interested in establishing 
an ability to participate in international peacekeeping 
operations and is seeking USG assistance through the Enhanced 
International Peacekeeping Capabilities (EIPC) initiative. 
10. (C) While supportive of U.S. efforts, President Maduro 
and his military advisors are very aware that Nicaragua and 
El Salvador have received large amounts of FMF funds.  They 
are likely to question why Honduras, even though it has been 
a staunch political and military supporter in the region, has 
not received any funds for many years.  (Note:  Honduras is 
scheduled to receive USD 168,000 in fall-out FMF funds made 
available from countries who have not completed Article 98 
Agreements with the USG, although it remains unclear when 
this money will be dispersed.  End Note.) 
 
11. (SBU) In January 2002, Honduras formally requested 6 
UH-1H helicopters through the EDA program.  However, because 
of changes in U.S. law, the cost of the helos rose from about 
USD 700,000 to USD 4.2 million - an amount the GOH was unable 
to afford.  The original Letter of Agreement expired some six 
months ago.  In early August, however, MOD Breve renewed his 
request for UH-1H helicopters, and also asked if there was 
any way to get them either free (i.e. under section 516 as 
grant aid at no cost to the GOH), or at an extended payment 
plan, i.e. 15 years.  The AMB and country team strongly 
support any assistance in this area since the principal use 
for these helos would be to support GOH counternarcotics 
operations.  The current Honduran fleet of UH-1H helicopters 
is in poor condition with a limited life expectancy. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Soto Cano Air Base - Joint Task Force Bravo 
------------------------------------------- 
 
12. (SBU) Five hundred sixty-five U.S. service men and women 
and eleven civilian DOD employees are currently stationed at 
Honduras\' Soto Cano Air Base under the auspices of SOUTHCOM 
as Joint Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment and will enable our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster relief, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
 
------------------- 
Cerro La Mole Radar 
------------------- 
 
13. (C) In 1993, the U.S. entered into an agreement with the 
GOH regarding the maintenance of the radar located at Cerro 
La Mole, under which the U.S. military agreed to pay 75 
percent of maintenance costs up to USD 400,000 per year.  To 
date, the U.S. has paid nothing under the agreement, (OSD/CN 
cited U.S. law that does not allow the USG to fund radars 
operated by foreign nationals) and the issue continues to be 
a sore spot between the U.S. and Honduran militaries.  The 
Embassy has pressed DOD and State on how best to resolve the 
U.S. obligation, and recommended that the U.S. either replace 
the radar with a solid state version (TPS-78) or with another 
TPS-70 transferred from counterdrug programs.  When 
operational, the radar provides a view of the 
Honduras-Nicaragua-El Salvador border areas and the Gulf of 
Fonseca on the Pacific Ocean, a corridor that cocaine laden 
aircraft regularly exploit on their illegal flight paths to 
Guatemala, Belize, and beyond.  A functioning radar in this 
location could greatly enhance Honduran capability to 
intercept and track these illegal flights.  The MOD and CHOD 
have agreed to share all data from this radar with the U.S. 
and with its neighbors.  Additionally, this radar would be a 
much-needed first step in eliminating the 10 mile \"no fly\" 
(without advance notice) corridor between the Honduran and 
Nicaraguan border - currently a safe haven for illegal 
flights. The Country Team strongly supports current efforts 
to transfer a radar from Venezuela (currently being 
dismantled) through EDA to Honduras in December of this year. 
 
------------------ 
F-5\'s for MANPADS? 
------------------ 
 
14. (C) Honduras maintains a fleet of aging F-5 aircraft as 
part of its overall defense structure, providing Honduras 
with the most lethal air force in the region.  Honduras has 
been encouraged to reduce or eliminate its fleet of F-5\'s as 
a quid-pro-quo to Nicaragua, which is being pressured to 
significantly reduce its stock of Man Portable Air Defense 
Systems (MANPADS).  Honduras has strongly rejected these 
efforts, suggesting that its fleet of F-5\'s should not be 
linked in any way to steps on the Nicaraguan MANPADS, which 
are a potential terrorist weapon.  These issues were 
discussed, but not linked, at an August 11 regional 
disarmament conference hosted by Managua that focused on 
reducing small arms and MANDPADS.  Honduras is not opposed to 
discussing the future of its F-5 aircraft in the context of 
regional disarmament.  However, any bilateral discussions 
with Nicaragua on that topic have so far been unacceptable. 
 
---------------- 
Border Relations 
------------------ 
 
15. (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three Central 
American land neighbors and its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  Its land and maritime 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast is a particularly 
difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
ruling laid out shared areas of control in the Gulf of 
Fonseca and established the land border between Honduras and 
El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow to implement 
the ruling.  In September 2002, El Salvador requested a 
revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling.  Honduras has responded to 
this request and remains confident the Court will not revise 
its original ruling.  In the interim, the Organization of 
American States (as a neutral third party) is providing both 
nations technical assistance to help them implement the 
non-disputed elements of the ICJ\'s ruling. 
 
16. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.  In the past, the dispute has threatened to derail 
trilateral counternarcotics operations.  Honduras provoked 
Nicaraguan retaliation when it signed a maritime treaty with 
Colombia recognizing the 15th parallel as its maritime border 
in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an ICJ case over the maritime 
border and more importantly in 1999 slapped a punitive 35 per 
cent tariff on Honduran goods.  This tariff remained in place 
until April of this year despite a Central American Court of 
Justice ruling that it was illegal.  Only after Honduras 
responded with a retaliatory tariff, threatening Nicaraguan 
exports, did Managua rescind the tax.  Tensions still exist 
between the GOH and Nicaragua over this issue, hampering 
regional integration and couternarcotics efforts. 
 
----------------- 
Economic Overview 
----------------- 
 
17. (SBU)  Honduras, with a per capita income of USD 950, is 
the third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere ahead of 
only Nicaragua and Haiti.  The economy is still growing 
(about 2.5 percent per year) but slower than the population 
growth rate of 3.5 percent per year.  Social indicators are 
improving, but two-thirds of all Hondurans live in poverty 
and average education levels are very low.  Historically low 
world coffee prices have hit rural areas particularly hard 
(although up some this year, coffee prices are still below 
the cost of production, forcing major cutbacks in planting, 
fertilizing, harvesting and investment).  The economy 
continues to be dominated by agriculture, particularly the 
production of bananas, coffee, cultivated shrimp, melons and 
other fruits, vegetables and grains. 
 
18. (SBU) The apparel assembly (maquila) sector grew 
dramatically in the 1990s reaching peak employment in 2000 of 
about 120,000 people.  Activity slowed after 2001 because of 
the U.S. economic slowdown in 2001-2002 and increased 
competition from Asia, but the sector appears to be 
rebounding this year.  While there has been some economic 
diversification (melons, cultivated shrimp, palm oil), there 
continues to be a large subsistence farmer population with 
few opportunities other than illegal immigration to the U.S. 
The Honduran government\'s desire to attract new types of 
foreign investment has been hindered by the stagnant economy 
and a wide range of investment climate/competitiveness 
problems. 
19. (SBU) Remittances from Hondurans abroad, particularly the 
U.S., continue to grow rapidly and have become the most 
important source of foreign exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras, 
largest trading partner.  The roughly 150 U.S. companies that 
do business in Honduras constitute the largest block of 
foreign direct investors. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Stubborn Fiscal Deficits Endanger IMF Program/Debt Relief 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
20. (C) President Maduro inherited a stagnating economy and 
seriously deteriorated government finances from the previous 
administration.  The difficult negotiations with the IMF have 
dominated much of Maduro,s time and that of his economic 
cabinet since assuming office.  The GOH has passed two tax 
packages in two years in order to stabilize the government\'s 
finances and reach a badly-needed agreement with the IMF, but 
have so far balked at measures that will rein in spending 
(particularly halting the uncontrolled growth in teacher and 
doctor salaries) and create a professional civil service. 
The Maduro administration and Congress, however, are hesitant 
to push through these needed reforms because of political 
opposition from teachers and medical workers who currently 
benefit from special legislation that gives them annual 
salary increases well above inflation.  In recent months, it 
also has become apparent that the tax measures were not 
sufficient to significantly improve revenue collection and 
meet government targets.  In addition, the IMF has pointed to 
repeated debt forgiveness legislation for farmers as 
undermining the government\'s finances as well as the banking 
system.  USG assistance is being provided to the GOH for both 
improvement in tax administration and implementation of civil 
service reform. 
 
21. (SBU) Significant multilateral and bilateral donor 
disbursements (USD 140 million) will be held up until a new 
IMF program is in place.  There is also pressure on the GOH 
to make renewed Paris Club debt service payments (USD 100 
million per year) and the lack of an IMF agreement is 
delaying Honduras, attainment of the completion point for 
Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) debt relief (USD 900 
million in present value terms).  Starting in July 2003, 
Honduras has had to resume payments of debt service on old 
DOD loans to avoid a cut-off of USG assistance under the 
Brooke Amendment.  With the lack of an IMF agreement, old 
Eximbank loan payments also became past due, and the agency 
has now gone off-cover for official loans to Honduras. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
CAFTA, Trade Capacity Building, and the MCA 
------------------------------------------- 
 
22. (SBU) In the CAFTA negotiations, the Honduran government 
is seeking to (1) make permanent the market access provided 
under CBTPA; (2) improve its textile and apparel sector\'s 
ability to compete with Asia as worldwide quotas are lifted; 
(3) increase its market access in the U.S. in products such 
as sugar, poultry, beef, and dairy, and (4) protect its 
agricultural sector from massive disruptions as much as 
possible.  The most controversial chapter of the agreement 
for Honduras is agricultural market access.  The Honduran 
Trade Ministry has repeatedly asked the Embassy to urge USTR 
to \"broaden its focus from commercial advantage to economic 
development.\"  The Honduran delegation has also been seeking, 
in the context of the CAFTA agreement, a temporary entry 
program for unskilled laborers; this would be unacceptable to 
the US delegation, because of its inherent change to 
immigration policy and strong U.S. Congressional opposition. 
 
23. (SBU) In discussing CAFTA, President Maduro may request 
large financial grants for the Central American countries to 
ease the adjustment to free trade with the U.S. (pointing to 
the example of the large financial transfers provided to 
Spain and Portugal as part of their accession to the European 
Community.)  Much of USG assistance to Honduras focuses 
heavily on assistance to the trade ministry, agricultural 
diversification, micro-enterprise development, and other 
trade capacity projects.  This bilateral assistance is 
supplemented by large and active programs by the World Bank, 
Inter-American Development Bank and other bilateral and 
regional donors.  However, the Honduran government has been 
arguing for far greater sums and may prepare a Millennium 
Challenge Account proposal for trade adjustment (Honduras 
appears to have a good chance at qualifying in the first year 
for the MCA, its fiscal  problems notwithstanding.)  Finally, 
Honduran interlocutors may repeat a request made earlier in 
the year that the USG fold into CAFTA some incentives for US 
companies to invest in Central America, such as tax 
incentives provided to companies in the 1960s to invest in 
Puerto Rico. 
 
24. (SBU) CAFTA ratification problems in Honduras are not 
expected, as long as the final agreement provides strong new 
opportunities in textiles and apparel, and some market access 
openings for non-traditional Honduran agricultural exports to 
the U.S.  In the U.S. Congress, concerns about labor rights 
enforcement are expected to be centered on countries other 
than Honduras, but we have been urging the GOH to do what it 
can to improve enforcement of core labor rights and 
environmental protection in Honduras.  At the beginning of 
2003, the USG banned exports of harvested shrimp from 
Honduras because of lack of adherence to laws on the 
protection of sea turtles. 
 
----------------------- 
Counternarcotics Issues 
----------------------- 
 
25. (C) Honduras\' geography places it squarely in the middle 
of a major illegal drug trans-shipment zone.  Current U.S. 
estimates are that between 80-100 tons of cocaine transit the 
country annually on the way to the U.S. market.  Honduras\' 
airspace is regularly violated by drug traffickers, who also 
use go-fast boats to transit their cocaine through the 
Western Caribbean region.  Heroin and marijuana are likewise 
trafficked through Honduras on a lesser scale, although 
heroin trafficking appears to be increasing.  Recently, the 
Embassy has noted an increase in drugs-for-guns bartering 
between Colombian terrorist organizations and local Honduran 
smugglers. 
 
26. (C) Honduras, under heightened Embassy pressure to 
increase its effectiveness on narcotics interdiction after 
disappointing results in 2001 and 2002, has risen to the 
occasion.  The GOH has seized approximately 4,962 kilos of 
cocaine this year, more than the previous five years 
combined.  While seizure rates have expanded significantly 
this year, endemic corruption in the judiciary, Public 
Ministry (Attorney General\'s office), and the police continue 
to hamper long-term efforts to increase the rule of law and 
effectively prosecute, sentence, and incarcerate drug 
traffickers.  Despite the increased seizures, there does not 
appear to be any drop-off in the amount of drugs transiting 
the country. 
 
27. (C) Under pressure from the USG to interdict more drugs, 
the Honduran Air Force shot-down an intruding Colombian 
aircraft carrying approximately 942 kilos of cocaine in 
April, killing the plane\'s two Colombian crewmembers. 
SOUTHCOM temporarily suspended sharing of air-track 
information pending reconfirmation from the GOH that Honduras 
has a \"no shoot-down\" policy.  The Embassy obtained such 
assurances and the GOH has stated unequivocally that the 
incident was an aberration.  Honduras is fully aware that 
under U.S. law, the USG is not allowed to share tactical 
air-track information with countries that employ a shoot-down 
policy.  SOUTHCOM has since restored sharing air-track 
information with the GOH. 
-------------- 
Anticorruption 
-------------- 
 
28. (C) Honduras was recently ranked 106 out of 133 counties 
surveyed by Transparency International, an NGO that tracks 
international corruption issues.  Only Ecuador, Haiti, and 
Paraguay scored lower in the Western Hemisphere.  U.S. policy 
to combat endemic corruption has struck a nerve in Honduras, 
especially any mention of our visa revocation authorities. 
Politicians in Congress and certain business elements feel 
the U.S. is attacking them.  Maduro has stated he is willing 
to address corruption, even if it will cost him political 
support within his party, but real achievements to date have 
been lacking.  Of particular concern are individual judges 
and prosecutors who remain susceptible to offers of bribes. 
Also, the current Attorney General, whose term expires in 
March 2004, is simply unwilling to prosecute high-profile 
cases.  Given the scope of the problem, any public discussion 
about the country\'s pervasive corruption is a positive 
development. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Money Laundering and Bank Failures 
---------------------------------- 
 
29. (C) Strengthened money laundering legislation, with an 
anti-terrorist financing clause, was passed in early 2002 and 
the GOH followed up rapidly with creation of a Financial 
Information Unit (FIU) for investigation of financial crimes. 
  Currently, over 150 potential cases of money laundering are 
under investigation.  However, without greater participation 
from the slow and corrupt Public Ministry responsible for 
prosecuting such cases, results will be minimal. 
 
30. (C) Weakness of the financial system remains a key 
concern  The GOH took over the two most troubled banks in May 
2002 (one has since been closed), arranged for the absorption 
of a third undercapitalized bank, and is actively promoting 
mergers among the remaining 20 private banks. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
31. (SBU) The current Supreme Court is developing into an 
independent branch of power, unlike any of its predecessor 
courts since democracy was restored in 1982.  It is 
pro-reform in orientation and fighting for its prerogatives. 
A key emerging issue is whether it can become a fully 
independent and co-equal branch of political power, 
consistent with the separation of powers provision in the 
Honduran Constitution.  The established political order is 
fighting that prospect with vigor.  In fact, the Congress 
seized the political opportunity to introduce legislation 
that would amend the constitution to give itself the power to 
interpret the constitutionality of the laws it passes.  The 
Supreme Court ruled in May that the proposed amendment was 
unconstitutional, which sparked a tense confrontation between 
the Supreme Court and Congress.  Congress, however, refrained 
from any precipitous action and the issue has since receded. 
 
---------------------------- 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
32. (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27, 2002, President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
out-of-control crime situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 
soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The public 
responded enthusiastically.  However, despite the initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides, continues at a high rate. 
Public support is fading and the campaign needs some visible 
victories to restore confidence in the government\'s program. 
The USG is helping the Maduro government establish an 
anti-kidnapping unit, increase intake/training of police 
recruits, create a model tourist police force, boost its 
counternarcotics efforts, and expand the frontier police. 
The country\'s geographic position makes it an obvious 
strategic transit point for narcotics trafficking, alien 
smuggling operations and other organized crime activities. 
 
33. (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults since 1998, have been a source of 
serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to take 
steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases.  Human 
rights groups regularly accuse former security force 
officials and the business community of colluding to organize 
\"death squads\" to commit these summary, and arbitrary 
executions.  There are also serious problems with child labor 
in several industries, particularly melon, coffee, and sugar 
cane (but not the maquila) sectors, and trafficking in 
persons of women/children for prostitution in the U.S. and 
children for commercial sexual exploitation in Central 
America.  USAID and Peace Corps have both been involved in 
HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
34. (SBU) At least 600,000 Hondurans, both legal and illegal, 
live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration issues high 
on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of Honduras is 6.5 
million.)  There is deep appreciation for the USG\'s extension 
of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) in the U.S. and interest 
in possible congressional action on the proposed Nicaraguan 
Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA), which 
would give immigration parity for Hondurans.  With 
approximately 18,000 American citizens residing in Honduras 
and many thousands visiting Honduras annually for tourism and 
business, American Citizen Services are a key part of the 
Embassy\'s work.  Since 1995, 37 American Citizens have been 
murdered in Honduras.  There has been little progress on 
these cases and to date, only two convictions have been made. 
 However, in the last year the GOH has increased cooperation 
with the Embassy on the remaining cases, including 
establishing two prosecutors to further the GOH\'s effort. 
Also, little progress has been made on extradition cases 
involving American Citizens residing in Honduras who are 
wanted for felonies in the United States. 
 
------------------------------ 
U.S. Investment Faces Problems 
------------------------------ 
 
35. (SBU) Maduro,s administration understands the need to 
increase foreign (and domestic) investment to spur economic 
growth, but so far has placed its emphasis on the more 
immediate problems of political and judicial reforms, the 
fiscal deficit, and needed improvements in security, 
education and health.  The government identified tourism, 
agribusiness, and forestry as important sectors that could 
create much-needed jobs. 
 
36. (SBU) Much still needs to be done to declare Honduras 
\"open for business\" for new sectors.  Although the Maduro 
Administration has begun significant changes, Honduras still 
suffers from poor and expensive infrastructure such as 
telecommunications, electric power and transportation, a weak 
legal system, threats to personal security, weak education 
and health delivery systems, land tenure problems, and 
opposition to large foreign investments by well-connected 
vested interests. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
37. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  Our Peace Corps program, with more than 245 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY03 budget of USD 45 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula. 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"11617","10/23/2003 23:02","03TEGUCIGALPA2490","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03HAVANA17832","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/B, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, PHUM, CU, HO, OAS 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS STILL FAR AWAY FROM NAMING ABMASSADOR TO 
CUBA 
 
REF: A. HAVANA 17832 
 
     B. OCTOBER 21 TRIVELLI-PALMER E-MAIL 
     C. STATE 297777 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) President Maduro\'s National Security Advisor, Ramon 
Medina Luna, informed PolCouns October 21 that the Government 
of Honduras (GOH) was still a long way from naming an 
ambassador to Cuba.  Medina Luna assured PolCouns that 
selecting an ambassador to Cuba was not a pressing issue, nor 
was it likely to be on the GOH\'s agenda for the immediate 
future.  Medina Luna did make a point of noting, however, 
that Cuba has already posted an ambassador to Honduras. 
Because the decision to normalize diplomatic relations was 
made by the previous government, Luna indicated that at some 
point in the future the GOH would have to move on the issue. 
He also repeated concerns about attending to the 700 Honduran 
medical students in Cuba and continuing pressure on this 
issue from the Honduran private sector. 
 
2. (C) Separately, on October 17 and on October 22, PolCouns 
pressed the MFA Director General for Foreign Policy Mario 
Fortin and Chief of Protocol Ambassador Ricardo Flores, 
respectively, on the possible naming of a Honduran Ambassador 
to Cuba.  Both stated unequivocally that naming an ambassador 
to Cuba was not a high Honduran foreign policy priority. 
Fortin added that he did not think there would be any 
movement on this issue until some time next year.  He then 
characterized the recent public statements by newly appointed 
Foreign Minister Leonides Rosa Bautista as having been 
twisted by the media and given greater prominence than they 
merited.  Fortin explained the FM\'s comments on this 
sensitive topic revealed Rosa\'s inexperience in how to deal 
with the media in his new position as Foreign Minister. 
(Comment: In other words, Rosa learned a lesson that his 
comments as FM are more likely to generate media interest and 
that he must more carefully parse his public statements than 
he did as a Congressman.  End Comment.) 
 
3. (SBU) Both interlocutors shared our concern over Cuba\'s 
March crackdown on civil society members and expressed 
agreement on the need for international action.  Flores could 
not commit to GOH support for a resolution at the 
Ibero-American Summit (ref C), but Post expects that Honduras 
would support such an initiative, if approached by the 
sponsors. 
Palmer 
"
"11681","10/27/2003 23:28","03TEGUCIGALPA2514","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL, EB, AND INR 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, EAID, EFIN, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN VICE PRESIDENT UNSETTLES MADURO 
GOVERNMENT WITH ACCUSATIONS OF CORRUPTION 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (U) On October 21, Honduran Vice President Armida de Lopez 
Contreras (one of three presidential designates in the 
current Honduran constitutional leadership structure) stirred 
up a hornets nest when she accused an unnamed high ranking 
Government of Honduras (GOH) official of tampering with USD 
24 million in international development aid.  The Vice 
President\'s public remarks left ministers scurrying for 
cover, drawing the ire of some of President Maduro\'s closest 
advisors. 
 
2. (C) While Contreras has yet to identify the name of the 
accused, the Honduran press narrowed the list to three 
possible individuals who have access to these particular 
development funds:  Mariano Jimenez, Minister of Agriculture; 
Jorge Carranza, Minister of Transportation; and Elias 
Lizardo, Minister of Health.  All three ministers deny any 
wrongdoing.  The Embassy learned from another source, 
however, that the corrupt official is allegedly Roberto 
Rodrigo Castillo Callejas, who earned the nickname. Roberto 
\"Ladron\" (Thief) Castillo during the previous Nationalist 
government of Rafael Callejas.  Castillo is a senior GOH 
advisor who reports directly to the Casa Presidencial. 
Contreras also confided that Minister Jimenez is the one who 
is refusing to follow established anti-corruption procedures. 
 
3. (U) The USD 24 million has been earmarked by the GOH to 
fund a development project along its northern border with El 
Salvador and Guatemala known as Plan Trifinio.  The project 
is funded jointly by the Inter-American Development Bank and 
the Central American Bank for Economic Integration. 
 
4. (U) In a follow-up interview on October 22 with the press, 
Contreras claimed various high ranking GOH officials have 
attempted to intimidate her by threatening to strip her of 
all her official duties.  She mentioned by name Jorge Ramon 
Hernandez, Minister of Government, Ramon Medina Luna, 
Maduro\'s National Security Advisor, and Luis Cosenza, 
Minister of the Presidency.  Contreras vowed that she would 
not be cowed and would continue her campaign to bring 
transparency to public finances. 
 
5. (C) Comment: Armida Lopez Contreras has been a moving 
force in the GOH\'s greatly improved drug interdiction effort. 
 She has taken firm control and leadership of the moribund 
National Council to Combat Drug Trafficking and is forcing 
GOH law enforcement agencies to work together.  She has 
spoken forthrightly about drug trafficking corruption and 
worked hard to improve the GOH\'s interdiction capabilities. 
However, she is not a part of the President\'s inner circle of 
advisors.  There is an underlying political isolation to her 
role in the government as well.  She possesses enormous 
fortitude and determination to carry out her policy 
responsibilities and to pursue program goals, such as her 
under-funded demand reduction program, \"Si Se Puede.\"  Her 
frustration with government ministries that refuse to carry 
out their work or worse (misdirecting or stealing funds), 
apparently boiled over in this incident.  Finally, she also 
harbors ambitions of running for the Presidency, perhaps even 
in this next election cycle; although her name has not been 
mentioned recently as a possible candidate.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"11682","10/27/2003 23:51","03TEGUCIGALPA2515","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2013 
TAGS: MARR, MOPS, PREL, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR THEATER CLEARANCE AND SUPPORT: 
HONDURAN MOD PLANS TRAVEL TO IRAQ 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR LARRY L. PALMER; 
REASONS 1.5(B) AND (D) 
 
1. (C) EMBASSY REQUESTS CENTCOM THEATER CLEARANCE AND SUPPORT 
FOR PLANNED VISIT TO IRAQ BY HONDURAN MINISTER OF DEFENSE 
FREDERICO BREVE 11-13 NOV 03 TO VISIT THE 370 HONDURAN TROOPS 
STATIONED IN AN NAJAF. 
THE OFFICIAL PARTY WILL INCLUDE: 
THE HONORABLE FEDERICO D. ((BREVE)) TRAVIESO, MINISTER OF 
DEFENSE 
--PP: 001909; DOB: 18 AUG 45; ID: -8-1-1945-02144 
MAJ GEN JOSE I. ((BARAHONA)) HERRERA, CHIEF OF THE JOINT 
STAFF (CHOD) 
--PP: 898583; DOB: 28 JUL 54; ID: 0501-1954-02563 
LTC RAFAEL T. ((MORENO)), HONDURAN ARMY PAO 
--PP 093432; DOB 25 MAR 60; ID# 0801-1960-0125 
COL RANDY JAMES,USAF, USMILGP COMMANDER (OFFICIAL ESCORT AND 
PAYING AGENT) 
--305-60-8415; 13 DEC 52 
COL JAMES WILL SERVE AS PAYING AGENT FOR OFFICIAL EXPENSES 
FOR THE OFFICIAL PARTY. 
 
2. (C) ADDITIONALLY, THE 3-PERSON PRESS CONTINGENT BELOW WILL 
ACCOMPANY THE MOD. REQUEST FULL LOGISTICAL SUPPORT AS WELL 
FOR THIS GROUP, HOWEVER, THEY WILL PAY THEIR OWN EXPENSES. 
--DAGOBERTO ((RODRIGUEZ) COELLO - PP: A040837; DOB: 3 SEP 67; 
ID: 0801-1967-04337 
--EDGARDO A. ((MELGAR)) MEJIA - PP: AWAITING; DOB: 17 NOV 68; 
ID: 0801-1968-06086 
--CARLOS R. ((LAINEZ)) RODRIGUEZ - PP: AWAITING; DOB: 30 SEP 
60; ID: 0801-1960-08005 
 
3. (C) OFFICIAL TRAVEL PLANS ARE AS FOLLOWS: 
9 NOV - DEPART TEGUCIGALPA FOR MIAMI  - AA 954 AT 1411 
      ARR MIAMI 1734 
      DEP FOR LONDON - BA 208 AT 2035 
10 NOV      ARR LONDON AT 0655 
10 NOV DEP LONDON FOR KUWAIT CITY - BA 157 AT 2155 
11 NOV ARR KUWAIT CITY AT 0655 
--REQUEST VIP  LOUNGE AND OTHER APPROPRIATE ASSISTANCE UPON 
ARRIVAL 
--REQUEST HOTEL RESERVATIONS AND TRANSPORTATION TO /FROM 
HOTEL (SEVEN PEOPLE PLUS LUGGAGE) 
PROPOSED OFFICIAL ITINERARY AS DISCUSSED WITH CENTCOM: 
12 NOV 0900 DEPART KUWAIT CITY VIA C-130 FOR BAGHDAD 
   1000  ARRIVE BAGHDAD 
   1015  DEPART BAGHDAD FOR AL NAJAF (HO TROOP LOCATION) - 
VIA HELO 
   1115  ARRIVE AN NAJAF 
            --REQUEST MEETING WITH POLISH MND COMMANDER 
            --REQUEST MEETING WITH SPANISH BRIGADE COMMANDER 
REMAINDER OF AGENDA TBD BY HO TROOP COMMANDER, COL ANDINO 
---AGENDA SHOULD INCLUDE PRESS OPPORTUNITIES, MEALS WITH THE 
TROOPS, MAIL DISTRIBUTION, TOUR OF THE HONDURAN AOR, RON WITH 
TROOPS, ETC 
13 NOV @1300 DEPART AL NAJAF FOR BAGHDAD VIA HELO 
       1400    ARRIVE BAGHDAD 
       1415    DEPART BAGHDAD VIA C-130 FOR KUWAIT CITY 
       1515    ARRIVE KUWAIT CITY 
AGAIN, REQUEST ARRIVAL ASSISTANCE, HOTEL AND TRANS FOR ALL 
            RON KUWAIT CITY 
14 NOV    DEPART FOR LONDON - BA 156 AT 0840 
          ARR LONDON 1255  RON LONDON 
15 NOV    DEPART LONDON FOR MIAMI - BA 207 AT 0940 
        ARR MIAMI 1425 - RON MIAMI 
16 NOV    DEPART FOR HONDURAS - AA 953 AT 1120 
          ARR TEGUCIGALPA 1246 - END OF OFFICIAL VISIT 
 
4. (C) HONDURAS HAS BEEN A STRONG ALLY OF THE UNITED STATES 
FOR MANY YEARS, AND WAS THE FIRST COUNTRY IN THE WESTERN 
HEMISPHERE TO SIGN AND RATIFY AN ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT. 
HONDURAS ALSO WAS AMONG THE FIRST COUNTRIES TO OFFER TROOPS 
IN SUPPORT OF OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM.  THIS DECISION WAS 
COSTLY, BOTH FINANCIALLY AND POLITICALLY.  THE MOD\'S VISIT IS 
IN PART TO ASSURE THE HONDURAN PEOPLE THAT THE TROOPS ARE 
WELL EQUIPPED, WELL PREPARED, AND ARE CARRYING OUT AN 
IMPORTANT MISSION THAT IS WORTH THE COST.  THE VISIT ALSO IS 
INTENDED TO STRENGTHEN GOH CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT TO CONTINUE 
TROOP INVOLVEMENT IN IRAQ.  THE NEXT TROOP ROTATION IS 
SCHEDULED FOR FEBRUARY 04.  REQUEST ALL POSSIBLE ASSISTANCE 
IN MAKING THIS VISIT SMOOTH AND FIRST RATE. 
 
5. (C) HO GOC HAS BEEN ADVISED THAT THEY NEED TO SEND A DIP 
NOTE TO KUWAIT IAW THE SOFA 
 
Minimized Considered. 
Palmer 
"
"11749","10/29/2003 17:00","03TEGUCIGALPA2530","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE280521","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 002530 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/CPP, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
OASD/SOLIC (HPANITZ) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KSPR, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PINS, HO 
SUBJECT: FY 2004 EIPC NOMINATION FOR HONDURAS 
 
REF: STATE 280521 
 
1. Per reftel, Embassy Tegucigalpa hereby submits its FY 2004 
Enhanced International Peacekeeping Capabilities (EIPC) 
initiative request. 
 
2. SUMMARY:  Honduras is fresh and fertile ground for a new 
peacekeeping program.  As a member of the Coalition of the 
Willing, Honduras has deployed 370 troops (task force 
Xatruch) to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  The 
Government of Honduras (GOH) has also indicated a keen 
interest in further developing its ability to deploy troops 
in support of internationally sanctioned peacekeeping 
operations.  This is new for Honduras, which historically has 
not participated in peace operations to any significant 
extent.  For several years, Honduras has provided a small 
peacekeeping team of 12 Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) 
observers in the Western Sahara.  While the HOAF still 
participates in this mission, and will provide another 370 
troops in February 2004 to relieve its troops currently in 
Iraq, the GOH lacks the resources to develop an ongoing 
training operation that would support training for meaningful 
participation in future peacekeeping operations (PKOs).  END 
SUMMARY 
 
3. Honduras transitioned to civilian control of the military 
in 1996 and the HOAF is now firmly under civilian control.  A 
1999 constitutional amendment established direct civilian 
control over the armed forces through a civilian Minister of 
Defense.  The amendment also replaced the position of the 
Armed Forces Commander in Chief, who had standing equal to 
that of the country\'s President, with that of Chief of the 
Joint Staff.  In April 2002, Congress passed the Organic Law 
of the Armed Forces to solidify civilian control over the 
military.  Moreover, the Honduran Constitution expressly 
encourages the HOAF to undertake broader missions such as 
disaster assistance, humanitarian assistance and other 
\"social mandates.\" 
 
4. In recent years, the HOAF responded quickly and 
effectively to assist its regional neighbors in the wake of 
various disasters and crises.  Both its strong civilian 
control and track record of assisting other nations in crisis 
situations are evidence of an emerging professional 
institution, which in Post\'s opinion strongly supports the 
HOAF as a good candidate to undertake international missions 
for peacekeeping purposes.  The primary hindrance for the 
HOAF is lack of appropriate training and training instructors. 
 
5. Honduras is a strong regional ally and was the first 
nation in the Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an 
Article 98 Agreement with the United States.  The GOH has 
demonstrated a willingness to host a vast array of U.S. 
military training and operational opportunities, and in 
September 2004 Honduras will host SOUTHCOM\'s regional 
peacekeeping exercise PKO North.  Senior HOAF officers have 
expressed a strong desire to assume regional and 
international roles in peacekeeping missions.  The Honduran 
military is currently involved in several initiatives to 
expand their knowledge and capabilities in the PKO arena. 
The HOAF is willing to dedicate time, manpower, and scarce 
resources in order to become more involved in the 
international peacekeeping effort. 
 
 ---------------------------------------- 
 MISSION GOALS RELATED TO EIPC OBJECTIVES 
 ---------------------------------------- 
 
6. Given the opportunity to increase its participation in 
peacekeeping missions, Honduras could contribute to regional 
stability.  EIPC funding would provide the GOH with the means 
to expand its involvement in international PKOs, increase its 
professionalization, and foster its contribution to the 
general stability of the region. 
 
7. Specifically, EIPC funding for Honduras would support 
Performance Goal four of Post\'s FY 2005 Mission Performance 
Plan (MPP)--Stable, Secure Regional Partners.  The Tactics 
delineated under both Strategies one and two relate to EIPC 
objectives.  Strategy one focuses on expanding the HOAF\'s 
ability to achieve its constitutionally mandated missions by 
transforming it into a modern 21st century military force 
able to contribute to a variety of regional efforts. 
Strategy one also includes as a tactic the provision of EIPC 
funding to develop and train peacekeeping units. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
U.S. INTERESTS SERVED BY HOAF PARTICIPATION 
------------------------------------------ 
 
8. U.S. interests are directly advanced by the establishment 
of enhanced peacekeeping capability in Honduras.  The 
addition of Honduran troops to the international pool of 
countries available for peace operations will free up U.S. 
military forces for other worldwide missions--notably, the 
war against terrorism.  Honduras is a proven ally in Latin 
America as well as a valuable partner in dealing with the 
international community, and can be counted upon to support 
U.S. national security objectives. 
 
9. The genesis of a peacekeeping unit in Honduras will result 
in better training and readiness for the HOAF, and will 
contribute to the worldwide effort in peace operations. 
Moreover, the establishment of such a unit would expand the 
role of Honduras in regional efforts, and could potentially 
lead to the creation of a unified Central American 
peacekeeping organization.  Such regional military 
integration is a top U.S. policy priority for Central America. 
 
10. Regional integration in Central America is important to 
resolving pervasive problems that exist in all countries of 
the region, such as the stagnant economic situation, 
long-standing border disputes, international organized crime 
and illegal drug trafficking.  Additionally, regional 
stability and integration are cornerstones for improved 
regional counternarcotics and counterterrorism efforts--both 
high priorities of the U.S. in the region. 
 
11. Honduras is a participant in Operation Iraqi Freedom and 
currently has 370 troops stationed in Iraq directly involved 
in PKO efforts.  The GOH also participates, on a limited 
basis, in international operations related to peacekeeping 
and is willing to provide forces to other international 
missions. 
 
------------------ 
REGIONAL INFLUENCE 
------------------ 
 
12. The Central American countries are all relatively small 
(Honduras is roughly the size of Tennessee) and poor.  For 
this reason, regional economic integration is a mutual 
strategy pursued by all Central American countries, and 
Honduras has demonstrated its ability to cooperate and 
function as a team player.  Though one of the poorer nations 
in Central America, Honduras has established itself as a 
leader in regional issues, and stands to gain greater 
regional importance from accepting a regional responsibility 
for PKO. 
 
13. Honduras is centrally located, possesses vast training 
areas, and maintains easy access for both U.S. and third 
nation training opportunities.  A recent example is Honduras\' 
hosting of the multi-national disaster exercise, FUERZAS 
ALIADAS 2002 (in March 2002), in which 24 other nations, 
multiple international organizations and non-governmental 
organizations trained in Tegucigalpa for two weeks in a 
regional disaster scenario. 
 
14. EIPC funds would give Honduras the ability to begin 
laying the groundwork for the establishment of a Central 
American Peace Support Operations (PSO) Center, capable of 
training Honduran individuals and units, as well as other 
Central American participants--perhaps with an eye toward 
future expansion, making it possible to offer training to 
other Latin American countries. 
 
15. Honduras should first develop its own dedicated PKO 
unit--starting at the platoon level and expanding to at least 
the company level.  Once Honduras develops and implements its 
own unit, it may ultimately be feasible to establish a 
Central American PKO unit--along the lines of regional 
multi-national units recently created in other theaters. 
With Honduras providing the site for training, each 
participating nation could supply forces with a fixed 
rotation of key leadership positions.  The eventual goal 
would be the establishment of a Central American 
battalion-level force, capable of deployment within the 
region, hemisphere, or on worldwide missions under United 
Nations mandate--potentially relieving the necessity for U.S. 
forces to perform those missions. 
16. Honduran leaders (including military leaders) have made 
great strides in working together on regional economic 
integration, counternarcotics efforts, etc.  Post believes 
that Honduras, along with its Central American neighbors, has 
the requisite leadership ability and spirit of regional 
cooperation to work on a regional plan for peacekeeping 
operations.  In fact, this is a concept that HOAF officials 
have already advanced at the Conference of Central American 
Armed Forces. 
 
17. The geographic location of Honduras, along with the 
presence of Joint Task Force-Bravo (Soto Cano Air Base) (the 
only forward deployed U.S. military base in Latin America), 
makes it a logical Latin American country in which to invest 
EIPC funds to develop a viable regional peacekeeping force. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
POLITICAL SUPPORT FOR PEACE OPERATIONS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
18. Currently, because the HOAF has not yet begun a formal 
peacekeeping program, peacekeeping is not a part of defense 
military financing in Honduras.  The HOAF operates under 
severe financial constraints, and only minimal funding is 
allocated for peacekeeping.  The HOAF does not have a 
dedicated PKO unit or training program.  Nevertheless, the 
Honduran military has a keen interest in developing and 
implementing a PKO unit, and seeks to build a unit gradually. 
 The Hondurans have identified as one of their goals the 
establishment of a PKO unit and a training program over the 
course of the next 2 to 3 years.  The GOH will be looking to 
veterans from Iraq to initially staff this unit. 
 
19. The Maduro Administration and the HOAF leadership are 
committed to the underlying tenets of international 
peacekeeping, and have a genuine interest in developing PKO 
capacity.  Financial constraints will be an issue with which 
the GOH must contend, but the political will to develop and 
implement a peacekeeping force exists.  The current Honduran 
deployment to Iraq makes this a propitious moment to engage 
Honduras with a peacekeeping initiative. 
 
---------------------------- 
MILITARY TRAINING OBJECTIVES 
---------------------------- 
 
20. Peace Support Operations (PSO) Center:  The project would 
be a five-year project, extending from FY 04 through FY 08. 
The long-term objective would be to sponsor a Central 
American Regional PSO Training Center--eventually responsible 
for training PKO units from any of the Central American 
nations, as well as \"train-the-trainer\" courses, and 
expanding as suitable to other Latin American nations. 
 
21. The first three years would involve the establishment of 
the center and the development of the curriculum.  Depending 
on the progress with respect to the center,s capacity to 
train units, the goal would be to commence training the first 
pilot classes by the end of FY 05.  During FY 06-07, course 
development and sustainment would continue, and the first 
regular courses and unit training exercise would commence. 
The overall objective would be to complete the five-year 
project by having a self-sustaining center, capable of 
continued instruction and development, uninhibited by reduced 
budget support from the USG. 
 
22. In order to achieve its own sustainable PKO unit over the 
next 3 to 5 years, Honduras will need to start out at the 
lowest levels--initially establishing one dedicated PKO 
platoon, which will eventually serve as the cadre for the 
establishment of a company-size unit.  The objective is to 
have a fully equipped PKO company in place by FY 07, which 
could deploy independently, as part of a Central American 
battalion within the region, or as part of a global United 
Nations mission. 
 
23. The ultimate objective of the PSO would be to develop a 
Central American Regional PSO Training Center, eventually 
responsible for training PKO units from all of the Central 
American nations. 
 
------------------------------------- 
PROPOSED PROJECTS AND FUNDS REQUESTED 
------------------------------------- 
24. In order to effectively implement and sustain a 
developing program, we request USD $500,000.  Per reftel, 
Post outlines below how this money would be dedicated to 
enhance Honduras\' peacekeeping training capabilities: 
 
(1) Phase I Visit by CCMR and NAWC-TSD to assess current 
Honduran efforts in PSO education and training.  The intent 
is to exchange information and identify counterparts.  Cost 
approximately $20,000 for the training case, and $20,000 for 
equipment. 
 
(2) Phase II Instructors\' Course.   15 to 20 officer 
instructors attend the course in Monterey.  Cost 
approximately $40,000, including travel/per diem. 
 
(3) Initial Phase III Mobile Education Team(MET) (3 to 4 
personnel) visit to Honduras to develop curriculum and expand 
on to-be-determined PSO topics resulting from Phases I and 
II.  Cost - approximately $90,000. 
 
(4) Initial equipment purchase, to include electronic 
classrooms, communications equipment, staff training software 
and modules, and multi-source audio-visual equipment.  Cost - 
approximately $100,000. 
 
(5) Language lab/language lab books and publications.  Cost - 
$50,000. 
 
(6) In country Phase IV conducted jointly by CCMR and the 
Honduran PSO Center (or its education equivalent based upon 
the Honduran progress in program development). Cost will vary 
according to length - approximately $100,000. 
 
(7) Follow-on equipment purchases.  Cost - $80,000. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE HOAF 
---------------------------------------- 
 
25. Literacy - The single point of entry for Honduran 
officers is through their academy system.  Accordingly, all 
officers are completely literate in Spanish.  A small 
percentage of those officers are bilingual in English, and 
regularly attend U.S. military courses through IMET.  The 
average enlisted soldier (in today\'s military, a volunteer) 
is far less educated.  For those who receive some formal 
education, it is rarely above the sixth grade level.  The 
exception is the Air Force, where airmen with a high school 
level education fill some of the more technical positions, 
and many attend IMET courses in the U.S.  It is noteworthy to 
mention that the Army feels a need to further educate its 
enlisted soldiers, and employs teachers to provide elementary 
education during some duty hours. 
 
26. Level of Training/Readiness - Within the Army, all 
battalions are approximately one-third of their strength of 
15 years ago, and equipment (primarily U.S. FMS case) is in 
poor condition.  The fundamental problem for all branches of 
the HOAF is a serious lack of funding for both training of 
personnel and maintenance of equipment. 
 
27. The Army trains well with the limited funds they receive. 
 Moreover, during the course of the last year the Army has 
benefited from a significant amount of training with U.S. 
Special Operations Forces (SOF).  These bilateral training 
opportunities have substantially improved the tactical 
capabilities of the troops.  This improvement is particularly 
noteworthy amongst the Honduran units that hosted multiple 
SOF deployments. 
 
28. The Air Force continues to make progress in the 
maintenance of their aircraft, and manages to keep 
approximately half of the fleet flyable at any given time. 
 
29. The Honduran Navy is experiencing more serious 
difficulties, with an old fleet that shows the effects of age 
and limited maintenance funds.  The Navy has benefited 
recently, however, from deploying seized go-fast boats once 
used by narcotraffickers. 
 
30. Discipline - As a rule, the Honduran military is fairly 
well disciplined, and failure to follow orders and 
insubordination are not tolerated. 
 
31. Leadership - Shortly after he took office in January 
2002, President Maduro appointed a new Minister of Defense, 
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Staff, and commanders 
of the Army and Navy.  Overall, the Joint Staff and the 
service Chiefs are competent leaders, and have a firm grasp 
of the strengths and limitations of the HOAF.  The magnitude 
of this transfer of leadership underscores the strong 
civilian control of the military. 
 
32. Loyalty to Government/Constitution - In January of 1999, 
the constitution was amended to abolish the position of 
military commander in chief of the HOAF, thus codifying 
civilian authority over the military.  Honduras now has a 
civilian Minister of Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint 
Staff who heads the HOAF.  Civilian control is well accepted 
by the HOAF, and the transition to civilian control has 
resulted in greater transparency and fiscal accountability. 
The current MOD, Federico Breve, enjoys an excellent 
relationship with the HOAF military leadership.  The military 
has embraced its new roles and missions as provided by the 
President and Congress with little or no disruption. 
 
33. Morale - HOAF morale is good.  The HOAF reports that 
soldiers\' morale has increased, because they feel they have a 
useful role.  The PKO opportunity would allow the HOAF to 
maintain high morale in peacetime by making soldiers feel 
like they are contributing to their society and participating 
in an international security role. 
 
34. Indicators of Corruption, Past or Present - Over the 
course of the last several years, human rights vetting has 
shown no involvement in atrocities.  While in general, 
corruption continues to be a problem in Honduras, Post has no 
credible evidence of recent cases of corruption amongst the 
current military top brass or HOAF officials. 
Palmer 
"
"11767","10/30/2003 14:06","03TEGUCIGALPA2544","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, ELAB, SOCI, PHUM, KIRF, HO 
SUBJECT: ARABS VIEWED AS ETHNIC COMMUNITY WITH MOST 
ECONOMIC CLOUT IN HONDURAS 
 
 
1.  A recent survey conducted in Tegucigalpa of 200 people 
over the age of 18 indicated that the majority of those 
polled view Arabs as having the most economic power in 
Honduras.  Those surveyed were asked two questions: which 
ethnic community do you view as the most powerful 
economically; and also, a somewhat generic two-pronged 
question about the overall social image of each ethnic group. 
The following ethnic groups were evaluated in the study: 
Chinese, African, indigenous, Arabic, and Jewish. 
 
2.  After the Arab community, those perceived as having the 
most economic clout (in descending order) were the Chinese, 
Jewish, African, and indigenous communities. As far as hard 
work is concerned, those surveyed overwhelmingly viewed the 
Chinese as the hardest workers (71 percent), followed by the 
Arabs (12 percent), indigenous (11 percent), African (3 
percent), and the Jewish community (2.5 percent).  When those 
surveyed were asked what is your overall view of these ethnic 
groups, the Chinese came out first, with 92 percent of the 
people seeing them in a positive light.  Following closely 
behind were the African and indigenous communities, with 89 
percent and 88 percent, with the Arabic and Jewish 
communities receiving only 49.5 percent and 35 percent 
respectively. 
 
3.  With respect to the Arab community, although perceived as 
the most economically influential group, they are not 
necessarily well-liked. (NOTE: The Arab community in Honduras 
is overwhelmingly Palestinian-Christian, not Islamic. END 
NOTE.) The Chinese, however, are seen as being both powerful 
and having a positive social image, particularly in terms of 
being hard workers.  The African and indigenous communities 
are viewed as having little economic power, but retain a good 
perception according to the survey. 
 
4.  COMMENT: Although there are no official statistics, it is 
estimated that between 150,000 and 200,000 of Honduras\' six 
million inhabitants are of Arab descent, and of these, the 
great majority are Palestinian-Christian. By some estimates, 
no other country in the Western Hemisphere has a higher 
proportion of Arab immigrants and, in absolute numbers, 
Honduras ranks fourth after the United States, Canada, and 
Chile. Important figures of Arabic descent include: the 
former president Carlos Flores; the Canahuati family 
(textiles); and the Kafati family (coffee). Despite their 
economic clout, Arab-Hondurans are often the victims of 
prejudice or stereotyping. 
Palmer 
"
"11769","10/30/2003 14:21","03TEGUCIGALPA2545","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA1740","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002545 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, PM, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PTER, MOPS, SNAR, KJUS, PHUM, PINR, HO, KCUM 
SUBJECT: THOUSANDS OF ILLEGAL ARMS STILL UNCOUNTED FOR IN 
HONDURAS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1740 
 
1.  It is estimated that around 10,000 AK-47\'s, remnants of 
the region\'s civil wars in the 1980\'s, remain on the streets 
of Honduras.  A recent legislative decree offered USD 57 for 
each gun deemed \"illegal\", but the 90-day grace period for 
voluntarily turning in these weapons has now expired. During 
this period, approximately 1,300 weapons were turned over to 
various police stations throughout the country. 
 
2.  Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez stated that the 
GOH is well aware of the threat these weapons pose for 
Honduran security, and the danger that they could be bartered 
for drugs with Colombian narcoterrorist groups.  As such, 
Alvarez announced planned operations to raid and arrest those 
who possess these weapons.  The penalty for possession of an 
illegal weapon will be 8 to 10 years in prison and a fine of 
USD 285 to 570 for each weapon.  The Minister also announced 
that this law will be enforced equally, regardless of factors 
such as socioeconomic standing or political affiliation. 
 
3.  As stated in reftel, the following arms are prohibited by 
the GOH: all types of AK-47\'s; Livian and other heavy 
automatic weapons with a caliber of 7.62 x 55mm; all types of 
Uzi machine guns; all types of M-16\'s; M-60 machine guns; 
guns used by snipers with a caliber of 5.56 mm; Galil\'s; 
G-3\'s; all types of Berettas 5.56; and M-21\'s used by snipers. 
Palmer 
"
"11786","10/30/2003 20:00","03TEGUCIGALPA2551","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03State263456","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002551 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT/BTT (DMALAC), OES/ETC(HLEE), AND 
WHA/CEN 
USDA FOR USDA/FAS/OA/BSIMMONS AND USDA/APHIS/BRS/JTURNER 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID FOR JLEWIS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO FDA FOR RLAKE 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO EPA FOR JANDERSEN 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, ECON, ETRD, SENV, TBIO, PGOV, HO, TSLP 
SUBJECT: Biotechnology Regulations: Honduras 
 
REF: State 263456 
 
1.  Post contacted Carlos Almendares, the GOH official most 
directly responsible for biotechnology issues, and received 
the information below.  Mr. Almendares is the Chief of the 
Seed Certification Department in the Honduran National 
Service for Animal and Plant Health (abbreviated SENASA, 
equivalent to our APHIS), within the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock.  The following answers are keyed to the 
questions in paragraph 4 of reftel. 
 
Q1.  What are the dates relevant laws and regulations became 
effective? 
 
A1.  The Phytozoosanitary Decree 157 was passed in 1994. 
This law establishes that the National Service for Animal 
and Plant Health (SENASA), in co-ordination with the 
Ministry of Health, has the responsibility for issuing 
regulations for the import and use of biotech products. 
 
The regulations based upon this law were approved and came 
into effect in 1998.  These regulations were based upon 
those of Mexico, Argentina and Colombia, though the Honduran 
regulations are less strict than those of the other 
countries. 
 
In addition, a National Committee of Biotechnology and 
Biosafety was established in 1997 and meets four times a 
year.  This committee is made up of representatives from the 
following organizations: 
 - the Seed Certification Department of SENASA, 
 - the Sanitary Regulations Department of the Ministry of 
Health, 
- the Biodiversity Unit of the Ministry of Environment and 
Natural Resources, 
 - the Pan American School of Agriculture at Zamorano, 
 - the Honduran Foundation of Agricultural Research (FHIA), 
 - the National University (UNAH), 
 - the National Council for Science and Technology (a semi- 
autonomous government institution), 
 - the National Association of Seed Producers and 
Distributors (an industry organization), and 
 - the Standard Fruit Company (someone with a scientific 
background). 
 
Q2. Is there a regulatory process in place for approving 
products of agricultural biotechnology for import or sale? 
If so, please provide a brief description of this process. 
 
A2.  The approval process for the import or sale of biotech 
products is as follows. 
 
First, any party which wishes to import or distribute any 
seeds in Honduras, whether biotech or not, must register 
with SENASA and pay a registration fee of 1,500 Lempiras 
(USD 86).  The registration process is simple - a one page 
application.  In addition, if the party wishes to import a 
biotech product, they must pay an additional registration 
fee of 5,000 Lempiras (USD 286). 
 
Then, the party that wishes to import biotech products must 
submit an application to SENASA, which passes it on to the 
National Committee of Biotechnology and Biosafety. 
 
The National Committee requires a risk evaluation of the 
product in question.  In some cases the Committee has 
accepted the results of an analysis done by another country. 
(For example, import of corn BT was approved based on an 
analysis done by the FDA.)  However, the Committee usually 
recommends that the risk analysis be performed in Honduras. 
Currently there are three organizations which conduct these 
risk evaluations: the Honduran Foundation of Agricultural 
Research (FHIA), the National University (UNAH), or the Pan 
American School of Agriculture at Zamorano. 
 
If the risk evaluation is performed in Honduras, the 
importing party is responsible for the cost.  The risk 
evaluation can take as little as three months, but in one 
case (a variety of banana) has been ongoing since 1997. 
 
As part of the risk evaluation, the effectiveness of the 
biotech product is also tested.  For example, if a variety 
claims to be drought-resistant, tests are also performed to 
evaluate whether the variety truly is resistant to drought 
in the Honduran context - essentially, whether the product 
does what it claims to do. 
The National Committee reviews the application and the risk 
evaluation and makes a recommendation on whether or not to 
allow the import of the product.  However, the final 
decision is made by the head of SENASA. 
 
Q3.  Which governmental departments or ministries monitor 
and/or enforce the laws or regulations? If possible, please 
provide contact information for a government official within 
each department or ministry which plays a role in the 
regulation of agricultural biotechnology. 
 
A3.  In the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock: 
 
Carlos Almendares 
Chief Department of Seed Certification 
Avenida La FAO, Edificio SENASA 
2do. Piso - Sanidad Vegetal 
Tel. (504) 239-7270 
E-mail:calmendares81(at)yahoo.com 
certisem(at)optinet.hn 
 
Eduardo Salgado 
Sub-Director of Plant Health 
Avenida La FAO, Edificio SENASA 
2do. Piso - Sanidad Vegetal 
Tel. (504) 235-8425 
E-mail: escambar(at)yahoo.es 
 
Lizardo Reyes 
General Director SENASA 
Avenida La FAO, Edificio SENASA 3er Piso 
Tel. (504) 239-7067 
E-mail: direccionsenasa(at)multivisionhn.net 
senasa-sag(at)multivisionhn.net 
 
Q4.  What does this monitoring and/or enforcement by the 
government departments or ministries entail?  What are the 
penalties for failing to comply? 
 
A4.  According to the law, penalties for failing to comply 
with the regulations range from 100 to 100,000 Lempira (USD 
6 to USD 5,737 at the current exchange rate).  The maximum 
penalty is reserved for cases of serious harm to human, 
animal or plant health or irreversible damage to the 
environment or ecosystem.  However, Mr. Almendares of SENASA 
knows of no case in which any fine has actually been imposed 
for failure to comply with laws concerning biotech products. 
 
Q5. Are shipments of agricultural products tested for 
biotech content, and if so, whether this testing is done on 
a random or regular basis? 
 
A5.  No shipments are tested at the port of entry to 
determine if they contain biotech content.  The only testing 
done is as part of the risk evaluation, as explained above 
in A2. 
 
Q6.  Has the country put in place or is it contemplating 
implementing a traceability system for the products of 
agricultural biotechnology, and if so, the details of this 
system? 
 
A6.  A traceability system is currently being considered by 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, and may be put 
into place as early as April 2004.  The system would be 
managed by SENASA. 
 
Q7.  Is special documentation required for agricultural 
products which may contain the products of agricultural 
biotechnology?  If so, what types of documentation are 
required? 
 
A7.  At the port, there is no special documentation required 
for the import of biotech products (as long as their import 
has been approved through the process described in A2 
above). 
 
Q8.  Are in-country field tests required prior to regulatory 
approval of a biotech crop? 
 
A8.  Yes, field tests are required as part of the risk 
evaluation included in the application process described in 
A2. 
 
Q9.  Exactly what constitutes a complete packet of 
information required by government regulators for 
consideration of approval of a biotech crop? 
 
A9.  The National Committee of Biotechnology and Biosafety 
requires the following information: 
 
1. Staff information: Names, addresses and telephone numbers 
of people that have developed and/or supplied the regulated 
product. 
 
2. Purpose: Detailed description of the purpose of the 
regulated product, (i.e., drought resistance, pest 
resistance, etc.) 
 
3. Description of genetic material: Description of the 
genetically modified material in the organism and how it 
differs from the non-modified organism. 
 
4. Transformation methods: Place and country where the 
organism was developed and produced; methods of 
transformation and selection processes used. 
 
5. Production system: A detailed description of the 
molecular biology of the system used to produce the biotech 
product (example: donor-recipient-vector). 
 
6. Evaluation location: If a risk evaluation for the product 
in question has already been performed, the country and 
specific location of the evaluation. 
 
7. Biosecurity measures: A detailed description of the 
processes and security measures used in the country of 
origin, and that will be used in Honduras, to avoid 
contamination and dissemination of the regulated product. 
 
8. Intended destination: A detailed description of the 
intended destination, uses and distribution of the regulated 
product (for example: location of green houses, labs, field 
tests, pilot projects, production, dissemination, 
processing, sale, distribution). 
 
9. Containment measures: A detailed description of the 
procedures, processes and security measures proposed that 
will be used to prevent the escape and dissemination of the 
regulated product at each of the intended destinations 
listed in 8, above. 
 
10.  Final disposition: A detailed description of the 
proposed method for final disposal of the regulated product. 
 
11.  Bibliography: A list of any articles or research 
pertaining to the regulated product. 
 
Q10.  Must foods containing the products of agricultural 
biotechnology be labeled, and if so, what threshold 
percentage of both intended and adventitious presence would 
trigger the labeling requirement? 
 
A10.  Currently, Honduras has no labeling requirements for 
biotech products. 
 
Q11.  If a label is required for food and feed containing 
the products of agricultural biotechnology, what are the 
contents of a label text? 
 
A11.  n/a 
 
Q12. What level of food products (i.e. unprocessed vs. 
consumer-ready) must carry a label? 
 
A12.  n/a 
 
Q13. Is there any law or regulation governing the use of 
labels such as \"biotech-free\", \"non-biotech,\" \"GMO-free\" or 
\"non-GMO?\" 
 
A13.  No, there is not. 
 
Q14. In countries where no formal laws or regulations have 
been promulgated or enforced, what is the likelihood that 
the host government will enact them in the near future? 
 
A14.  n/a 
 
Palmer 
"
"11813","10/31/2003 17:20","03TEGUCIGALPA2558","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE268055|03TEGUCIGALPA1863","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND S/ES-CR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, OPDC, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN FOREIGN MINISTERS (CURRENT AND FORMER) 
SEND LETTERS TO SECRETARY POWELL 
 
Ref: State 268055 
     Tegucigalpa 1863 
 
1.  Honduran Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista, under 
cover letter to the Ambassador, sent the Embassy on October 
20 two letters to Secretary Powell - one from himself in 
response to a September 18 letter from the Secretary (ref A) 
and one from former Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso 
Arias officially announcing his July 23 resignation (ref B). 
Post is unsure why the Foreign Ministry did not send the 
Perez-Cadalso letter earlier.  Post faxed originals to 
WHA/CEN.  Unofficial Embassy translation of the two letters 
follows. 
 
2. 
 
Secretary of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Honduras 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C. September 26, 2003 
 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary: 
 
I have the pleasure to confirm receipt of your kind letter 
on the 18th of this month, by means of which you 
congratulate me for my recent appointment, which I am 
thankful. 
 
Indeed, the relationship between Honduras and the United 
States has been excellent and is characterized by solidarity 
and mutual respect.  You can be sure that I share your wish 
to still fortify it, through the cooperation in subjects of 
particular interest for both countries, such as the fight 
against terrorism, drug trafficking and corruption, as well 
as obtaining a successful negotiation in the Free Trade 
Agreement between Central America and the United States. 
 
I take advantage of this first opportunity to express my 
highest and distinguished consideration. 
 
/s/ 
 
Leonidas Rosa-Bautista 
Secretary of Foreign Relations 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C. 22 of July of 2003 
 
 
Excellency: 
 
I have honor to acknowledge to your Excellency that in this 
date, I interposed my resignation for the position of 
Secretary of State in the Office of Foreign Affairs, to Mr. 
 
SIPDIS 
Ricardo Maduro, President of the Republic of Honduras, 
effective as of July 23. 
 
Upon saying goodbye to your Excellency, I wish to express my 
special recognition for the attentions received during the 
exercise of my position, as well as the warm demonstrations 
of friendship toward me.  I will keep the most pleasing 
memories. 
 
Upon formulating my best wishes for your personal fortune, 
Excellency, I take this opportunity to renew the testimony 
of my highest and distinguished consideration. 
 
/s/ 
 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias 
 
3.  End unofficial Embassy translation. 
Palmer 
"
"11821","10/31/2003 22:23","03TEGUCIGALPA2564","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA2490","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/AN/IAA, IO/UNP, AND USUN 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, ETRD, CU, HO, UNGA 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN AMBASSADOR TO CUBA NOT IN THE OFFING, BUT 
MFA SUGGESTS ONE COULD AID HUMAN RIGHTS EFFORTS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2490 
 
     B. STATE 297777 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request; see paragraph 6. 
 
2. (U) Deputy Chief of Mission and Political Counselor met 
with Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Anibel Quinones on 
October 28 to deliver points in ref B.  Quinones was already 
aware of USG concerns as raised with Government of Honduras 
(GOH) officials in ref A.  Quinones added Ambassador 
Canahuati had also informed MFA that State Department 
officials had raised the issue during the Honduran Minister 
of Public Security\'s visit to Washington during the previous 
week. 
 
3. (C) Quinones reiterated that the naming of a Honduran 
ambassador to Cuba is not on the immediate agenda of the 
Foreign Ministry, nor have they have had any recent 
discussion with the President\'s office on the topic.  He did 
echo earlier comments (see ref A) that the GOH is concerned 
about being able to provide consular services to its 700 
Honduran nationals who are studying medicine there.  He also 
added a new wrinkle, suggesting that the GOH is concerned 
about the possible political indoctrination of these medical 
students and needs to expand staffing at their offices in 
Cuba to monitor better the type of training these students 
may be receiving. 
 
4. (C) Quinones stated that at some point Honduras would have 
to name an ambassador.  He said that they have not received 
any pressure from the Cuban Ambassador in Tegucigalpa nor has 
there been recent domestic pressure, which has allowed them 
to move slowly.  He explained, however, that the conclusion 
and signing of a maritime boundary treaty with Cuba is a top 
priority for the GOH, in part, he claimed, because it will 
strengthen their defense against Nicaragua\'s maritime border 
case in The Hague.  He added that the GOH is close to 
finishing a similar agreement with Mexico and they signed an 
agreement with the Cayman Islands and the United Kingdom in 
2002.  The agreement with Cuba, we learned separately, is 
completed.  All that is lacking is a signing ceremony. 
 
5. (C) Quinones then asked if he could speculate on a 
possible course of action that might serve both countries, 
interests.  He first made clear that this approach had not 
been discussed with either President Maduro or Foreign 
Minister Rosa Bautista.  As a member of the UN Commission on 
Human Rights, he said, Honduras felt it was positioned to 
play a key role in advancing the international effort to 
press Cuba to live up to its international human rights 
commitments.  Quinones said that Honduras wanted to use its 
time on the UNCHR to promote human rights in the hemisphere. 
He asked directly whether it would be helpful to the U.S. to 
have a loyal ally in Havana who could help press the human 
rights case there.  He noted that the current chief of the 
U.S. Interests Section, Jim Cason, was favorably known to the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs from his earlier posting here, 
and imagined that he would be comfortable working closely 
with the Honduran mission.  Quinones then suggested that the 
MFA would seek to name a senior career Honduran diplomat to 
the Charge post in Havana.  He said this would give Honduras 
the necessary level of experienced representation to meet its 
consular needs and a seasoned official who could engage more 
effectively on human rights issues in Cuba.  He added that it 
would also delay the need for naming an ambassador.  Another 
option that he said had been discussed would be to dually 
accredit a Honduran Ambassador in another country to Cuba, 
although this was not an attractive option. 
 
6. (C) COMMENT:  Quinones at one point made it clear that the 
GOH and MFA are unhappy with the current Charge in Havana and 
wanted to replace him with a more experienced officer.  It 
appears that they will not be naming an ambassador in the 
immediate future but are considering ways to upgrade the 
level of representation in Havana.  While the GOH,s concern 
about its consular services is laudable, we believe that the 
GOH is most concerned about finalizing its maritime boundary 
treaty with Cuba.  Post would appreciate department and US 
Interest Section Havana\'s guidance on how to respond to 
Quinones,s idea about the appointment of a more senior MFA 
official in the Charge role and interest in working with US 
on human rights issues.  END COMMENT. 
 
Palmer 
"
"11876","11/4/2003 13:12","03TEGUCIGALPA2584","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE272561|03STATE272561","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002584 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/PCI: PSAMSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, ETRD, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: SELECTING CANDIDATE MODEL COUNTRIES ON WATER FOR 
THE UN COMMISSION ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN LATIN 
AMERICA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 272561 
 
1. Summary.  In response to STATE 272561, Post recommends 
the consideration of decentralized management of urban water 
and sanitation systems in Honduras as a model to be further 
studied by an expert team and eventually presented at the 
upcoming UN Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD). 
End Summary. 
 
2. Access by the urban population to water supply and 
sanitation services in Honduras is decidedly uneven. 
Despite almost universal coverage for residential water 
supply (93 percent of the urban population), access to 
sanitation services is much lower (73 percent).  In 
addition, the high rates of access to water mask the poor 
quality of service delivery and erratic quality of water 
itself.  In terms of sewerage, few wastewater treatment 
systems exist nationally, resulting in the majority of 
residential wastewater being returned to the environment 
without any treatment.  Not surprisingly, improved and 
uninterrupted provision of water and sanitation continues to 
be a priority for urban populations in Honduras, especially 
for the urban poor, those most affected by a lack of piped 
water supply and substandard sanitation services. 
 
3. Over the past 10 years, the de facto decentralization of 
water supply and sanitation has stimulated significant 
advances in delivering basic urban services in secondary, or 
medium-sized, cities throughout the country.  (Rural water 
systems have historically been locally managed, but it is 
worth mentioning more about these rural systems as they 
represent the supply side of the equation of providing the 
water for the lower watershed, urban areas.)  Another 
benefit of decentralization in Honduras has been that 
several rural communities have been able to help stabilize 
water supply in some communities by stabilizing water 
sources in the upper watersheds through activities such as 
reforestation, crop rotation and changes in crops grown. 
Any progress made, however, is being threatened by the 
pressures of urban growth that present real and sometimes 
insurmountable challenges to the provision of water and 
sanitation services. 
 
4. Honduras is a country undergoing a profound demographic 
transition, not unlike the urbanization that many other 
countries in the region have already experienced.  The 
urbanization that is projected to occur in Honduras over the 
next five years (5 percent annual growth, one of the highest 
urbanization rates in all of Latin America) is also expected 
to impact a number of secondary cities throughout the 
country, not only the traditional centers of Tegucigalpa and 
San Pedro Sula.  This high growth rate in the urban 
population has already started to present challenges in the 
provision of basic urban services, specifically water and 
sanitation.  Further, this high growth rate will continue to 
put pressure on the upper watersheds which represent the 
sources of the water for the urban areas. 
 
5. Water and sanitation sector reform is now generating some 
real momentum.  The urban water and sanitation sector is 
expected to undergo a dramatic change over the next five 
years.  Congress recently passed a bill, the Water and 
Sanitation Law (August, 2003), providing for the 
restructuring of the central government\'s water company, 
Servicio Autonomo Nacional de Acueductos y Alcantarillados 
(SANAA), and transfer of 20 urban water systems to 
municipalities over the next five years.  SANAA would retain 
the operation and management of the Tegucigalpa water and 
sanitation system, and become the principal regulating 
agency of urban water systems elsewhere in the country. 
While this bill has yet to be signed by President Maduro, 
Post believes that there is a very high probability that 
this bill will become law. 
 
6. Passing a law alone does not immediately improve the 
supply of water.  For this reason, USAID Honduras is 
supporting activities in upper watershed management in order 
to ensure that both the supply and demand sides of the water 
equation are being addressed. 
 
7. The reforms included in the Water and Sanitation Law, in 
particular the decentralization of the urban water and 
sanitation systems, were an effectiveness condition of the 
USD 26 million Honduras Potable Water and Sanitation 
Investment Program (1048/SF-HO) funded by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB).  This program has been awaiting 
compliance with this conditionality for several years and 
now, with the passage of this law, can begin disbursements. 
This program will offer loans to eligible municipalities and 
decentralized operators for expansion, rehabilitation, and 
other infrastructure improvements to urban water and 
sanitation systems in selected municipalities, as well as 
technical assistance related to the construction and 
rehabilitation of these civil works.  A preliminary short 
list of 22 potentially eligible municipalities coincides 
with the same group of municipalities that have been 
receiving technical assistance through USAID\'s Municipal 
Development Project (1994-2003).  In this manner, the IDB 
loan is already capitalizing on the increased capacity of 
the 22 municipalities resulting from USG-funded assistance 
programs. 
 
8. However, the IDB loan does not provide for technical 
assistance for the transfer of the 20 SANAA systems that 
will pass from central management to municipal management 
within five years.  USAID recognizes the importance of 
providing assistance throughout the transfer process, and 
has experience in having done so in 1999 when four urban 
water systems were transferred to municipal governments.  A 
successful transfer of urban water systems in large 
secondary cities such as El Progreso (pop. 157,188), 
Juticalpa (pop. 93,726), Comayagua (pop. 96,450), La Ceiba 
(pop. 140,931), and Danli (pop. 145,024) will be important 
not only for uninterrupted water supply to the populations 
of these urban centers, but also for these decentralized 
operators to become eventually eligible for construction and 
rehabilitation projects financed by the IDB loan. 
 
9. Other bilateral donors, such as the Swedish International 
Development Agency (SIDA), the Japanese International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA), and the European Commission (EC), 
have also demonstrated interest in contributing technical 
assistance to municipalities and decentralized operators in 
order to make them eligible for the IDB loan. 
 
10. USAID-funded technical assistance facilitated the 
transfer of the Catacamas (pop. 87,845) urban water supply 
system, and the establishment of a decentralized entity, 
Servicios Municipales de Catacamas (SERMUCAT), autonomous of 
the municipality.  SERMUCAT now provides a successful model 
of decentralized municipal services provision for water 
supply, sewerage, solid waste management, and street 
cleaning.  USAID-funded assistance also contributed to the 
establishment of an autonomous decentralized entity in 
Puerto Cortes (pop. 103,033).  Similar technical assistance, 
also funded by USAID, was provided in the transfer of the 
Choluteca (pop. 134,452) urban water system.  However, this 
transfer was less successful and the autonomous 
decentralized entity created, Aguas de Choluteca, has had 
more difficulties in consolidating its management of 
municipal services. 
 
11. Other municipalities assisted by USAID-funded technical 
assistance have also developed interesting models for 
addressing basic service delivery from within the municipal 
government, such as Santa Rosa de Copan (pop. 40,309), 
Comayagua (pop. 96,450), and Tela (pop. 82,499). 
 
12. An opportunity exists to generate lessons learned from 
the existing experiences in order to provide additional 
inputs to the increased decentralization of municipal 
services (water supply, sewerage collection, and solid waste 
management) throughout the country. 
 
 
PALMER 
"
"11923","11/5/2003 22:09","03TEGUCIGALPA2612","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002612 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:MLARSEN 
DEPT OF COMMERCE FOR THE ADVOCACY CENTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EINV, KPRV, HO 
SUBJECT: Telecom Procurement Practices, Less Than Fair? 
 
1. (U) Summary and action request.  In an effort to promote 
transparency in its procurement practices, the Government of 
Honduras (GOH) decided to contract the UNDP to manage 
procurements for major infrastructure projects by the state 
owned telephone company, Hondutel.  Unfortunately, in the 
first two major tenders, both bids have ended with heavy 
clouds of doubt and strong allegations of wrongdoing from 
participating U.S. (and other international) companies.  The 
French company, Alcatel, has walked away winning both 
contracts under highly questionable circumstances.  Embassy 
officers met with both American companies during each bid 
process and passed along their concerns to the UNDP, 
Hondutel and the GOH. One company chose to file an official 
protest with UNDP headquarters in New York, but it appears 
without success.  Post requests assistance from EB/CIP and 
Commerce Advocacy Center to discuss emerging problems with 
UNDP.  End Summary and Action Request. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Fiber Optic Network - the first bid 
----------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) The UNDP conducted its first Hondutel tender on 
March 21, 2003.  The bid was for a fiber optic network to be 
installed from the North coast city of Puerto Cortes, down 
through the middle of Honduras, to Tegucigalpa.  Midwest 
Cable Communications (Midwest) approached the Embassy before 
the tender officially began, to notify the commercial 
section of its interest in doing business in Honduras and to 
give a brief company overview.  Shortly after the bid 
opening, Midwest notified the Embassy of rumors of 
impropriety it had been hearing.  Midwest claimed that 
another bidder, an Israeli company, contacted one of its 
U.S. subcontractors looking for information on supplies to 
fill the bid, saying that it had heard Midwest had been 
disqualified.  Midwest became concerned since the bid 
packages were still under review and should have been 
confidential at that time. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
3. (SBU) Midwest was puzzled about the prospect of 
disqualification as special efforts had been made to deliver 
a high quality bid.  When finally notified, the company was 
told that thirteen other bidders, everyone except Alcatel in 
fact, had been disqualified.  Rumors began circulating that 
Hondutel and the UNDP based the request for the fiber optic 
network proposals on an unsolicited proposal previously 
received from Alcatel. 
 
4. (SBU) Midwest, it turned out, had the lowest bid price, 
roughly USD 3 million lower than Alcatel\'s and lower than 
other European firms as well.  Econoffs, concerned by the 
appearances of impropriety in a bid process in which so many 
well-known international companies had been disqualified, 
including the sole U.S. company, raised the issue with 
Minister for Investment, Camilo Atala, Special Presidential 
Advisor for Government Reinvention, Mauro Membreno, Hondutel 
General Manager, Alonso Valenzuela, and UNDP/Honduras 
representative, Jeffrey Avina.  All of these interlocutors 
indicated that it was the procedures used for this tender 
that had resulted in these skewed results because not even 
the smallest of omissions or ambiguities were allowed to be 
clarified.  In addition, Membreno indicated that the 
procedure of opening both the technical and price envelopes 
simultaneously, unusual in Honduras, contributed to the 
confusion.  Membreno, Valenzuela and Avina indicated that 
the procedural errors would be corrected in future tenders. 
 
5. (SBU) Most disconcerting of all for Embassy efforts to 
assure a fair process for U.S. companies was the obvious 
finger pointing and buck passing among the parties. 
Hondutel officials shrugged off any responsibility for the 
flawed process by indicating that the UNDP was managing the 
bid, but UNDP in turn blamed Hondutel for providing them 
with the complete bid package and tender procedures which 
caused the disqualifications of all but the winning bidder. 
Membreno, new to his post, showed interest in fixing the 
problems for the future, but no willingness to reverse the 
result. 
 
6. (U) Midwest later discovered it had been disqualified on 
sixteen different counts, a higher number than all other 
bidders.  Some of these `fundamentals\' were as minimal as 
not specifying the exact type/brand of office furniture to 
be supplied.  Midwest sent letters of dissent to the UNDP in 
Honduras and Alonso Valenzuela, General Manager of Hondutel. 
The Embassy also provided Midwest with contact information 
for the UNDP in New York, but the company decided not to 
file an official complaint.  Note: Though Midwest indicated 
to the Embassy it would not challenge this result in order 
to be in good standing for future bids, it appears the 
company has now lost interest and/or confidence in doing 
business in Honduras.  End note. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Microwave Network System - the second bid 
----------------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) In the second UNDP-managed Hondutel bid, a new policy 
on clarifications appears to have been implemented to the 
opposite extreme.  The request for proposals for microwave 
equipment has a ceiling of USD 11 million.  The U.S. 
company, Harris Corporation, submitted the strongest 
technical offer.  Harris officials believe the company would 
have had the lowest economic offer (USD 10 million) if the 
French had not been allowed to add in required equipment 
after the bid opening (illegal) and offer that equipment, at 
an estimated value of USD 3 million, for free.  Had Alcatel 
included this equipment from the beginning its bid would 
have been USD 11 million. According to Harris 
representatives, the bid rules do not allow for their bid to 
be `clarified\' by adding this equipment in their bid after 
bid opening, as it is a fundamental part of the project. 
Alcatel is also rumored to have included a substandard 
network management system in their bid that did not meet the 
bid minimum requirements.  The Alcatel bid allegedly 
included an option written into the bid which would allow 
for the Hondurans to upgrade the system later - a necessary 
upgrade that would have added millions to their bid price. 
 
8. (U) Emboffs met with Harris representatives and followed 
up with calls to UNDP Honduras officials to underscore the 
importance of Harris\' concerns.  The UNDP Honduras 
representative expressed surprise at the allegations from 
Harris, stating no company should know the details of other 
companies\' bids as the process was still under review and 
any company having such knowledge should be disqualified. 
The same official noted, however, that he had received 
inquiries and complaints from the German Embassy as well. 
Harris attorneys sent letters of dissent to Honduras UNDP 
representatives and Hondutel General Manager, Alonso 
Valenzuela, as well as UNDP headquarters in New York. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (U) The GOH decided to outsource to the UNDP procurements 
in several ministries, precisely in order to assure 
transparency and eliminate corruption.  By most accounts, 
the UNDP is doing a fairly good job at managing procurement 
of medicines for the Ministry of Health and achieving these 
aims.  However, if these two telecom cases are any 
indication, the UNDP (and GOH) are failing miserably in the 
telecom procurement processes.  In these two cases, each 
involving only one U.S. company, even the most basic 
requirements of sound procurement processes appear to be 
ignored.  In the fiber optic case, the government utility is 
going to pay 30 percent more for a key infrastructure 
project than needed because of the most minimal of omissions 
in the bid package.  In the microwave tender process, the 
UNDP appears to be allowing the same French company to 
change the key terms of the bid after learning the details 
of other bidders\' packages; moreover, UNDP did not 
disqualify Alcatel for failing to provide software up to 
specification.  By our reading of Honduran procurement law, 
this latter breach is patently illegal.  And finally, in 
both cases, Hondutel or UNDP officials working on the 
evaluation committee leaked information about the state of 
the tenders with impunity.  The UNDP has not allowed any on- 
the-record discussion of the flaws in the process, vaguely 
threatening that any such discussions with the Embassy could 
hurt the U.S. companies\' chances of receiving redress.  Any 
guidance from Washington agencies for post on the 
appropriate way to pursue these advocacy cases at this time, 
or to call for an overall review of UNDP\'s program here in 
Honduras, would be greatly appreciated.  End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"11924","11/5/2003 23:23","03TEGUCIGALPA2614","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002614 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PA (CHAYDEN), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" carried a front 
page photo of the press event at Casa Presidencial featuring 
Secretary Powell, President Maduro, the Honduran Minister of 
 
SIPDIS 
Foreign Affairs Leonidas Rosa Bautista and Ambassador Larry 
Palmer with the headline \"The U.S. does not commit itself to 
donate helicopters\". The paper carried two articles entitled \"The 
U.S. doesn\'t promise to donate helicopters\" and \"The U.S. will be 
pleased to get any kind of help from Central America in Iraq\". 
It also included an editorial entitled \"Powell\". 
 
2. Tegucigalpa-based conservative daily \"El Heraldo\" carried a 
front page photo of Secretary Powell, President Maduro and 
Ambassador Palmer with the headline \"Powell expresses 
appreciation for our presence in Iraq\" with the subheading 
\"Announces funds of five billion dollars for poor countries\", and 
\"Nicaragua doesn\'t agree to destroy all its missiles\".  The paper 
also included a two-page report of the visit with the headlines 
\"Powell left our country pleased\", \"Maduro: Our troops will be in 
Iraq as long as they\'re necessary\", and \"Powell: You should fight 
corruption\". 
 
3. San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" carried a front 
page photo of Secretary Powell and President Maduro shaking hand 
in Casa Presidencial with the headline \"Maduro: We have a good 
marriage with the U.S.\" with the subheadings \"On the Honduran 
request for helicopters to combat narcotrafficking, Powell said 
that it\'s a complex issue and this kind of equipment is 
expensive\", and \"The Popular Resistance disagrees with the visit 
of Colin Powell\".  The paper included a two-page report of the 
visit with the headlines \"Maduro said to Powell: the Honduran 
troops will remain in Iraq\", and \"Demonstrators called Powell a 
fascist and a terrorist\". 
 
4. San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" carried a front 
page photo of Secretary Powell, President Maduro and Ambassador 
Palmer with the headline \"Powell didn\'t make a commitment\" with 
the subheading \"He thanked Honduras for the sending of troops to 
Iraq, but he didn\'t promise help to fight drug trafficking\".  The 
paper included a full-page report entitled \"Powell impressed, but 
didn\'t promise aid\". 
 
Palmer 
"
"11925","11/5/2003 23:24","03TEGUCIGALPA2615","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002615 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
11/5 entitled \"Powell\".  \"Throughout the uncertain times Honduras 
is going through, the visit of Colin Powell to Honduras has 
brought very good news.  The U.S. Secretary of State has said 
that Honduras could be one of the countries to be benefited from 
the Millennium Account that will allocate 5 billion dollars for 
developing countries.  These funds will be given to those 
countries committed to democracy and those that have implemented 
social, economic and political reforms which will ensure economic 
openness.\" 
 
\"There\'s no doubt that Honduras will qualify to access to these 
funds, because we\'re a developing country and we have done the 
necessary efforts to implement a series of comprehensive 
political, social and economic reforms.  And, the most important 
thing is that we have sent Honduran troops to Iraq.\" 
 
\"Powell, who is a very influential figure in the American 
political arena, took this opportunity to thank for the Honduran 
support for being part of the original coalition of nations that 
sent troops to Iraq, when other countries refused to do so.  The 
importance of sending troops to Iraq isn\'t the number of soldiers 
we have sent, it is actually our willingness to help.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"11960","11/6/2003 21:34","03TEGUCIGALPA2622","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PA (CHAYDEN), PM, EFIN 
AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" carried a front 
page photo of the press event at Casa Presidencial featuring 
Secretary Powell, President Maduro, the Honduran Minister of 
 
SIPDIS 
Foreign Affairs Leonidas Rosa Bautista and Ambassador Larry 
Palmer with the headline \"The U.S. does not commit itself to 
donate helicopters\". The paper carried two articles entitled \"The 
U.S. doesn\'t promise to donate helicopters\" and \"The U.S. will be 
pleased to get any kind of help from Central America in Iraq\". 
It also included an editorial entitled \"Powell\". 
 
2. Tegucigalpa-based conservative daily \"El Heraldo\" carried a 
front page photo of Secretary Powell, President Maduro and 
Ambassador Palmer with the headline \"Powell expresses 
appreciation for our presence in Iraq\" with the subheading 
\"Announces funds of five billion dollars for poor countries\", and 
\"Nicaragua doesn\'t agree to destroy all its missiles\".  The paper 
also included a two-page report of the visit with the headlines 
\"Powell left our country pleased\", \"Maduro: Our troops will be in 
Iraq as long as they\'re necessary\", and \"Powell: You should fight 
corruption\". 
 
3. San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" carried a front 
page photo of Secretary Powell and President Maduro shaking hand 
in Casa Presidencial with the headline \"Maduro: We have a good 
marriage with the U.S.\" with the subheadings \"On the Honduran 
request for helicopters to combat narcotrafficking, Powell said 
that it\'s a complex issue and this kind of equipment is 
expensive\", and \"The Popular Resistance disagrees with the visit 
of Colin Powell\".  The paper included a two-page report of the 
visit with the headlines \"Maduro said to Powell: the Honduran 
troops will remain in Iraq\", and \"Demonstrators called Powell a 
fascist and a terrorist\". 
 
4. San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" carried a front 
page photo of Secretary Powell, President Maduro and Ambassador 
Palmer with the headline \"Powell didn\'t make a commitment\" with 
the subheading \"He thanked Honduras for the sending of troops to 
Iraq, but he didn\'t promise help to fight drug trafficking\".  The 
paper included a full-page report entitled \"Powell impressed, but 
didn\'t promise aid\". 
 
Palmer 
"
"11961","11/6/2003 21:34","03TEGUCIGALPA2623","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002623 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN (TKELLY), PM, EFIN AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 4, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
11/5 entitled \"Powell\".  \"Throughout the uncertain times Honduras 
is going through, the visit of Colin Powell to Honduras has 
brought very good news.  The U.S. Secretary of State has said 
that Honduras could be one of the countries to be benefited from 
the Millennium Account that will allocate 5 billion dollars for 
developing countries.  These funds will be given to those 
countries committed to democracy and those that have implemented 
social, economic and political reforms which will ensure economic 
openness.\" 
 
\"There\'s no doubt that Honduras will qualify to access to these 
funds, because we\'re a developing country and we have done the 
necessary efforts to implement a series of comprehensive 
political, social and economic reforms.  And, the most important 
thing is that we have sent Honduran troops to Iraq.\" 
 
\"Powell, who is a very influential figure in the American 
political arena, took this opportunity to thank for the Honduran 
support for being part of the original coalition of nations that 
sent troops to Iraq, when other countries refused to do so.  The 
importance of sending troops to Iraq isn\'t the number of soldiers 
we have sent, it is actually our willingness to help.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"11988","11/7/2003 23:07","03TEGUCIGALPA2648","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA2034","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002648 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA, INR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR BRETT MAKENS 
TREASURY FOR E. ILZETSKI 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, ELAB, EAGR, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: IMF TEAM RETURNING TO HONDURAS TO NEGOTIATE A 
LETTER OF INTENT THIS MONTH 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 2034 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  An October IMF mission visit to Honduras 
found enough progress and high-level commitment to agree to 
return in November for the negotiation of a Letter of Intent 
(LOI) for a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) 
program.   The government hopes to be able to push 
legislative measures through Congress that would address all 
prior actions identified in the LOI, by the end of November. 
The IMF staff showed flexibility in this visit, loosening up 
a bit on the fiscal targets of the budget deficit and the 
staged-in decline in the wage bill.  The GOH and IMF staff 
both envision that the program will also require new tax 
measures, particularly elimination of additional exemptions. 
This extremely ambitious schedule is a recognition by all 
parties of the limited political window of opportunity for 
reaching an agreement.   One of the danger signs is that the 
GOH will need substantially higher levels of foreign 
assistance from donors in the next three years in order to 
meet these fiscal targets and still meet its commitments to 
poverty reduction spending.  As the director of the IMF 
mission told the donors before departing, however, \"there are 
dangers on all sides.\"  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) At the GOH\'s request, an IMF mission led by 
Assistant Director of the Western Hemisphere Department 
Adrienne Cheasty and mission chief Mario Garza held 
productive consultations with the GOH in Honduras on October 
13-23 on the current fiscal situation and prospects for a 
three-year PRGF program.  Cheasty indicated to the G-15 
donors group, before the mission\'s departure, that the GOH 
had shown enough commitment to addressing the structural 
fiscal problems, that they were willing to recommend a return 
mission in November to negotiate a letter of intent (LOI). 
Note: Post now understands that the mission is scheduled to 
return during the week of November 10 to begin negotiations 
in earnest.  End Note. The GOH has indicated its strong 
determination to reach agreement with the mission on the LOI 
quickly, and to achieve rapid legislative approval of laws 
required as prior conditions in the LOI, by the closing of 
the legislative session at the end of November.  That would 
free up the GOH to adopt the 2004 budget during its 
traditional \"extraordinary\" session in December.  While this 
represents an extremely ambitious schedule, all sides are 
trying to make it work in recognition of the limited 
political window of opportunity for reaching an agreement. 
In 2004, the GOH expects its ability to push through tough 
legislative measures to diminish rapidly.  In addition, the 
fiscal situation is deteriorating with non-inflationary 
sources of deficit financing rapidly drying up and the GOH 
needs an agreement to free up new sources of financing and 
debt relief. 
 
3. (SBU) The IMF mission described the baseline fiscal 
situation as fairly bleak.  The Central government\'s deficit 
is expected to reach 5.5 percent of GDP in 2003, or 2 percent 
higher than the GOH\'s target (although the GOH would argue 
that it is really just 1 percentage point higher than the 
target and that the IMF is not correct in charging the full 
cost of the agricultural loan debt forgiveness program to the 
year 2003, as the costs will be spread out over ten years). 
Other contributing factors to the higher deficit are: the 
high public wage bill (10.6 percent of GDP vs. the 10.0 
percent target), because administrative measures were not 
successful in compensating for the rising teacher and medical 
employees\' salaries; cost of transferring a troubled 
state-owned bank to private Banpais (covering its liabilities 
with bonds); and a large shortfall in the revenues projected 
to come from the tax measures that were adopted in May 2003. 
The GOH is financing this greater than expected deficit by 
drawing on foreign reserves and issuing bonds.  Net reserves 
in the Central Bank declined by more than USD 100 million in 
the first nine months of the year. 
 
4. (SBU) For 2004, if the government takes no new measures, 
the deficit will be approximately 4.4 percent of GDP.  The 
IMF staff is even more concerned about prospects for 2005 and 
2006, as the projections for increased social spending rise 
necessarily (to meet poverty reduction targets) and available 
non-inflationary deficit financing decline. 
 
The Outlines of a Program 
------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) The IMF (very tentatively and not yet negotiated 
with the GOH) plans deficit targets of 3.5 percent in 2004, 
2.5 percent in 2005 and 2.0 percent in 2006.  They 
acknowledged that this is somewhat faster than would usually 
be sought for a country with such great poverty reduction 
needs, but indicated that it is necessary because of the 
limited non-inflationary financing available.  The Fund asks 
bilateral and multilateral donors to look for possibilities 
of additional donations that would help the government 
maintain social spending.  Very tentatively, and even with 
expenditure and revenue measures, the Fund staff estimates 
the GOH will need USD 120 million in new funding in 2005 and 
USD 175 million in new funding in 2006. 
 
6.  (SBU) Note:  Because the burgeoning wage bill has been 
one of the main reasons for the structural fiscal deficits, 
the IMF staff plan to require, as a prior action, the 
enactment of legislation that provides the executive branch 
with control over wage policy and that begins to reduce the 
wage bill as a percent of GDP. End Note. 
 
7.  (SBU) The IMF is no longer requiring this percentage to 
decline by one percentage point a year, perhaps as 
recognition of the political constraints in reopening the 
wage agreement with the teachers that would be the only 
practical way of achieving this reduction.   Both the Finance 
Minister and IMF Resident Representative indicate that the 
two sides are now in agreement on the text of the wage 
legislation, which will grant the executive branch wage 
policy control and will also freeze the collateral benefits 
that are provided to teachers and doctors (in the special 
statutes governing these professions). 
 
8. (SBU) To compensate for the shortfall in revenues coming 
from the May 2003 tax package, adopted in May 2003, the GOH 
is considering a sizable increase in the taxes on gasoline 
and diesel.  Other potential measures, such as an increase in 
the sales tax or elimination of popular tax exemptions like 
the exemption on residential electricity, have been ruled out 
so far by President Maduro and his inner circle on political 
grounds.  The GOH believes that this gas tax hike, along with 
the freezing of the teacher collateral benefits, will provide 
the needed revenue to make up the potential shortfall in 2004 
between the baseline budget deficit (4.4 percent) and the 
expected target of 3.5 percent. 
 
9. (SBU) The program will also require the elimination of 
exemptions provided to the wealthy and to many companies. 
The government is likely to do this in the context of 
adoption of legislation enacting the key measures from the 
Fiscal Pact recently signed in the context of the National 
Dialogue among the government, private sector and civil 
society.  Congress President Pepe Lobo has announced his 
intentions to push for enactment of this legislation starting 
in January 2004. 
 
10. (SBU) In the financial sector, the program will require 
the GOH to raise requirements for provisioning for bad loans, 
in accordance with Basel standards.  The IMF resident rep 
indicated that this might also be made a prior condition in 
the Letter of Intent.  In addition, the IMF will require the 
government to make changes to Central Bank operations to 
reduce losses incurred as part of the execution of monetary 
policy operations.  This was an issue identified in the 
Financial Sector review performed by a joint IMF-World Bank 
team early this year.   Finally, it appears the IMF staff is 
going to accept that no further changes to the agricultural 
credit law are politically/ legally possible at this point. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (SBU)  This may be the now-or-never point for President 
Maduro to reach an agreement with the Fund in his time in 
office, and the GOH seems to know it.  With the President\'s 
full engagement now, Post expects the GOH to do its best to 
use this window of opportunity.   The wage policy 
legislation, if adopted, will be a major, overdue milestone 
toward structural reform.  It will have to be closely 
followed, in early 2004 with the development of a 
professional civil service, legislation enacting the Fiscal 
Pact developed in the National Dialogue process (see septel) 
and elimination of a series of tax exemptions.   End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"12059","11/12/2003 17:55","03TEGUCIGALPA2656","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002656 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, L, IO, EB, INL, AND NP 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, KTIA, AORC, PARM, EAIR, EWWT, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS RATIFIES THREE COUNTERTERRORISM 
CONVENTIONS; TWO IMO AND TWO OAS CT CONVENTIONS REMAINING 
 
 
1. Summary: The GOH has ratified three outstanding 
counterterrorism (CT) conventions (two ICAO and one IAEA). 
The GOH is now a party to 10 international CT conventions. 
Post is pressing hard for the GOH to ratify the two IMO and 
two OAS CT conventions still outstanding.  Persistent efforts 
by EmbOffs to urge GOH officials to sign/ratify all 
outstanding CT conventions are bearing fruit.  End Summary. 
 
2. While a staunch ally in the War on Terrorism, Honduras has 
been slow to sign and ratify outstanding counterterrorism 
(CT) conventions.  In late December 2002, the GOH completed 
all necessary domestic steps to become party to two 
outstanding conventions.  Since then the Ambassador and DCM 
have repeatedly raised the CT conventions with President 
Ricardo Maduro, multiple senior MFA officials, and Minister 
of the Presidency Luis Cosenza.  PolOffs have met and spoken 
repeatedly with officials in the MFA\'s Directorate General 
for Treaties and Ricardo Montes, legal advisor to Cosenza. 
Assistance from Embassy London, the U.S. Mission to ICAO, the 
U.S. Mission in Vienna, IO/T, NP, WHA/OAS, and WHA/CEN in 
obtaining official Spanish-language translations of the CT 
conventions was also critical.  After months with no 
significant progress, this summer/fall the GOH finally acted 
on three outstanding CT conventions. 
 
GOH Ratifies Three CT Conventions 
--------------------------------- 
 
3. The GOH has now completed all necessary domestic steps to 
becoming a party to the following three counterterrorism 
conventions.  The three were approved by Congress in July, 
but it took until late October/early November for the decrees 
to be signed by President Maduro and published in La Gaceta 
(the Honduran equivalent of the Federal Register).  The CT 
conventions are: 
-- 1980 Convention on the Physical Protection on Nuclear 
Materials 
-- 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of 
Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation 
-- 1991 Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for 
the Purpose of Detection (signed by the GOH March 26, 1991). 
 
Honduras Now a Party to 10 CT Conventions 
----------------------------------------- 
 
4. The GOH was already a party to the following seven 
international counterterrorism conventions: 
-- 1963 Tokyo Convention on Offenses and Certain Other Acts 
Committed Onboard Aircraft 
-- 1970 Hague Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful 
Seizure of Aircraft 
-- 1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful 
Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation 
-- 1973 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes 
Against Internationally Protected Persons 
-- 1979 Convention Against the Taking of Hostages 
-- 1997 Convention for the Suppression on Terrorist Bombings, 
and 
-- 1999 Convention on the Suppression of Financing of 
Terrorism Crimes. 
 
5. With the addition of the three aforementioned CT 
conventions, the GOH is now a party to 10 CT conventions. 
Note:  The GOH ratified the 1997 and 1999 UN CT conventions 
in late December 2002.  End Note. 
 
Four to Go: Two IMO and Two OAS 
------------------------------- 
 
6. The GOH is still not a party to the following two 
international maritime CT conventions: 
-- 1988 Convention for the Suppression on Unlawful Acts 
Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (SUA Convention) 
-- 1988 Protocol for the Suppression on Unlawful Acts Against 
the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental 
Shelf (SUA Protocol) 
 
7. Nor is the GOH a party to the following two Organization 
of American States (OAS) CT conventions: 
-- 1971 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of 
Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and 
Related Extortion that are of International Significance 
(signed by the GOH February 2, 1971) 
-- 2002 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of 
Terrorism (signed by the GOH June 3, 2002). 
 
8. According to the MFA and the Presidential Palace, the two 
IMO CT conventions are under review by the GOH.  The 1971 OAS 
CT convention was recently forwarded to Congress for 
approval; the GOH claims it will do the same soon for the 
2002 OAS CT convention. 
 
9. Note:  The GOH also recently ratified the UN Convention on 
Organized Crime.  End Note. 
Palmer 
"
"12061","11/12/2003 21:25","03TEGUCIGALPA2662","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR 
TREASURY ALSO FOR RAMIN TOLOUI 
- 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2013 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, EINV, HO 
SUBJECT: IMF IN HONDURAS: PROSPECTS FOR AND OUTCOMES OF AN 
AGREEMENT 
 
REF: MATTHEWMAN-ILZEKTKI NOVEMBER 10 E-MAIL 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri for 
reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: If the Maduro government comes to an 
agreement with the IMF, the National Congress is likely to 
approve the necessary measures.  Of those measures, an 
increase in the fuel tax could potentially be the most 
difficult, and runs the risk of adding a new constituency, 
the transportation sector, to those who are angrily opposed 
to reform.  Given Honduran history, the government should be 
able to withstand the ensuing popular protests against an IMF 
package.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) The President of the National Congress Porfirio Lobo 
told the Ambassador in September that he can get the measures 
needed for an IMF agreement through a recalcitrant Congress, 
if and only if, he can present them as a final completed 
package.  We believe that this assurance continues to be in 
place and that Lobo, who has been steadfast in his political 
support for President Maduro, would be able to deliver on 
this commitment. 
 
3. (C) This assessment is not ironclad.  At the time Lobo 
made his statement there had not been any talk, or even a 
hint, that a fuel tax would be part of a final package. 
Since that time, Lobo\'s presidential political campaign has 
begun to take a greater and more public form.  He may find 
himself in a more delicate and difficult political position. 
He could almost certainly claim that the fuel tax is one 
measure too far.  It is not clear how much of the proposed 
deal with the IMF the government has revealed to the 
congressional leadership.  At a November 4th G-15 donors 
meeting with Porfirio Lobo, he claimed that Maduro had not 
provided to Congress any draft legislation for implementing 
an IMF agreement. 
 
4. (C) It is well accepted that there will have to be a 
reform of the teacher\'s compensation package.  For political 
reasons, Maduro does not have as much to lose as one would 
think in following through on this reform, as they have 
already paid a political cost for it.  (Some members of the 
Nationalist Party believe the true cost will be paid in the 
next presidential election when teachers will work hard to 
elect a Liberal Party president.)  There will also be 
elements in the Congress who will vigorously oppose ceding to 
the executive branch authority over public sector wage 
setting.  This component should not be a deal breaker, but it 
will be a tough issue that will require the government to 
find other ways to pay off Nationalist legislators for their 
support.  Note: Controlling the wage bill by phasing out the 
compensation part of the teacher and doctor \'estatutos\' has 
long been an issue that the administration believed it could 
not get through Congress.  Now, however, the administration 
is betting that people are desperate enough for an IMF 
agreement that they can finally risk it.  End note. 
 
--------------------------- 
Fuel tax the most difficult 
--------------------------- 
 
5. (C) As a means to raise revenue, Maduro apparently 
believes that a fuel tax is the best move in a bad hand, as 
it would affect less people than the alternatives (such as an 
increase in the sales tax or a tax on residential 
electricity).  However, Maduro and his team are likely to 
face determined opposition over a fuel tax from within their 
own party and from the political opposition, which will use a 
fuel tax to stoke populist embers to raise the heat on 
Maduro. 
 
6. (C) The transportation sector, which is large and 
organized, will strongly and vocally oppose such a measure. 
It is a certainty that the size, tenor and strength of recent 
street protests will increase once the prospect of a fuel tax 
is announced, and there will be larger street protests 
if/when the Congress enacts it.  A fuel tax, which would be 
felt immediately by all segments of the Honduran population, 
could serve to rally middle-class sectors to join the 
protesters.  To date these other sectors have been ambivalent 
and withholding their judgment on the Maduro government\'s 
reform program, praying it will deliver economic growth. 
 
7. (C) The anti-globalization forces will call for more 
vigorous protests, which could potentially turn violent. 
While these protests are likely to result in destruction of 
private and government property, the police thus far have 
been very measured in their response to the protests.  The 
current Security Minister is likely to avoid confrontations 
with the protesters.  Under the current atmosphere, all sides 
have avoided actions that would cause the loss of life. 
 
8. (C) Comment: Given Honduran history, we would not assess 
an IMF package as outlined in reftel to result in a 
destabilizing situation.  There will be protests, but the 
government should be able to withstand the challenge.  One 
unknowable variable is how the general population would react 
to the loss of any life during a street protest.  Such an 
event could serve as a catalyst for broader protests or a 
reason for somber reflection by all parties.  End comment. 
Palmer 
"
"12062","11/12/2003 21:43","03TEGUCIGALPA2663","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002663 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PA (CHAYDEN), EB, PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, ETRD, SNAR, EAID, MOPS, PGOV, HO, KICC 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 12, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Ramon Villeda Bermudez (current Liberal Party 
Congressman) in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
11/12 entitled \"Why did Colin Powell come to Honduras? \".  \"The 
Honduran press received almost a dozen clues about the issues 
discussed with Secretary Powell, but Powell himself said that the 
fight against corruption in Central America is one of the main 
priorities and conditions to get the assistance the U.S. will 
offer to the countries of this region through the Millennium 
Challenge Account.\" 
 
\"Why would he want to highlight this particular issue?  It seems 
that the position of Honduras at the top of the international 
scale of corruption has definitely caught the attention of our 
partners, and they are warning us beforehand about what we should 
do to improve that situation, in order to qualify to get more 
aid.\" 
 
\"It\'s likely that the issues discussed with Powell and his 
delegation included the reorganization of the judicial system, as 
well as the political and legal reforms in Honduras.  It\'s also 
probable that President Maduro himself talked about the issue of 
coffee, which is crucial for the country as a whole, and 
especially for some businessmen who are very close to the 
President.  It\'s feasible that the Executive branch took full 
credit for the elimination of immunities, which was a particular 
decision by Congress that was taken without any external 
pressure.\" 
 
\"Regarding our bilateral relationships, it\'s still unknown if our 
relationship with Cuba was a matter of discussion.\" 
 
\"We believe our cooperation with the reconstruction efforts and 
our commitment to send troops to Iraq is something that should be 
part of our past and current agenda, it shouldn\'t be part of our 
plans for the future.\" 
 
\"CAFTA was definitely one of the top issues in Powell\'s agenda. 
We suppose that President Maduro and his collaborators informed 
him that everything is on track, although I believe they didn\'t 
have time to explain to Powell the persistent doubts that some 
businessmen and even some ministers have about this agreement.\" 
 
\"The issues of terrorism and narcotrafficking should have been 
emphasized on this visit more than any other.  The Honduran 
request for more helicopters and other equipment for these tasks 
is widely known.  After all, the successes on drug seizures and 
the arrests of drug traffickers have to help us to get more aid. 
But, here\'s where the issue of corruption comes up again, and as 
Powell said, our efforts to fight against it should be similar to 
our willingness to combat drug trafficking.\" 
 
\"Furthermore, we believe President Maduro requested Powell the 
help of the U.S. delegate in the IMF in our negotiations with 
this international institution.  We don\'t know if the White House 
experts are aware of how important the U.S. support on this 
matter is.  Honduras needs to get the billion dollars for debt 
relief that our creditors promised to us in Stockholm.\" 
 
\"It\'ll be helpful that President Maduro himself informs to the 
people what was discussed with Powell, to prevent any surprises 
in the future as it has happened before.  For instance, it was 
very unpleasant to find out, just a little before it was approved 
in Congress, that President Maduro and the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs had secretly signed an agreement with the U.S. in 
September 2002 that prohibits submitting troops from both 
countries to international criminal courts when they commit war 
crimes and crimes against humanity.\" 
 
\"This kind of secrecy has caused an obvious distrust in our 
agreements with the U.S.  Such dishonorable agreements are not 
known in due time to the Congressmen and the Honduran people.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"12102","11/14/2003 13:05","03TEGUCIGALPA2682","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002682 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, PA (CHAYDEN), EB, PM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, SNAR, EAID, MOPS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON THE VISIT OF SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN 
POWELL TO HONDURAS, NOVEMBER 13, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
11/13 entitled \"Missiles and helicopters\".  \"The visit of Colin 
Powell to Central America wasn\'t just for pleasure.  While he 
came to thank the countries supporting the U.S. in the coalition 
in Iraq, he also came to remind us that his country has a few 
million dollars, known as the Millennium Account, available to 
those developing democracies committed to foster political, 
economic and social reforms, as well as the fight against 
narcotrafficking and terrorism.  When he visited Nicaragua, 
Powell talked about one of the issues that concern him the most: 
the region\'s security situation.\" 
 
\"The Americans have repeatedly warned the Nicaraguan government 
about the need to eliminate the ground-to-air missiles they have, 
which could fall in the wrong hands, such as the Colombian 
guerrillas or the terrorist groups operating in the region.\" 
 
\"This must be a matter of concern to us all.  Some days ago, the 
international wires pointed out that these criminal groups are 
certainly interested in getting those missiles.  For that reason, 
the U.S. has insisted that Nicaragua must get rid of their 
missiles.  It\'s not odd that right after the visit of Colin 
Powell to that country, there has been a political struggle 
between President Bolanos, who is willing to comply with the U.S. 
demands, and the Sandinistas that hold control of Congress, who 
say that any decision on this matter must be taken by Congress.\" 
 
 
\"Other sectors have said that Nicaragua can destroy its missiles 
in exchange of getting some helicopters, the same request 
Honduras has made to the U.S.  Unfortunately, they aren\'t willing 
to give away anything, and Powell was obviously clear on this 
issue, when he preferred to talk about the Millennium funds 
instead of making any commitment to give us the helicopters we 
need.\" 
 
\"So, the Nicaraguans shouldn\'t expect anything either.  We won\'t 
give up our F-15s in exchange of the elimination of the dangerous 
missiles they have.  The Nicaraguans shouldn\'t expect to get 
helicopters in exchange of their SAM-7s, because if the Americans 
give them helicopters, we should also get our helicopters too.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"12205","11/18/2003 22:51","03TEGUCIGALPA2714","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002714 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, NOVEMBER 18, 2003 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 11/18 entitled \"Troops are stationed in low risk zones in 
Iraq\".  \"After a short visit to Iraq to supervise the work 
of the Honduran troops in that country, the Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve said that the Honduran troops have 
received all the support they require from the coalition 
forces.\" 
 
\"Breve also said that the Honduran troops have been deployed 
in one of the most peaceful zones on the Najaf region. 
Breve added that he had the chance of joining the troops on 
some of their missions to verify that the risk they face is 
minimal.\" 
 
2. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
on 11/18 entitled \"Honduras will withdraw its troops if they 
face any danger\".  \"After returning from a short visit to 
Iraq, the Minister of Defense Federico Breve said that 
President Maduro would consider the possibility of 
withdrawing the Honduran troops from Iraq or re-station them 
in a safer place if the risks they face increase in any 
way.\" 
 
\"Breve said, we will really need to evaluate our presence in 
Iraq. we won\'t take any unnecessary risks.  Thus, if we are 
aware that the risks to our troops increase, we\'ll assess 
our presence in Iraq. If the lives of our soldiers are in 
any danger, there\'s a chance to bring them back, or re- 
station them somewhere else.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"12236","11/19/2003 16:46","03TEGUCIGALPA2718","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002718 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2013 
TAGS: PINR, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: BIO OF HONDURAN FIRST LADY AGUAS OCANA DE MADURO 
 
1.  (SBU) Aguas Ocana, the first lady of Honduras, married 
President Ricardo Maduro on October 10, 2002. It is her first 
marriage and his second.  Born on April 29, 1963 in Sevilla, 
Spain, Ocana was the former counselor of the Spanish embassy 
in Tegucigalpa.  Ocana first earned the Spanish equivalent of 
a bachelor\'s degree in accounting, and later went on to study 
law.  She is a dynamic, self-confident woman that displays a 
passion for children, women, and the elderly.  While these 
types of issues are normally associated with her formal 
position, Ocana genuinely seems to be interested in promoting 
social development in Honduras. 
 
2.  (SBU) Currently, her efforts are focused on reforming 
adoption laws in order to eradicate irregularities in the 
adoption process, as well as make it easier for foreigners to 
adopt Honduran children. Ocana herself is in the process of 
adopting two Honduran children, Milady and Kevin, for whom 
she has written custody from the parents that allows her to 
travel with them. 
 
3.  (C) Ocana has a strong personality and does not hesitate 
to insert herself into the inner-workings of GOH politics. 
She has publicly clashed with a number of GOH officials, much 
to Maduro\'s chagrin, who would prefer that she keep a lower 
political profile. 
 
4.  (SBU) Earlier this summer, Ocana returned to her native 
Spain on \"personal business.\" This period of estrangement 
from her husband had been exacerbated by comments Ocana made 
to the press about Maduro\'s ex-fiancee, and current Minister 
of Culture, Mireya Batres.  Ocana\'s public remarks came at a 
price.  Cesar Batres, the father of Mireya and close personal 
friend to Maduro, resigned his position as legal advisor to 
the president on land issues due to the controversy. 
Minister Batres did not resign. 
Palmer 
"
"12307","11/21/2003 22:35","03TEGUCIGALPA2751","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN, AND INL/LP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON DRUGS, NOVEMBER 20, 2003 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Ramon Villeda Bermudez (current Liberal Party 
Congressman) in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 11/20 entitled \"A hundred tons of cocaine \".  \"The U.S. 
Ambassador Larry Palmer recently revealed that almost a 
hundred tons of cocaine go through Honduras and Central 
America on its way to the U.S every year.  This shocking 
figure means that the drug seizures done by our security 
forces have gotten only an insignificant amount of the drugs 
transported through our country.  This announcement came 
just a few days after our security forces presented the data 
of drug seizures for this year, which we had seen as a huge 
success.\" 
 
\"The first question that came to my mind was, how did those 
figures, which are a matter of concern to the Ambassador, 
his and our government, and all decent Hondurans, came to 
the attention of the Ambassador?  I\'d also like to know: if 
the U.S. knew this all along, how come the powerful northern 
country hasn\'t done anything to stop it?.\" 
 
\"Honduras has repeatedly explained to the Americans that, 
although the government has increased the amount of drug 
seizures and has improved our mechanisms to arrest drug 
traffickers, we have insufficient means to improve our 
results in this fight.  We have repeatedly said to them that 
we can\'t use our entire limited budget to build a fence to 
protect the back of a rich neighbor that has all the 
necessary means to build it by itself.\" 
 
 
 
\"The Honduran request for more economic aid, equipment and 
five helicopters to increase our effectiveness in our fight 
against drug trafficking is widely known internationally. 
Our governmental authorities talked about this issue when 
the Secretary of State Colin Powell visited Honduras, 
although I believe Powell didn\'t like this idea that much.\" 
 
\"The Ambassador of the most powerful country in the world 
has mentioned a list of requests from the Bush 
administration to Honduras, which include the reforms of our 
legal system to increase our effectiveness in the fight 
against narcotrafficking.\" 
 
\"It\'s a national shame that some of the narcotraffickers we 
have arrested, just a few days later have escaped from 
prison.  It\'s also a shame that some of the cocaine seized 
by the police has been later sold by the same police 
officers who seized it, as it happened recently in 
Choluteca.  Maybe Colin Powell was thinking about these 
facts when he said that we must fight corruption in a more 
decisive and effective manner.\" 
 
\"There are a hundred million reasons to seriously think 
about what Ambassador Palmer has recently said, and there\'s 
also a hundred million motives for Honduras to get the 
assistance we need from the U.S.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"12362","11/24/2003 20:06","03TEGUCIGALPA2757","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA2221","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/24/2013 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, MOPS, ES, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ANXIOUS TO MOVE EL SALVADOR BORDER 
DEMARCATION PROCESS FORWARD 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2221 
 
     B. PALMIERI/WAGNER EMAIL 11/17/03 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary: As part of the on-going effort to demarcate 
the Honduran-El Salvador border, on November 11 OAS envoy, 
NIMA specialist John Gates, awarded over one square kilometer 
of territory to El Salvador that was originally designated to 
Honduras by the 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
decision.  Although the decision generated substantial press 
interest decrying the loss of national territory, the 
Government of Honduras (GOH) is far more concerned with 
moving the demarcation process forward as fast as possible. 
The GOH remains committed to honoring its international 
obligations and continues to view Gates as an honest broker, 
although Honduras believes Gates overstepped his bounds in 
his latest decision.  While the GOH stands ready to implement 
Gates\' decision, Honduras expects the same from any future 
revisions that negatively effect El Salvador. End Summary 
 
2. (C) As part of the on-going effort to demarcate the 
Honduran-El Salvador border, on November 11 OAS envoy, NIMA 
specialist John Gates, awarded over one square kilometer of 
territory to El Salvador that was originally designated to 
Honduras by the 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
decision.  The territory (Cerro El Pital) is centered around 
Cayaguanca, Ocotepeque and is one of the highest points in 
the area which is considered strategic by both sides. 
According to the GOH, Gates\' decision to revise the ICJ\'s 
ruling was based on his feeling that placing the border 
marker atop El Pital, rather than another hilltop close by, 
made the border more congruous.  The GOH, which was quite 
surprised by the decision, feels that Gates overstepped his 
authority by basing his revision on factors that were outside 
the boundaries of mere \"technical discrepancies.\" 
 
3. (C) On November 19 FM Leonidas Rosa Bautista held a press 
conference in which he reiterated that the GOH remains 
committed to moving forward on the border demarcation 
process, even though it felt that Gates\' decision was 
unsound.  Rosa also indicated that the GOH had sent notice to 
the OAS stating its displeasure.  Honduras will not, however, 
formally appeal Gates\' assessment.  Privately, Rosa told the 
Ambassador on November 21 that completing the border 
demarcation process was among the top priorities at the MFA. 
Rosa stated that completion would eliminate a long standing 
irritant and help foster greater regional integration. 
 
4. (C) On November 20, PolOff met with Miguel Tosta Appel, 
President of the Honduran Special El Salvador-Honduras Border 
Demarcation Commission, to discuss Gates\' decision.  Appel 
confirmed that Honduras will fully abide by its international 
commitments and obligation to accept Gates\' decisions as 
final.  However, he reiterated the GOH\'s concern that Gates 
over-stepped.  Appel also stressed that the GOH expects El 
Salvador to move forthright on continuing to demarcate the 
border and expressed faith that El Salvador also would accept 
any changes made by Gates in the future that result in 
additional territory for Honduras. 
 
5. (C) Appel dismissed comments in the El Salvadoran press 
attributed to Coronel Raul Antonio Sandoval, representative 
of the Ministry of Defense assigned to the Commission, which 
criticized Gates as unrepresentative of the GOH\'s position. 
The press article was based on a memo COL Sandoval sent to 
the Commission that was subsequently leaked to the press. 
Appel reiterated the GOH\'s confidence in Gates\' 
professionalism (ref A) and stated that the GOH was looking 
forward to moving ahead with the demarcation process as 
planned. Appel went on to say that COL Sandoval \"has his own 
agenda.\" 
 
6. (C) Comment:  While certainly not pleased with Gates\' 
decision, the GOH is much more concerned with moving the 
process forward as quickly as possible. It is possible the 
GOH may jawbone Gates to soften him up on future decisions, 
especially if the press continues to cover the story in a 
negative fashion.  However, according to the GOH, if El 
Salvador drags its feet in placing any of the other upcoming 
markers that Gates designates, especially if those markers 
result in additional territory for Honduras, or El Salvador 
formally objects to a Gates decision, great harm could come 
to the entire process. Post believes that Honduras will react 
vigorously to any perceived Salvadoran delay on future 
demarcations.  End Comment 
 
Palmer 
"
"12383","11/25/2003 16:26","03TEGUCIGALPA2765","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EAID, ELAB, EIND, PGOV, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: THE NATIONAL DIALOGUE: SETTING OBJECTIVES FOR A 
BETTER HONDURAS 
 
1.  Summary.  On October 27, President Ricardo Maduro 
received the results of the National Dialogue which, by means 
of consensus, attempts to prioritize national objectives in 
order to benefit the most vulnerable groups of society. 
Following the idea that the National Dialogue should be 
participatory in nature, representatives from 298 
municipalities throughout Honduras participated in nine 
different workshops. The result was a voluminous document 
that presented ideas for both the short and long term. Among 
the themes covered in the National Dialogue were:  political 
and institutional development; justice and security of 
democracy; human capital and social development; and creating 
sustainable economic growth that benefits all classes.  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  Perhaps the most notable development is that of a fiscal 
pact which seeks to increase much-needed government revenues. 
The proposed pact advocates for and is aligned with many of 
the recommendations made by the IMF and includes methods to 
facilitate the collecting and paying of taxes, as well as 
eliminating many unnecessary tax exemptions. Other issues 
addressed in the pact include the reigning in of public 
expenditures and an increased level of fiscal transparency. 
 
3.  A law currently being drafted on the fiscal pact as a 
result of the National Dialogue addresses the aforementioned 
areas of concern. Article 3 of this draft law attempts to 
tackle the problems concerning the intake or lackthereof of 
government revenues.  (Note: Due to the fact that the GOH can 
not support financially its own spending and relies heavily 
on foreign aid, large strides made in this area could benefit 
Honduras greatly. End Note).  Items proposed under Article 3 
include: introducing a simplified system to tax the informal 
sector; a gradual end to unnecessary tax exemptions, which 
includes limiting future exemptions for emergency purposes 
only; a general widening of the tax base; and applying 
control measures in order to combat and reduce tax evasion. 
President of Congress, Pepe Lobo, has recently come out 
publically stating that Congress would not support any 
measures relating to tax increases or reforms, mostly due to 
political pressure relating to IMF requirements. 
 
4.  Article 4 of the draft law addresses the issue of better 
controlling government expenditures. Under this law 
government expenditure would be limited to 18 percent of the 
country\'s GDP, and could only be exceeded if deemed necessary 
for the strict use of covering basic social services such as 
health, education, and security. Other proposed reforms under 
this article include: reducing the amount of subsidies 
offered to businesses, only keeping those necessary to 
support low-income households; gradually reducing public debt 
as a percentage of GDP; transferring control of human, 
economic, and natural resources in an effort to decentralize 
in order to create efficiencies in administration. 
 
5.  The principal objective of the National Dialogue relating 
to the fiscal pact was to identify problems within the 
current system.  The draft law addresses these issues and 
attempts to increase revenues, decrease spending, and create 
efficiencies in administration, without raising the tax rate. 
The fiscal pact is an ambitious plan that if accomplished, 
would widen the tax base, eliminate unnecessary subsidies and 
exemptions, and create a more modern GOH that would benefit 
the country as a whole. 
 
6.  Comment:  The likelihood of such a law passing would 
require a broad coalition in order to push the bill through 
Congress. As such, the lack of political will among members 
of Congress will unequivocally dilute the effectiveness of 
rosy, rhetorical dialogue producing an end result that falls 
well short of its initial goal.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"12438","11/28/2003 22:48","03TEGUCIGALPA2792","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA2648","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR 
TREASURY ALSO FOR RAMIN TOLOUI 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD/OMA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/28/2013 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, EINV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS REACHES PRELIMINARY AGREEMENT WITH IMF ON 
PRGF PROGRAM - BALL IS NOW IN THE COURT OF HONDURAN CONGRESS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2648 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1581 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2662 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer for reasons 1.5  (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C)  Summary.  On November 25, the GOH and visiting IMF 
mission announced a preliminary agreement on a Letter of 
Intent (LOI) for a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth 
Facility Program (PRGF).  The central government deficit 
targets are 3.5 percent of GDP in 2004, 3.0 percent of GDP in 
2005, and 2.5 percent of GDP in 2006.  The program contains 
four prior actions that must be taken before the program can 
go to the IMF Board of Directors for approval.  The first 
three require adoption of legislation by Congress of a 
government salary law, a new fiscal package of revenue and 
expenditure measures and a revised 2004 budget.  The fourth 
prior action is adjustment of Honduras\' poverty reduction 
strategy.  The program includes requirements for adoption of 
new financial sector reforms, overall civil service reform, a 
new tax code, a prohibition on new agricultural debt 
bailouts, and pricing of electricity.  The ball is now 
squarely in the court of the National Congress to adopt the 
necessary legislation in early December.  All four of the 
prior actions will be politically unpopular and will touch on 
the interests of key political constituencies.  At this 
point, however, it should be clear to the Congress that the 
measures are indispensable requirements if an IMF agreement 
is to be reached.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) As planned, an IMF mission led by Adrienne Cheasty 
arrived during the week of November 10 to work with the GOH 
to pound out the long-awaited PRGF program.  The negotiations 
began to founder during the second week as key legislators, 
including the President of Congress, came out publicly 
against new tax measures or a cut-back on teacher salary and 
benefit hikes, causing the GOH to back away from promises 
made in October.  Over the November 22-23 weekend, the 
mission convinced the GOH that there was no further 
flexibility possible, and the hard legislative measures were 
absolutely necessary to obtain an IMF agreement.  On November 
25, the GOH announced that tentative agreement on a letter of 
intent was reached, but has not publicized the content.  The 
program, as described to Emboffs by IMF and GOH officials, is 
similar to the proposal outlined in October (see ref A). 
 
------------------ 
The Fiscal Targets 
------------------ 
 
3. (C)  The central government deficit targets in the draft 
LOI are: 3.5 percent of GDP in 2004, 3.0 percent of GDP in 
2005, and 2.5 percent of GDP in 2006.  The 2003 deficit is 
expected to be 5.5 percent of GDP, by IMF calculations (the 
GOH uses 4.5 percent, using a different accounting basis). 
For the consolidated public sector, the deficit targets in 
the draft LOI are: 3.0 percent of GDP in 2004, 2.5 percent of 
GDP in 2005, and 1.7 percent of GDP in 2006.  Central 
government wage bill targets are 10.6 percent of GDP for 
2004, 10.4 percent of GDP for 2005 and 10.0 percent for 2006. 
 The program contains four prior actions that must be taken 
before the program can go to the IMF Board of Directors for 
approval.  The program also includes requirements for 
adoption of new financial sector reforms, overall civil 
service reform, a new tax code, and a prohibition on new 
agricultural debt bailouts. 
 
---------------- 
Prior Conditions 
---------------- 
 
4. (C) The first prior condition is adoption by Congress of a 
government salary law that establishes executive branch 
control of central government wage policy (with raises keyed 
to inflation), folds the teachers into the unified civil 
service salary policy by June 2005, freezes the collateral 
benefits for public sector teachers and freezes salaries for 
medical personnel.  The text of the law was discussed at 
length by IMF staff and the GOH, both in October and 
November.  The GOH has also mentioned returning to an 
alternative model of folding in the teachers: leaving the 
collateral benefits untouched, but stretching out the planned 
wage increases for 2004-2005 over four years.  Although this 
would provide similar (perhaps slightly higher) fiscal 
relief, it would mean a further two-year delay in 
establishing executive branch control over teacher salaries 
to June 2007, and the IMF staff have tried to dissuade the 
GOH from pursuing it.  However, President Maduro\'s advisors 
are continuing negotiations with the teachers unions over the 
form of the adjustment of teacher compensation.  These 
negotiations are expected to continue for about a week. 
5. (C) The second prior condition is adoption of a third 
fiscal package by Congress that results in at least one 
percent of GDP (about USD 60 million) in central government 
fiscal savings.  The content of this fiscal package will be 
closely held for now, and is expected to include a fuel tax 
increase (0.5-0.6 percent of GDP) and other tax measures (tax 
on tobacco products and legislative action that implements 
fully the reduction in sales tax exemptions that were adopted 
in April 2003).  On the expenditure side, 2004 government 
spending will be cut by 600 million lempiras, affecting all 
Ministries and government organizations that receive 
transfers from the Central Government.  The GOH had 
originally proposed a much larger fuel tax increase to cover 
the fiscal gap for 2004, but the IMF staff had urged 
moderation (and compensation with other measures) because of 
the probable impact on the poor.  Previous promises not to 
add more new taxes, by President Maduro and National Congress 
President Pepe Lobo, will complicate the passage of this 
legislation.  However, given the size of the budget deficit, 
the lack of non-inflationary financing, and the disappointing 
results of the previous two fiscal packages, adoption is 
unavoidable for stabilization of GOH finances. 
 
6. (C) The IMF Mission also is requiring a change of the 2004 
budget (presented as required by law in September 2003) to 
reflect the lower expenditure envelope, before its adoption 
in December.  The fourth prior action is the adjustment of 
the Poverty Reduction Strategy to reflect spending targets. 
IMF staff are also requiring publication in the Official 
Gazeta of the increase in electricity rates (keeps rates 
equal to marginal cost).  The National Electricity Commission 
has already approved this rate hike, which will take effect 
January 1, 2004, but the decree has yet to be published 
(presumably due to political pressure).  GOH interlocutors 
did not mention this issue. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Other Key Requirements in the PRGF Program 
------------------------------------------ 
 
7. (C) In the negotiations, the GOH committed to enactment of 
a Financial Sector reform by June 2004 that will include a 
series of vital reforms for this very fragile banking system. 
 The GOH will implement consolidated supervision of all 
financial intermediaries.  Banks will be required to increase 
capitalization and provisioning for bad debts.  There will be 
reforms to the Central Bank\'s role as a lender of last 
resort.  This ambitious set of reforms is key to financial 
sector stability in October 2004, when the 100 percent 
government guarantee of bank deposits ends. 
 
8. (C) The LOI includes mention of enactment of overall civil 
service reform in 2004.  This is a key measure that was also 
included in Honduras\' last PRGF program, and is a prior 
action for World Bank program loans.  The IMF staff will be 
working closely with the World Bank to ensure the requirement 
is handled in a way that doesn\'t conflict with rules on 
cross-conditionality. 
 
9. (C) The program also requires enactment of a new tax code 
in 2004 that, among other things, provides harsher sanctions 
for tax evasion.  The GOH has been working on the text of 
this law for some time. 
 
10. (C) The final program requirement mentioned by Embassy 
interlocutors is a prohibition on new bailouts for 
agricultural loans and a limitation on expenditures to 
implement the 2003 Agricultural Credit law (see ref B).  The 
law authorized expenditures up to two billion lempiras for 
agricultural debt forgiveness, but the GOH has committed to 
limiting its share of cost to 1.2 billion lempiras and paying 
the smaller farmers first.  Given the political influence of 
many of the larger beneficiaries and the continuous pressure 
for other bailouts, post expects implementation of this 
program condition will continue to be a struggle for the GOH 
over time. 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
11. (C) The GOH told the Fund staff there would be a 3-4 day 
delay before announcing the details of the preliminary 
agreement with the IMF to the public, to provide more time 
for negotiations with unions and with key Congressional 
deputies.  Although the GOH had previously planned to submit 
and obtain passage of needed legislation by November 28 
(hence the urgency of the arrival of the IMF mission), 
National Congress President Porfirio Lobo has decided to keep 
the Congress in session during the first 20 days of December 
and consider any legislation related to the IMF program 
during that period (traditionally, the special December 
session of Congress only considers the budget). 
 
12. (C) If the GOH submits and the Congress adopts the needed 
legislation in its entirety, without changes that affect 
fiscal targets, the IMF mission will send the LOI directly to 
the Board of Directors.  The LOI will need to be reopened, 
however, if Congress makes substantive changes (the IMF 
mission believes its room for flexibility is now exhausted). 
If the GOH fails to send the laws to Congress, the efforts to 
reach an IMF program would go back to square one. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
13. (C) The fiscal targets in the program are substantially 
looser than those sought by the IMF staff in previous visits, 
reflecting an enhanced understanding of the GOH\'s political 
constraints.  All four of the prior actions will be unpopular 
politically and will touch negatively on the interests of key 
political constituencies.  At this point, however, it should 
be clear to the Congress that the measures are indispensable 
if an IMF agreement is to be reached and macroeconomic 
stability is to be reestablished.  Much will now depend on 
the GOH\'s and Congress\' leadership in taking hard measures 
and explaining the need for them to the public.  As indicated 
in ref C, post believes it likely that the Congress will 
approve the legislation and that the government can withstand 
any subsequent protests.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"12476","12/2/2003 14:58","03TEGUCIGALPA2814","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE301352","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002814 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT (JREAP), L, IO, EB, INL, AND NP 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, KTIA, AORC, PARM, EAIR, EWWT, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: 2003 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 301352 
 
1. The 2003 Annual Terrorism Report for Honduras follows. 
Points are keyed to reftel paragraph headings: 
 
A. Significant Actions by GOH 
----------------------------- 
 
In 2003, President Ricardo Maduro continued his policy of 
strong Honduran support for U.S. efforts against terrorism, 
was a member of the Coalition of the Willing for Iraq, and 
sent 370 troops to Iraq as part of Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
The GOH also ratified three outstanding counterterrorism (CT) 
conventions during the year.  The GOH promptly issued freeze 
orders for terrorist-related assets at U.S. request.  No 
terrorist assets have been found in Honduran financial 
institutions, to date.  However, the GOH has yet to designate 
a national coordinator for counterterrorism.  The GOH has 
been an advocate in the region for U.S. anti-terrorism goals 
and supported the United States in regional fora, in the 
United Nations and in the Honduran media with forthright and 
unambiguous public statements against terror.  The Government 
of Honduras (GOH) continues to provide increased security 
around the U.S. Embassy and other USG facilities. 
 
After September 11, 2001, Honduras took the lead, in its role 
as President Pro-Tempore of the Central American Integration 
System (SICA), in organizing Central American cooperation in 
the war against terrorism.  The GOH convoked Central American 
heads of state for a terrorism summit on September 19, 2001. 
The Summit produced an endorsement of President Bush\'s call 
for an international coalition against terrorism, a firm 
condemnation of all terrorist acts, and full support for 
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) resolutions and 
Organization of American States (OAS)/Rio Treaty actions.  In 
February 2002, the Congress passed and President Maduro 
signed legislation to strengthen the Honduran anti-money 
laundering regime, in accordance with UN conventions.  The 
GOH responded significantly to all U.S. requests for 
intelligence cooperation.  The GOH took immediate measures to 
implement new U.S. civil aviation security regulations, and 
continues to work with the Transportation Security 
Administration on such measures. 
 
The GOH has tightened visa restrictions by adding countries 
to its list of countries that require Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MFA) approval prior to visa issuance, coordinated 
the Central American SICA regional counterterrorism plan, and 
began developing its own national counterterrorism plan. 
 
Since September 11, 2001, the GOH has signed and ratified the 
Convention on the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism 
Crimes in November 2002, acceded to the Convention for the 
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings in November 2002, and 
signed the OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of 
Terrorism in June 2002.  In 2003, the GOH ratified three more 
pending counterterrorism (CT) conventions, the 1980 
Convention on the Physical Protection on Nuclear Materials, 
the 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of 
Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation, 
and the 1991 Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives 
for the Purpose of Detection (signed by the GOH March 26, 
1991), which makes the GOH a party to 10 international CT 
conventions.  The GOH still needs to sign and ratify two 
outstanding International Maritime Organization 
conventions/protocols and ratify two OAS conventions (1971 
and 2002) against terrorism. 
 
B. Response of the Judicial System 
---------------------------------- 
 
The weakness of the rule of law in Honduras continues to be 
the most serious impediment to any prospective government 
prosecution, extradition, or investigation of suspected 
terrorist activity.  Historically, the judicial system has 
not played a significant role in dealing with terrorism. 
Heavy caseloads, severe resource constraints, insufficient 
personnel and lack of expertise in handling complex 
international investigations limit the ability of the 
judicial and law enforcement authorities to deter terrorists 
from operating in Honduras.  Moreover, the judicial system 
remains vulnerable to political tampering, corruption, and 
improper, extra-legal influence. 
 
There were no terrorist incidents thwarted or terrorist cells 
broken up in Honduras in 2003.  There were no cases of 
terrorism, domestic or international, before the Honduran 
judicial system during 2003. 
On May 14, a group calling itself the \"Popular Revolutionary 
Forces\" issued a communique announcing the beginning of a 
campaign to overthrow the Maduro government and vowed to 
evict \"Yankees\" and other foreign occupiers.  The communique 
also identified diplomats from the United States, United 
Kingdom, and Spain as legitimate military targets.  Initial 
assessment by both the Embassy and the Honduran police 
concurred that the communique was an attempt to gain 
political support and therefore not considered a realistic 
threat. 
 
C. Extradition of Suspected Terrorists 
-------------------------------------- 
 
The GOH did not request the extradition of any suspected 
terrorist.  The U.S. has not asked the GOH to extradite 
anyone suspected of terrorism in 2003. There are no third 
country extradition requests for suspected terrorists. 
 
D. Impediments to Prosecution/Extradition 
----------------------------------------- 
 
The Honduran Constitution (Article 102) prohibits the 
extradition of Honduran nationals.  The U.S.-Honduras 
Extradition Treaty of 1928 permits each party to refuse to 
extradite its own citizens.  In July 2000, Honduras ratified 
a revised extradition treaty with Spain that enumerates 
various acts of terrorism that cannot be considered political 
crimes.  The GOH will not extradite anyone for a crime 
punishable by death, unless the requesting country provides 
formal assurances that the individual will receive a lesser 
penalty if convicted (the maximum sentence for any one crime 
in Honduras is 20 years imprisonment).  There are no other 
legal impediments to Honduras\'s ability to prosecute or 
extradite suspected terrorists. 
 
E. Responses Other Than Prosecution 
----------------------------------- 
 
Honduras belongs to Interpol and shares criminal information 
with other countries, but has had difficulty preparing basic 
Interpol \"red notices\" and provisional arrest requests.  As 
noted above, it is sharing intelligence information with the 
U.S. and its Central American neighbors.  The GOH has been an 
advocate in the region for U.S. anti-terrorism goals and has 
supported the United States in regional fora, in the United 
Nations and in the Honduran media with forthright and 
unambiguous public statements against terror. 
 
There is growing evidence of the existence of an illicit 
trade of \"arms for drugs\" utilizing illegal narcotics that 
transit through Honduras (see answer G).  In July 2003, the 
GOH passed Article 332 of the Honduran Penal Code making the 
possession of AK-47s and other types of automatic weapons 
illegal.  A 90-day arms-for-money program was initiated to 
facilitate the collection and destruction of weapons deemed 
illegal.  The GOH\'s severely limited capacity to interdict 
drugs and the alleged involvement of current and former 
military/police officials, who may retain access to arms 
caches left over from the 1980\'s Central American conflicts, 
undermine efforts to disrupt these transactions. 
 
In addition, there is little or no security at the country\'s 
three principal ports on the Caribbean coast, Puerto Cortes, 
La Ceiba, and Trujillo.  However, the GOH launched an 
expedited effort to meet new International Maritime 
Organization and U.S. port security standards. 
 
F. Major Counterterrorism Efforts 
--------------------------------- 
 
Honduras strongly opposes international terrorism in 
international fora.  President Maduro and his cabinet 
consistently and vigorously spoke out in support of U.S. and 
international anti-terrorism efforts in statements to the 
Honduran media. 
 
G. Support for International Terrorism 
-------------------------------------- 
 
The GOH provides no support to international terrorism, 
terrorists, or terrorist groups.  There are no known 
terrorist elements operating in Honduran territory.  The GOH 
does not permit sanctuary, training sites, training or 
storage/transfer of weapons to terrorists groups. 
 
However, there is growing evidence of the existence of an 
illicit trade of \"arms for drugs\" utilizing illegal narcotics 
that transit through Honduras.  The arms from these deals are 
presumably destined for use by terrorist groups in Colombia. 
The GOH\'s severely limited capacity to interdict drugs and 
the alleged involvement of current and former military/police 
officials, who may retain access to arms caches left over 
from the 1980\'s Central American conflicts, undermine efforts 
to disrupt these transactions. 
 
Honduras has maintained diplomatic relations with Cuba since 
late January 2002, but has not named an ambassador, even 
though Cuba has an ambassador in Honduras.  Honduras has no 
diplomatic relations with the other state sponsors of 
terrorism -- Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan, and Syria. 
 
H. Public Statements in Support of Terrorist-Supporting 
Countries on a Terrorism Issue 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
The GOH has not voiced support for terrorist groups or their 
objectives, or for state sponsors of terrorism. 
 
I. Changes in Attitude toward Terrorism 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Immediately following the September 11, 2001 attacks, 
Honduran police and military authorities began working even 
more closely with U.S. Mission counterparts to assess links 
to international terrorism in Honduras.  This cooperation has 
continued under President Maduro in 2002-2003.  Extensive 
investigation and ongoing threat analysis has not revealed 
any terrorist links in Honduras.  Honduran financial 
officials and its private sector banking association 
responded promptly to UNSC and U.S. requests related to the 
freezing and seizing of terrorist financial assets and 
accounts.  The GOH continues to issue freeze orders of 
accounts of terrorist individuals and groups listed in the 
U.S. Executive Order, and the financial community has fully 
cooperated.  To date, no terrorist accounts have been found. 
 
On May 14, a group calling itself the \"Popular Revolutionary 
Forces\" issued a communique announcing the beginning of a 
campaign to overthrow the Maduro government and vowed to 
evict \"Yankees\" and other foreign occupiers.  The communique 
also identified diplomats from the United States, United 
Kingdom, and Spain as legitimate military targets.  There was 
no further action by the \"Popular Revolutionary Forces\" or 
evidence that this group represented a realistic threat at 
this time. 
Palmer 
"
"12485","12/2/2003 22:20","03TEGUCIGALPA2824","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA1608","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO DOJ - GREGORY STEVENS 
DEPT FOR: L/LEI, DOJ/OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, CASC, HO (MR. MORRIS ARNOLD FREDERICK) 
SUBJECT: EXTRADITION OF ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 01608 
 
1. SUMMARY: ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS HAS AN OUTSTANDING 
ARREST WARRANT IN THE U.S. FOR CONSPIRACY, ILLEGAL 
CONCEALMENT OF ASSETS, MAKING FRAUDULENT AND FALSE 
STATEMENTS, AND CONSPIRACY TO LAUNDER MONEY. ON MARCH 
18, 1992, MR. MORRIS FRAUDULENTLY OBTAINED HONDURAN 
CITIZENSHIP BY CONCEALING HIS U.S. CRIMINAL HISTORY IN 
AN EFFORT TO AVOID EXTRADITION, SINCE THE HONDURAN 
CONSTITUTION FORBIDS EXTRADITION OF HONDURAN 
NATIONALS. NEVERTHELESS, ON MARCH 7, 1995, THE USG 
OFFICIALLY REQUESTED THE EXTRADITION OF ARNOLD 
FREDERICK MORRIS. ON AUGUST 16, 1996, THE HONDURAN 
ATTORNEY GENERAL REQUESTED REVOCATION OF MR. MORRIS\' 
HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP. SUBSEQUENTLY, MORRIS APPEALED 
THIS DECISION THROUGH THE HONDURAN COURT SYSTEM. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. IN A PREVIOUS REPORTING CABLE POST REPORTED THAT 
THERE WERE THREE ACTIONS PENDING IN THE HONDURAN 
COURTS WITH RESPECT TO MR. MORRIS\' CASE: 
 
- AN APPEAL FILED BY MR. MORRIS WITH THE SUPREME COURT 
ON MARCH 25, 2002, ARGUING THAT THE REQUEST FOR THE 
CANCELLATION OF HIS HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP SHOULD HAVE 
BEEN FILED BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL AND NOT BY THE 
ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
 
- AN APPEAL FILED BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL ON NOVEMBER 
29, 2002, WITH THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT OBJECTING THE RULING OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA.  THE SAN PEDRO 
SULA COURT HAD SUSPENDED THE CANCELLATION OF HIS 
NATIONALITY WHILE ITS ACQUISITION WAS BEING 
CHALLENGED. 
 
- AN APPEAL FILED BY MR. MORRIS ON MARCH 5, 2003, FOR 
INTERIM EQUITABLE RELIEF IN ORDER TO ENSURE THE 
EXECUTION OF THE RULING RENDERED BY ADMINISTRATIVE 
COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA ON OCTOBER 24, 2002, AND 
REJECTED BY THE SOLICITOR GENERAL ON JUNE 9, 2003. 
 
3.  On November 18, 2003 Post sent a request for a 
status report to the Ministry of Government and 
Justice. On November 28, 2003, Post received a 
response through Official Note number 1456-DSG0 dated 
November 25, 2003, stating the following: 
 
-  Regarding the November 29, 2002 appeal filed by the 
Solicitor General with the Court of Appeals of the 
Administrative Court (File number 160-2002), objecting 
to the ruling of the Administrative Court in San Pedro 
Sula, which suspended the cancellation of Mr. Mr. 
Morris\' Honduran nationality while the acquisition was 
being challenged: the Ministry informed Post that the 
Court of Appeals of the Administrative Court ordered 
that a judicial communication be sent to the Circuit 
County Court of Pinellas, Florida, requesting 
information about the results of the sentence it 
imposed for a minor offense involving violence (for 
example, time served, parole, compliance with 
conditions of parole, etc.). 
 
-  REGARDING THE SEPTEMBER 8, 2000, APPEAL FILED BY 
MR. MORRIS WITH THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT CONCERNING THE REPOSITION OF THE 
RULING RENDERED BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN 
PEDRO SULA, CONCERNING THE SUBMISSION OF EVIDENCE (013- 
2000-SPS): THE MINISTRY INFORMED POST THAT ON OCTOBER 
10, 2003, THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT IN SAN PEDRO SULA 
RULED IN FAVOR OF MR. MORRIS. HOWEVER, ON NOVEMBER 5, 
2003, THE SOLICITOR GENERAL FILED AN APPEAL. 
 
-  THE MINISTRY\'S RESPONSE DID NOT MENTION THE MARCH 
25, 2002 SUPREME COURT APPEAL FILED BY MR. MORRIS, 
WHICH ARGUED THAT THE REQUEST FOR THE CANCELLATION OF 
HIS HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP SHOULD HAVE BEEN FILED BY THE 
SOLICITOR GENERAL AND NOT BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
(FILE NUMBER 650-02). 
 
4.  POST WILL CONTINUE TO ADVISE THE DEPARTMENT OF 
DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS CASE AS THEY ARISE. 
 
PALMER 
"
"12514","12/3/2003 19:54","03TEGUCIGALPA2827","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002827 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON TERRORISM AND VIOLENCE, DECEMBER 
3, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 12/3 entitled \"The End\".  \"At some point in our recent 
history, conventional wars, guerrilla wars like the one the 
U.S. army encountered in Vietnam, gave way to terrorism as 
the most significant threat. We now see in the Middle East, 
Africa, some South American countries, and the 9/11 attack 
in the U.S. that terrorism is the most devastating threat to 
humanity.\" 
 
\"When we hear and read the news about the difficulties of 
the allied forces in Iraq, the attacks against American 
troops, the recent terrorist actions against diplomatic 
missions in other countries, the suicidal attacks of Iraqis 
against their own countrymen or the occupation forces, or 
last weekend\'s incident that took the lives of seven Spanish 
secret agents, has inevitably brought to our mind what 
 
SIPDIS 
happened in Vietnam.\" 
 
\"There are so many war fronts around the world.  Right now, 
North Korea and Iran are being closely watched to prevent 
them from developing nuclear weapons, the eternal clash 
between Arabs and Jews that has made the Middle East such an 
unstable and volatile region, and in the meantime both Osama 
bin Laden and Saddam Hussein are still unaccounted for. 
Humanity is now exposed to a terrible and new threat, and 
it\'s still impossible to predict how it will end.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"12544","12/4/2003 20:16","03TEGUCIGALPA2841","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN POLICE SEIZE ANOTHER 53 KILOS OF COCAINE, 
MAKING IT 5,000 KILOS IN 2003 
 
 
1.  On November 27, Honduran authorities seized approximately 
53 kilos of cocaine from a truck in the remote northern town 
of Bonito Oriental in the Department of Colon.  The cocaine 
valued at approximately USD two million was seized by the 
Honduran Frontier Police, working in cooperation with the 
National Preventive Police at approximately 10:00 a.m. Upon 
being pulled over by authorities, the driver of the truck, 
Norberto Reyes Zavala, was found to be extremely nervous. 
Tipped off by Zavala\'s agitated demeanor the police searched 
the truck, and only after a lengthy search did the 
authorities discover the cocaine hidden in a rear compartment 
covered by sawdust. 
 
2.  Zavala confessed to authorities that two individuals had 
offered him USD 1,400 to transport the cocaine from Sico, 
Colon to Danli, El Paraiso in southern Honduras. Later that 
afternoon, nearly five hours after detaining Zavala, the 
alleged \"owner\" of the drugs, Jose Daniel Pinto, was captured 
by the police in Tocoa. The deputy investigator in Tocoa was 
notified by informants that the same Mercedes truck driven by 
Zavala had been seen earlier in Sico conversing with Pinto. 
While this information led to Pinto\'s arrest, Honduran 
authorities continue to investigate alleged links between 
Pinto and Zavala.  Pinto adamantly denies any connection 
between him and the drugs (Note: The reason the police were 
able to detain Pinto is the Honduran law \"Affiliation with 
Known Narcotraffickers\", which gives authorities the legal 
right to arrest anyone associated with narcotraffickers. End 
Note.) 
 
3.  This latest seizure brings the total amount of cocaine 
seized this year in Honduras to approximately 5,000 kilos. 
This is more than what has been seized in the last five years 
combined. 
Palmer 
"
"12545","12/4/2003 21:40","03TEGUCIGALPA2844","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03USDAOTEGUCIGALPAIIR684100263","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 002844 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR INL, INL/LP, INR/B, AND INR/AN/IAA, 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG/ROL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, EFIN, PHUM, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: GOOD TALKERS, BUT MADURO ADMINISTRATION NOT 
SERIOUSLY COMMITTED TO FIGHTING CORRUPTION 
 
REF: A. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 68410026 03 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1615 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2514 
     D. STATE 312936 
     E. STATE 319281 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
1. (S) SUMMARY: In office for almost two years, President 
Ricardo Maduro\'s administration talks a lot about fighting 
corruption, particularly when addressing interested U.S. 
audiences.  Upon close examination, however, one sees little 
demonstrable progress in breaking corruption\'s pervasive grip 
on almost all aspects of daily life in Honduras.  Moreover, 
there appears to be very little genuine interest in 
addressing corruption\'s root causes or the venality of many 
Government of Honduras (GOH) officials.  Honduras ranked 106 
out of 133 countries in a recent survey by Transparency 
International, an NGO that tracks international corruption 
issues.  Only Ecuador, Haiti, and Paraguay scored lower in 
the Western Hemisphere.  Maduro\'s inability to effectively 
attack corruption has fueled anti-government sentiment among 
a general population disillusioned with the president\'s 
lackluster leadership and undelivered reform program. 
Discontent with Maduro and his administration continues to 
grow, providing fodder for protesters and many others 
yearning for a leader with the ability to effect real change 
in the fight against corruption. END SUMMARY 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
President Committed Rhetorically, But Not Pushing the Issue 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
2. (S) Candidate Maduro promised the people of Honduras that 
fighting corruption would be a top priority of his 
administration, but since taking office almost two years ago, 
he has done little to reduce corruption\'s pervasive hold on 
Honduran society.  Maduro speaks eloquently about 
corruption\'s grip on daily life in Honduras and its 
detrimental effects on the Honduran economy, particularly to 
U.S. and European audiences (ref D).  Rhetoric aside, 
however, the President seems unwilling or unable to make the 
politically tough decisions necessary to effect a paradigm 
shift in Honduras. 
 
3. (S) When pressed on the issue, Maduro squarely places the 
blame for his administration\'s inability to effectively 
confront corruption on the shoulders of Attorney General (AG) 
Roy Medina, who (according to Maduro) is politically 
motivated and simply refuses to prosecute high level 
corruption cases.  Maduro cites limited resources as another 
major impediment to combating corruption, but the GOH\'s 
parsimonious funding of anti-corruption efforts clearly 
reflects the priority his administration is itself willing to 
put forth. 
 
4. (C) Other aspects of Maduro\'s anti-corruption strategy 
which require congressional action, particularly electoral 
reform, have either run out of steam or have been hijacked by 
others for their particular political purposes.  Although 
Maduro\'s Nationalist Party (NP) does not control a majority 
in Congress, the president\'s inability to muster support for 
needed reforms (even within his own party) has begun to 
reflect poorly on his leadership ability and bodes ill for 
any significant improvements in the near future. 
 
5. (C) Maduro and his Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza 
recently highlighted to visiting Secretary Powell Congress\'s 
recent passage of a constitutional amendment to eliminate 
immunity for all legislative, judicial, and government 
officials (still pending ratification) and the selection of 
an independent Supreme Court as the most significant advances 
in ending a culture of impunity that permits corruption in 
Honduras.  Cosenza noted how the new Criminal Procedures Code 
is streamlining the administration of justice.  However, they 
both acknowledge that a major figure needs to be jailed to 
make a statement, and change the perception of corruption and 
impunity in the country (ref D). 
 
6. (C) Cosenza has noted that the GOH has also instituted a 
number of other measures to combat corruption including: the 
selection of an independent auditing firm to audit executive 
branch procurements; the closure of certain businesses for 
tax evasion; and an effort to get Congress to enact a law 
that requires transparency in the budget process. The GOH 
also highlights the transfer of public procurement projects 
to the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), although 
Post notes that the UNDP in Honduras has itself been accused 
of questionable practices, particularly in the awarding of 
Hondutel procurement contracts to select European firms. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Attorney General Irrelevant, Maladroit, or Worse 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
7. (S) A hold-over from the previous Flores administration, 
in March, 2004, Roy Medina will complete his congressionally 
appointed five-year term as AG.  While eligible to be 
nominated to serve a second term, he is not considered a 
possible candidate.  Medina entered the Public Ministry (PM) 
amid high-hopes that the GOH would be able to begin an 
effective campaign to combat corruption by prosecuting 
high-profile corrupt individuals.  This has not happened. 
Rather, Medina\'s tenure with the PM has been a major 
disappointment, characterized by obfuscation, excuses, and 
allegations of corruption within the PM itself.  Worse, since 
Maduro\'s election, Medina has used his prosecutorial 
discretion to foil efforts by Maduro to pursue cases against 
bankers who looted their own banks and the national treasury. 
 
 
8. (S) Clearly, Medina does not have the fortitude or 
prosecutorial zeal to pursue high-level corruption cases. 
Whether through intimidation, ineptness, lack of resources, 
lagging political will, or worse, Medina appears to have no 
intention of pursuing allegations of corruption against 
prominent individuals, regardless of the evidence presented. 
Maduro, at one time, entertained ideas of seeking Medina\'s 
ouster, but decided against directly confronting a Liberal 
Party appointee, particularly as it would lead to a 
confrontation with Congress.  Maduro\'s strategy now appears 
to let Medina\'s time run out, then seek an individual who 
will purportedly more aggressively seek to combat crime in 
Honduras. 
 
9. (C) Embassy confronted Medina in June (ref B) concerning 
the disappointing results and allegations of corruption 
within the PM.  At that time, Medina promised Ambassador that 
the PM would begin to move forward on the more than 160 money 
laundering cases languishing in its files.  Medina also 
promised action on other high level cases, although he noted 
that faulty police work and ineffective judges were hampering 
his efforts to bring cases to trial.  While there was some 
improvement in the short term, paralysis has once again 
gripped the PM.  The one exception was PM action against 
congressman Avila Panchame on narco-corruption charges, 
although this appears to have been in direct response to 
Embassy pressure. 
 
10. (S) In an orchestrated effort to deflect continued 
criticism and avoid a cut-off in USG assistance, Medina did 
shuffle a number of high level officials within the PM, 
moving Special Prosecutor for Organized Crime Mario 
Chinchilla and prosecutor Rafael Soto to the Environmental 
Crimes Unit.  (Chinchilla was replaced by Doris Aguilar.) 
Both Chinchilla and Soto were tainted by accusations of 
corruption and possible ties to narcotraffickers, although 
the PM has shown no interest in pursuing these allegations. 
Also, Soto continues to interfere in drug cases, even though 
he has been reassigned.  While Aguilar appears to be well 
intentioned, these moves have not resulted in any greater 
exuberance at the PM to prosecute meaningful cases.  There 
have been, however, several prosecutions against low-level 
police officers. 
 
11. (S) While inaction at the PM is itself a serious concern, 
corruption within the judiciary and police also hamper 
efforts to improve the administration of justice and rule of 
law within Honduras.  Although both Supreme Court President 
Vilma Morales and Public Security Minister Oscar Alvarez 
remain committed anti-corruption watch-dogs, the influence of 
drug money, threats from narcotrafficking organizations, and 
a general climate of impunity continues to vitiate any 
significant improvements. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Judiciary Improving, But Still A Long Way To Go 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
12. (C) Vilma Morales has been very outspoken on corruption 
issues and is working to increase judicial independence in an 
effort to, among other things, bolster anti-corruption 
efforts.  Morales has gone as far as to challenge the public 
to come forward with the names of corrupt judges, whom she 
has promised to investigate.  While many newly appointed 
trial judges are performing admirably, the vast majority of 
magistrates continue to exhibit old tendencies, namely 
dismissing cases for arbitrary reasons, or simply refusing to 
bring them to trial.  Morales has dismissed some judges, but 
Liberals charge that some of these dismissals were 
politically motivated.  Inexplicably, she also chose to 
publicly criticize the Embassy for failing to coordinate with 
her regarding a corrupt judge who was recently excluded from 
a U.S.-sponsored money laundering training class.   She 
claimed to be unaware of U.S. concerns, despite the fact that 
the Embassy had notified her in advance and that she herself 
had expressed concern about this judge\'s actions and had also 
hinted about an investigation of her own.  To date, there has 
been no Supreme Court follow-though on this. 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
GOH Anti-Corruption Efforts Underfunded and Inadequate 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
13. (U) In an effort to provide greater transparency and more 
effectively combat corruption, with the help of international 
donors, the GOH created the National Anti-Corruption Council 
(NAC) and the Supreme Court of Accounts (Tribunal Superior De 
Cuentas - TSC). To date, neither institution has lived up to 
its potential. 
 
14. (SBU) The NAC was conceived under the Flores 
administration and continued by Maduro.  The NAC\'s charge was 
to develop a national anti-corruption strategy and then help 
the GOH implement that strategy.  The NAC is composed of 14 
prominent individuals representing Honduran civil society, 
and 14 senior GOH officials; heading the NAC is Roman 
Catholic Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez.  While the NAC was able to 
develop a national strategy, its implementation has fallen 
short.  Lassitude among the NAC\'s members, insufficient 
funds, and lack of attention from the GOH have all 
contributed to the NAC\'s poor showing.  Its most significant 
contribution has been to call public attention to corrupt 
practices.  Most of its credibility emanates from the moral 
authority of Cardinal Rodriguez. 
 
15. (C) In an October 21 meeting with PolCouns, NAC Executive 
Director German Espinal confided that the GOH was not 
committed to the NAC\'s mission.  Espinal outlined the limited 
extent of GOH financial support for the NAC: one phone line. 
The NAC\'s small staff, and all other resources, are provided 
by international donors.  If the international community 
withdrew funding from the NAC, it would probably disappear. 
 
16. (SBU) The TSC was intended to function as a national 
hybrid general accounting and public ethics office.  It was 
created in January, 2002, and its organic law was approved by 
Congress on January 20, 2003.  The TSC placed the Comptroller 
General of the Republic, the Directorate of Administrative 
Probity (Ethics office), and the Office of State Assets under 
one roof.  However, since its inception (to Post\'s 
knowledge), the TSC has yet to report a single accounting 
discrepancy or to recommend corruption charges against any 
individual.  In essence, the TSC has had no visible impact on 
the fight against corruption in Honduras. 
 
17. (C) Espinal alluded to dysfunctionality at the TSC during 
the October 21 meeting with PolCouns.  According to Espinal, 
the TSC employs close to 600 people (most of them lawyers) 
who really contribute nothing to the TSC\'s ability to 
effectively function as a public auditor.  Rather, the TSC 
seems to have become a jobs program for contacts of senior 
GOH officials in need of employment.  Still, the Maduro team 
trumpets the creation of the TSC as one of its major 
accomplishments in its fight against corruption. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
One Bright Spot - Reduced Corruption in the Armed Forces 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
18. (C) The reduction of corruption within the Honduran Armed 
Forces (HOAF) is one of the few success stories in an 
otherwise cloudy horizon.  Once a bastion of corruption, the 
HOAF is now no more corrupt than other GOH entities.  Firmly 
under civilian control, and with the introduction of 
transparency in the budgetary process, the Generals and those 
that serve them, have been reduced to low-level graft.  The 
HOAF, particularly the Navy and Air Force, are also now much 
more inclined to effectively participate in drug interdiction 
efforts.  The HOAF leadership is more inclined to discipline 
corrupt officers, even at the highest levels.  In fact, 
recent rumors suggest that Col. Caceres, commander of the 
Honduran Air Force, and his deputy, Col. Cervantes, will soon 
be removed for the alleged misuse of funds.  Also, at least 
two naval officers suspected of involvement in narcotics 
trafficking have been removed from their positions. 
 
19. (C) Problems continue with the undercapitalized military 
pension fund \"Instituto Prevision Militaria\" (IPM), as a 
result of an extraordinary theft by former Commander in Chief 
General Hung Pacheco before his retirement (ref A).  It 
remains unclear if General Pacheco will ever face criminal 
charges for the heist.  Grumbling can also be heard from some 
senior and mid-level officers upset with rumors that Chief of 
the Joint Staff General Isaias Barahona intends to raise the 
mandatory retirement age from 30 to 35 years of active 
military service.  The disgruntled officers claim Barahona is 
really raising the retirement age so that he can continue in 
his present position.  Barahona has stated that the IPM needs 
this five-year retirement hiatus to recover and recapitalize 
to be able to support the next round of senior retirements. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Don\'t Look to Congress for Any Help 
----------------------------------- 
 
20. (S) Congress continues to resist any meaningful reform 
that would lead to the reduction of corruption within 
Honduras.  The institution itself is riddled with tainted 
politicians who view their positions heavily through the lens 
of personal wealth creation.  This year alone, three members 
of Congress have been arrested on drug trafficking charges, 
and many others continue to be involved in a wide range of 
other illicit activities. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Designada Genuine, But Lacks Support 
------------------------------------ 
 
21. (S)  Honduran Vice President Armida de Lopez Contreras 
(one of three presidential designates in the current Honduran 
constitutional leadership structure) appears genuinely 
committed to anti-corruption efforts but lacks any type of 
following within the GOH.  She has publicly clashed with 
other senior GOH officials over inaction on fighting 
corruption (ref C) which has contributed to her political 
isolation.  While wanting to do the right thing, Contreras\' 
lack of a political following renders her unable to force 
movement on anti-corruption efforts. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Lack of Resources Serious Impediment 
------------------------------------ 
22. (SBU) While the GOH, without doubt, could do a better job 
of fighting corruption, a lack of resources continues to 
seriously impede effective measures to address the issue. 
Post notes the technical assistance provided to Honduras by 
USAID (ref E) and its positive case-by-case results. 
However, the lack of U.S. assistance to fund more effective 
work by national legal institutions is a short-coming. Other 
international donors are providing some limited 
anti-corruption assistance; but more international aid, with 
U.S. leadership, is essential to realize the necessary 
enforcement effort in this crucial area.  Still, these types 
of programs (and others funded by the international 
community) need to be matched by a similar commitment on the 
part of the GOH for them to be effective and have a lasting 
impact. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Population Losing Confidence In Maduro to Fight Corruption 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
23. (S) Comment:  Public support for the Maduro 
administration has decreased in recent months.  Apart from 
serious economic concerns, the general population has doubts 
that Maduro is serious about tackling corruption in Honduras. 
 This lack of confidence is turning into a general 
disillusionment with the Maduro administration.  There is a 
growing sense that the President will not deliver his reform 
agenda, with anti-corruption being a major short-coming.  It 
is not lost on Honduran political observers, and protest 
leaders, that known corrupt individuals continue to ply their 
trade with complete impunity.  On a positive note, no 
evidence exists linking Maduro, or most of his ministers, to 
personal involvement in corrupt activity.  However, Maduro 
and his cabinet, while aware of the corruption problem and 
the need to address it more effectively, are dangerously out 
of touch on this issue, appearing to believe that 
anti-corruption rhetoric alone is enough to win the people\'s 
trust.  Maduro\'s inaction on fighting corruption could 
contribute to increasingly fertile ground for a strong, 
left-leaning populist leader, inclined to seriously challenge 
the status quo in Honduras.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"12546","12/4/2003 21:57","03TEGUCIGALPA2846","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002846 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2013 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PREL, PGOV, ASEC, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS REAFFIRMS COMMITMENT TO OPERATION IRAQI 
FREEDOM DESPITE RECENT MORTAR ATTACKS 
 
REF: CUMMINS-KELLY EMAIL 12/3/03 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5 (A), (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) During the early morning of December 3, the Honduran 
contingent in Iraq (Task Force Xatruch) was attacked by four 
mortar shells.  No injuries or damage was reported.  Initial 
reports indicated that all four shells impacted outside the 
Honduran compound (Ref A), although MOD Federico Breve later 
told MILGRP Commander that two shells apparently did land 
inside the compound, one between two barracks. 
 
2. (U) According to press accounts, despite the attacks, 
President Maduro reaffirmed November 3, that Honduras would 
not be deterred from continuing to provide troops in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  Maduro cited Honduras\' long 
standing alliance with the U.S., its commitments as a UN 
member, and Honduras\' moral obligation to contribute to 
peacekeeping missions among the reasons to stay the course in 
Iraq.  Maduro assured the Honduran people that the Government 
of Honduras (GOH) would continue to monitor the situation and 
do all it could to provide for the troop\'s safety.  However, 
Maduro stated that the mission did involve certain risks that 
Honduras was prepared to take. 
 
3. (C) While the GOH downplayed the incident to the press, 
privately MOD Breve expressed relief to MILGRP Commander that 
the attacks produced no casualties, stating the GOH could 
face sustainment problems if Honduran troops were targeted. 
(Comment:  Concerns remain that a determined attack against 
the Honduran compound could easily produce casualties.  If 
this were to occur, there would be intense pressure on Maduro 
to withdrawal Honduran troops from Iraq. End Comment). 
 
4. (U) Minimize considered. 
Palmer 
"
"12569","12/5/2003 22:19","03TEGUCIGALPA2857","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002857 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, DECEMBER 5, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 12/5 entitled \"Soldiers in Iraq and 
transparency\".  \"The bloodless attack against the 
headquarters of our troops in Najaf, Iraq has reopened the 
debate among those who opposed the sending of Honduran 
troops to Iraq since the beginning, who are now demanding 
their immediate return, and those still think that it is 
reasonable to collaborate with the U.S. troops.\" 
 
\"Most of those demanding the return of our soldiers are 
those who oppose our participation based on legal or moral 
grounds.  Also, there are some who initially agreed with our 
involvement in the coalition, but are now concerned that a 
tragedy will inevitably occur, just like the recent attacks 
against the Spaniards and Italians.  There are also some 
opponents of our presence in Iraq who are motivated by their 
ideological background.  They are those who are always 
against the U.S. and everything the government does.\" 
 
\"However, the main issue here is the lack of transparency 
from the Honduran government, because before sending our 
troops to Iraq, we were told they would be part of a peace 
mission and there were no risks involved.  Some governmental 
officials even said that the presence of Honduran troops in 
that invaded country was in support of a mandate of the 
United Nations. \" 
 
\"Since the sending of Honduran soldiers to Iraq was mainly a 
decision of President Ricardo Maduro, later backed by 
Congress, the only conclusion we can assume is that our 
presence in Iraq is unmistakably based on our full agreement 
with the U.S. foreign policy goals and other commitments of 
reciprocal support we have acquired with the world\'s most 
powerful country.  We believe this issue must be properly 
informed to the Honduran people.\" 
 
\"We must acknowledge that the risks our soldiers are facing 
in Iraq are common in any war.  Those who are using this 
excuse seem to forget that our troops were actually trained 
to fight, that they\'re known to be very brave, and if they 
return to Honduras shouldn\'t be because of fear.  This 
should be a political decision to be taken at the highest 
level.  Our authorities may have made a mistake by sending 
these troops, but now they can\'t simply back off.  We 
wouldn\'t want to appear in front of the whole world as 
cowards, or that we are governed by hesitant politicians.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"12594","12/8/2003 16:19","03TEGUCIGALPA2861","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP (SDONNELLY), EB/TPP/MTA/IPC, AND OES 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS USTR 
COMMERCE ALSO FOR USPTO 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR, ETRD, SOCI, TBIO, PGOV, HO, WTRO 
SUBJECT: AIDS DRUGS AND THE WTO: THE EXPERIENCE OF HONDURAS 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary and Action Request: The GOH has been seeking 
to be the first country to use the August 30 WTO decision on 
Access to Medicines in order to stretch its limited HIV/AIDS 
treatment funds.  Discussions with USG officials have 
revealed that the GOH would not need to use this decision for 
a planned upcoming medicines purchase, as it can make use of 
existing provisions in the WTO TRIPS Agreement.  The unhappy 
GOH reaction to this discovery, however, has revealed a 
fundamental misunderstanding on the GOH\'s part as to the 
purpose of the August 30 decision.  This misunderstanding may 
well exist in other developing countries facing AIDS crises. 
Embassy believes it would be useful to have a coordinated 
outreach effort to explain the August 30 decision, existing 
TRIPS flexibility and USG policy in this area for use with 
foreign governments.  Otherwise, (at least in Honduras and 
similar countries), the USG runs the risk of being blamed for 
positions the U.S. never advocated, and of losing good will 
which the U.S. may have hoped to win by our support of the 
August 30 decision and its eventual inclusion in the TRIPS 
agreement.  End Summary and Action Request. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
GOH: How Do We Use the August 30 Decision? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) EconOffs were called to the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade on October 17th for a meeting with Minister Norman 
Garcia and Vice Minister for External Trade Irving Guerrero. 
The Honduran officials explained that Honduras is preparing 
to purchase generic copies of three AIDS drugs from Indian 
manufacturers, and they want to make the purchase under the 
terms of the August 30, 2003, decision of the WTO.  (This 
decision, regarding paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on 
the TRIPS agreement and public health, as Post understands, 
was intended to allow poor countries suffering from national 
health emergencies to import cheaper generics made under 
compulsory licensing if they are unable to manufacture the 
medicines themselves.) 
 
3. (SBU) The drugs to be purchased are AZT, 3TC and Combivir, 
all patented by GlaxoSmithKline, a British firm.  The 
producers are two Indian companies named Cipla and Rambaxy. 
The purchase would be made with the GOH\'s own money, and 
arranged through the IDA (International Dispensary 
Association), a broker based in the Netherlands.  This would 
be the second Honduran government purchase of AIDS medicines 
this year; in August, the Ministry of Health purchased the 
same drugs through the IDA using money from the Global Fund. 
According to Vice Minister Guerrero, the price being offered 
by the Indian manufacturers is 30 to 40 percent lower than 
the best price offered by GlaxoSmithKline.  The GOH\'s current 
stocks of these drugs are expected to run out between 
February and April 2004. 
 
4. (SBU) The GOH\'s initial concern was that the official 
mechanism for notifying the WTO of a purchase under the 
August 30 decision was not yet in place.  Vice Minister 
Guerrero had obtained a form from the IDA that purports to be 
a \"waiver\" form, to be used for WTO notification in such 
cases.  However, Guerrero acknowledged that this form was not 
officially approved by the WTO.  Fearing negative 
repercussions if the GOH somehow failed to follow the correct 
procedures for making the purchase and notifying the WTO, 
Guerrero asked for EconOffs\' assistance in clarifying the 
proper procedures. 
 
5. (SBU) Honduras is the HIV/AIDS epicenter in Central 
America, accounting for approximately 60 percent of the HIV 
infections in the region.  It is estimated that Honduras has 
between 66,000 and 100,000 infected persons, and that between 
5,000 and 7,000 Hondurans become infected with HIV annually. 
The disease disproportionately affects the Afro-Caribbean 
minority on the North Coast of Honduras.  As of February 
2003, only 300 people were under ARV (antiretroviral) 
treatment, but this increased to 1,100 people as of 
September, thanks to the Global Fund-supported purchase of 
ARVs.  The medicines are distributed through five treatment 
sites (government hospitals, not NGOs): two in Tegucigalpa, 
one each in San Pedro Sula, Choluteca, and La Ceiba.  There 
is much to be done, however, to meet Millennium Challenge and 
Special Summit of the Americas goals on AIDS treatment. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Consultations Indicate that the Agreement Isn,t Relevant 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
6. (SBU) In a series of e-mails and telephone calls between 
the Embassy, State/EB, USTR and the GOH, it became clear that 
the GOH did not need to use the August 30 decision in this 
specific case.  After receiving confirmation that the drugs 
would be shipped directly from India to Honduras, it was 
explained that the proposed purchase would not be covered by 
the August 30 decision, since the exporting country (India) 
does not have patent protection for the drugs in question. 
 
7. (SBU) For the proposed purchase, the GOH would be able to 
issue a compulsory license as outlined in Article 31 of the 
TRIPS Agreement, and pay the remuneration to the patent owner 
itself (if there are valid GSK patents in Honduras).  The 
amount of the \"adequate remuneration\" paid to the patent 
holder, GlaxoSmithKline, would be determined by the GOH. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
The GOH Reaction: Frustration, Even Some Suspicion 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
8. (SBU) The initial reaction of GOH officials to the 
discussion with USG officials -- \"So the August 30 decision 
doesn\'t work, it does nothing for countries like us,\" and 
\"Why is the WTO issuing decisions that are meaningless?\" -- 
revealed a fundamental misunderstanding of the purpose of the 
August 30 decision or the working of the TRIPS Agreement. 
The officials seemed disappointed they would have to pay 
remuneration under TRIPS Article 31, apparently unaware that 
such remuneration is also required under the provisions of 
the August 30 decision.  At the time, GOH officials even 
suggested that the narrow coverage of the August 30 decision 
was intentional and the agreement, advertised as a 
breakthrough for poor countries suffering from the HIV/AIDS 
epidemic, was never meant to work.  The tenor of their 
remarks also indicates a certain amount of blame being 
apportioned to the U.S. 
 
9. (SBU) Subsequently, GOH trade officials have come to 
understand that remuneration to the patent holder must be 
paid under either Article 31 or the August 30 decision, and 
they do now recognize that buying generic AIDS medications 
according to Article 31 and paying remuneration to the patent 
holder still would result in substantial savings compared to 
the full price.  While the GOH has not yet determined its 
next steps, it apparently has not made any effort to 
negotiate a lower price directly with the patent holder. 
 
10. (SBU) Comment: EconOffs have discussed this issue at 
length with the GOH, emphasizing the USG\'s sincere intent to 
assure cost-effective availability of AIDS medicines, and, we 
believe, we have cleared up some misunderstandings.  However, 
we believe that detailed guidance from Washington agencies on 
USG policy regarding TRIPS Article 31 and the August 30 
decision would be very helpful to our efforts here to 
encourage GOH respect for intellectual property rights and at 
the same time address the GOH\'s goal of increasing HIV/AIDS 
treatment.  We expect that such guidance would also be useful 
in many other posts around the world.  End comment. 
Pierce 
"
"12600","12/8/2003 21:03","03TEGUCIGALPA2866","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002866 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/PHD, DRL/MLA, DRL/CRA, AND IO 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, WHA/USOAS, WHA/CCA, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/08/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, CU, HO, UNGA 
SUBJECT: DRL PDAS KOZAK MEETS WITH HONDURAN OFFICIALS TO 
DISCUSS COORDINATION ON UNCHR RESOLUTIONS; GOH SUPPORTIVE 
 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i., Roger Pierce; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  DRL PDAS Kozak, DRL/MLA Deputy Director 
Sicade, and EmbOffs met November 19-20 with senior GOH 
officials, including Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista, 
to discuss U.S. cooperation with Latin American countries on 
human rights resolutions at the United Nations Commission on 
Human Rights (UNCHR).  GOH officials said they would be happy 
to work with the USG on UNCHR resolutions, including the Cuba 
resolution.  The GOH has been a steadfast ally at the UN on 
recent controversial resolutions, including the Iran human 
rights resolution and Middle East resolutions, and has been a 
co-sponsor of the UNCHR Cuba resolution in the past.  Post is 
confident that the GOH will do what it can to support the USG 
in this important initiative.  End Summary. 
 
Meeting with Minister of Foreign Affairs 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Ambassador, DRL PDAS Kozak, DRL/MLA Deputy Director 
Sicade, and PolOff met November 19 with Honduran Foreign 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista, Vice Minister Anibal 
Quinonez, and MFA Senior Advisor Ambassador Policarpo 
Callejas to discuss U.S. cooperation with Latin American 
countries on human rights resolutions at the United Nations 
Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR).  Kozak noted that they 
were traveling to Latin American countries that were members 
of the UNCHR, first in Central America and then in South 
America, to seek closer cooperation.  The effort was modeled 
on a similar effort undertaken recently with the European 
Union (EU), which had been successful. 
 
3. (C) Tracing recent U.S. experience with the UNCHR, from 
losing a seat on the commission, to gaining a seat back, to 
present day, Kozak underlined that the USG was seeking to 
work with other democratic countries instead of fighting over 
language in specific resolutions, noting the example of 
arguments with the EU over language on the death penalty in 
the 2002 Iran resolution.  By the time a compromise had been 
reached there was no time to lobby for the resolution\'s 
passage, and it was defeated.  Kozak said the U.S. sought to 
encourage democracies to: (a) run for the UNCHR, and (b) not 
trade votes with dictatorships on resolutions. 
 
4. (C) The FM thanked Kozak for the visit to Honduras, and 
noted that U.S.-Honduran relations were excellent, 
highlighted by the recent visit of the Secretary and WHA A/S 
Noriega to Tegucigalpa.  Noting the importance of Central 
America working together as a region, the FM said common 
Central American positions on UN issues, such as UNCHR 
resolutions, was a goal.  He pledged to work with the U.S. on 
revitalizing the UNCHR.  Rosa Bautista then highlighted 
recent steps Honduras had taken on human rights problems, and 
said that a lack of resources often left developing countries 
open to criticism for human rights problems by omission. 
Ambassador Callejas, noting his experience on the 
Inter-American Court of Human Rights, discussed first, 
second, and third generation human rights and problems with 
Cuba.  Kozak noted that the U.S. supported second generation 
human rights, but saw them as of a different character than 
first generation human rights.  Governments can show respect 
for civil and political rights simply by not interfering in 
their exercise; economic, social, and cultural rights reflect 
aspirations we all share, but the degree to which they can be 
realized depends on policy choices each sovereign state 
makes.  He noted that this meant the wording of individual 
resolutions was key. 
 
5. (C) Vice Minister Quinonez noted that it would be 
difficult to get other democracies to join the UNCHR to take 
the place of dictatorships.  Kozak noted that one-third of 
the commission was bad, with opportunities for majorities to 
be built of the following countries:  the U.S., the EU, 
Eastern Europe, Latin American and Caribbean Group (GRULAC) 
countries (minus Cuba), allies in the Pacific, and select 
African or Asian countries. 
 
6. (C) Kozak noted the importance of the Cuba resolution, and 
the GOH\'s co-sponsorship of the resolution in the past.  He 
floated the idea of creating a group of representative 
countries from various regions of the world to draft and 
co-sponsor a Cuba resolution.  Kozak noted that the text of 
the last Cuba resolution was weak.  He said that while the 
issue of the elements of an effective policy toward Cuba may 
be the subject of debate, there was no debate over the 
importance of human rights in Cuba. 
 
7. (C) Rosa Bautista mentioned several possible avenues for 
U.S. cooperation with Central America on UNCHR resolutions, 
including the Central American Integration System (SICA - the 
seven Central American countries plus the Dominican 
Republic), or the 13 Central America and Caribbean countries 
(minus Cuba).  He noted that the Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) should increase cooperation among countries 
in the region.  Kozak noted the usefulness of a Central 
American technical representative to work with DRL/MLA on 
UNCHR resolutions.  Rosa Bautista said that in the meantime 
the USG could communicate directly with him, VM Quinonez, and 
AMB Callejas on UNCHR resolutions. 
8.  (C) DCM, DRL PDAS Kozak, DRL/MLA Deputy Director Sicade, 
and PolOff met later that same day with Minister of 
Government and Justice Jorge Ramon Hernandez Alcerro, Vice 
Minister of Justice Carlos Pineda Pinel, and Minister of 
Public Security Oscar Alvarez to discuss the same issue and 
other human rights issues (septels). 
 
Meeting With Minister of the Presidency 
--------------------------------------- 
 
9.  (C) DCM, DRL PDAS Kozak, DRL/MLA Deputy Director Sicade, 
and PolOff met November 20 with Minister of the Presidency 
Luis Cosenza and Minister of Strategic Affairs and 
Communications Ramon Medina Luna to discuss UNCHR 
cooperation.  Kozak gave a similar outline on the reasons for 
consultations with Honduras and other Latin American 
democracies on the UNCHR.  He clarified that although Cuba, 
like other serious human rights violators, always wants to be 
on the UNCHR to try to quash critical resolutions, Cuba is 
only on the commission because it is nominated and elected by 
GRULAC.  Kozak noted that Cuba has never abided by any UNCHR 
resolutions, and that Cuba\'s treatment of dissidents has 
worsened recently.  He floated the idea raised in the MFA 
meeting of creating a group of representative countries from 
various regions of the world to draft and co-sponsor a Cuba 
resolution. 
 
10. (C) Kozak said that the U.S. could agree to disagree with 
democratic countries on certain issues, but that it was much 
better to do so in advance of any votes on UNCHR resolutions. 
 The USG was seeking to establish an informal consultative 
mechanism on UNCHR resolutions by early 2004. 
 
11. (C) Cosenza and Medina Luna both said they thought the 
U.S. plan sounded like a good idea and a worthwhile 
initiative.  Cosenza said that the GOH would be pleased to 
work with the USG on improving human rights throughout the 
world. 
 
GOH Should be a Good Partner with USG on UNCHR Resolutions 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
12. (C) Comment:  Honduras is likely to be a good partner for 
the USG on UNCHR resolutions and the goal of improving the 
commission itself.  The GOH has been a steadfast ally at the 
UN on recent controversial resolutions, including the Iran 
human rights resolution and Middle East resolutions, and has 
been a co-sponsor of the UNCHR Cuba resolution in the past. 
The MFA\'s limited depth may hamper its ability to work with 
the USG on a technical level on drafting and seeking 
sponsorship of resolutions, but Post is confident that the 
GOH will do what it can to support the USG in this important 
initiative.  End Comment. 
 
13. (U) This cable has been cleared by DRL PDAS Kozak. 
Pierce 
"
"12611","12/9/2003 12:54","03TEGUCIGALPA2871","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT, EB/TPP/MTA AND IO 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, ETRD, EAID, EAGR, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: International Coffee Organization Director Visits 
Honduras 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Nestor Osorio, Executive Director of the 
International Coffee Organization (ICO), visited Honduras 
and spoke publicly about the goals of the ICO.  While he 
defended the interventionist role that the ICO has played in 
the past, he stressed the organization\'s current focus is on 
promotion of new markets, greater demand, and improved 
coffee quality.  He also spoke of his hope that the U.S. 
would rejoin the ICO, to promote greater political co- 
operation and dialogue concerning the ongoing coffee crisis. 
President Maduro\'s willingness to raise this issue in public 
fora and with the highest levels of the USG is winning him 
strong praise among members of the Honduran coffee sector. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  Nestor Osorio, a Colombian national who is Executive 
Director of the International Coffee Organization (ICO), 
visited Honduras on December 2 and 3.  After meetings with 
President Ricardo Maduro and the Minister of Agriculture, he 
hosted a three-hour open meeting with members of the 
Honduran coffee sector, which EconOff attended.  After 
several leading figures in the Honduran coffee industry gave 
opening remarks, Osorio spoke for about thirty minutes, then 
took questions from the audience, which also included coffee 
farmers and leaders of coffee co-operatives. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Osorio: Promotion, not Price Controls 
------------------------------------- 
 
3.  Osorio began with an overview of the history of the ICO, 
and gave a strong defense of the quota system that was in 
place until 1989.  However, he clearly stated on several 
occasions that the ICO will not return to such a system, and 
that instead, coffee-producing countries must find other 
means to address the current crisis.  In particular, he 
spoke of promotion of new markets (especially Russia and 
China), and of campaigns to increase coffee consumption in 
countries which already consume coffee, including Honduras. 
Said Osorio, \"We\'re not trying to interfere in the market, 
but we are trying to influence the behavior of consumers.\" 
 
4.  Osorio also spoke of training and technical assistance 
to coffee producers to improve the quality of their product, 
and briefly touched on diversification.  However, for 
Osorio, the purpose of diversification is not to have coffee 
farmers stop producing coffee, but rather to complement 
coffee farmers\' income.  Conspicuous by its absence was any 
suggestion that the world is producing too much coffee. 
Nowhere in his remarks did Osorio address the issue of 
global oversupply, except implicitly by his focus on the 
need for greater global demand. 
 
5.  Several of the Hondurans at the meeting appealed to the 
ICO to take a more activist role.  During the question and 
answer period, one Honduran coffee producer asked Osorio\'s 
opinion of the proposal that a portion of the world\'s coffee 
stocks be destroyed in order to boost the world price. 
Osorio declared flatly that it would never happen, as it 
would be completely impractical politically, and there would 
be no way to force the destruction of coffee stocks. 
Instead of such ideas, said Osorio, the ICO countries need 
to \"think creatively\" about ways to promote coffee in new 
markets. 
 
------------------- 
The U.S. in the ICO 
------------------- 
 
6.  Osorio also spoke of the possibility of the U.S. 
rejoining the ICO, saying that a major diplomatic effort has 
been underway since September on behalf of ICO members to 
encourage U.S. membership.  Several times he stated that 
\"the coffee crisis is not purely a commercial issue, but 
also a political issue,\" and that it would therefore be 
beneficial to have the U.S. \"sitting at the table\" to 
discuss ICO initiatives with the other member countries. 
 
7.  This theme was echoed by some of the Hondurans present. 
Eduardo Kafati, owner of Honduras\' largest coffee company, 
Liberal Party member of Congress and member of the National 
Coffee Council, spoke optimistically of the U.S. return to 
the ICO in his introductory remarks.  Privately, he 
acknowledged that of course U.S. membership would not 
magically solve any problems or have any immediate effect on 
world coffee prices.  However, he maintained that the U.S. 
would add considerable clout to the ICO, and would send a 
valuable signal that, as a major coffee consumer and the 
world\'s most powerful country, the U.S. takes the coffee 
crisis seriously and is willing to engage multilaterally in 
efforts to address the crisis. 
 
8.  Comment: Osorio was clear that the ICO\'s days as a price- 
fixing organization are over, even though it was apparent 
that many in the audience (and perhaps even Osorio himself) 
were sympathetic to the old methods of managed supply and 
price control. 
 
9.  Several Honduran speakers also mentioned the fact that 
President Maduro raised the issue of U.S. ICO membership 
with President Bush in May.  It was clear that many 
Hondurans regard Maduro as an international champion of this 
issue, and if the USG does indeed rejoin the ICO, there will 
be much congratulatory praise among Maduro\'s supporters here 
in Honduras.  End Comment. 
 
Pierce 
"
"12612","12/9/2003 13:55","03TEGUCIGALPA2872","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE245422","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002872 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
USDA FAS FOR ITP/AAD/GRUNENFELDER AND CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT STEVE HUETE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, ETRD, PGOV, HO, WTRO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS INCREASES TARIFFS ON DAIRY PRODUCTS 
 
REF: A) STATE 245422 
 
     B) TEGUCIGALPA 2049 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  In November, after several months of 
internal debate, the GOH increased tariffs on a range of 
dairy products.  The tariff increases apply to thirty 
specific products (8-digit tariff lines), going far beyond 
the initial focus on only nonfat powdered milk.  For most of 
the products, the tariff was raised from 15 percent to 35 
percent.  However, mindful of the risks of violating its WTO 
commitments, the GOH raised the tariffs only to the level of 
the bound rates that Honduras had previously agreed to under 
the WTO. 
 
2. (SBU) The tariff increases represent a victory for 
LACTHOSA, the Honduran dairy company that dominates the 
domestic market, and serves as an example of how influential 
businessmen can exercise control over markets in Honduras. 
Embassy has received one complaint to date from a U.S. ice 
cream manufacturer whose planned exports would be harmed by 
the tariff increase.  However, the GOH continues to believe 
that any specific concerns by U.S. exporters can be 
accommodated in the framework of the CAFTA negotiations. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
3. (U) On October 20, 2003, the GOH announced that it would 
raise tariffs on thirty specific dairy products (8-digit 
tariff lines), including milk and powdered milk, sour cream, 
yogurt, some cheeses, butter, and ice cream.  The new 
tariffs took effect in November, as soon as the Ministry of 
Finance and the Customs Agency were officially notified. 
(See paragraph 11 for a complete list of the old and new 
tariffs according to their 8-digit product codes.)  The 
announcement took the form of an agreement signed by 
LACTHOSA, a Honduran dairy company, and FENAGH, the Honduran 
National Federation of Cattle Farmers.  The agreement was 
also \"witnessed\" by the Minister of Trade and Industry, the 
Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of the Presidency, and 
the head of COHEP (a private sector umbrella organization). 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
4. (SBU) LACTHOSA, owned by Honduran businessman Chucry 
Kafie, owns the Sula brand of milk and other dairy products, 
and holds the license to distribute products of the Costa 
Rican brand Dos Pinos in Honduras as well.  LACTHOSA is the 
largest purchaser of milk in Honduras, and is also reported 
to be negotiating the purchase of its largest competitor, 
the LEYDE milk company, which would grant LACTHOSA near- 
monopsony buying power (95 percent of the market).  Earlier 
this year, LACTHOSA built a milk dehydration plant in 
Honduras, and began to lobby the Honduran government for 
greater tariff protection of powdered milk, in order to 
raise the cost of imported powdered milk and make the 
dehydration plant economically viable.  Specifically, in 
August, LACHTOSA requested a increase in the tariff from 15 
percent to 60 percent. (See reftels A and B). 
 
5. (SBU) Officials in the Honduran Trade and Agriculture 
ministries privately expressed their frustration with the 
situation, caught between high-level political instructions 
to provide some kind of support to Honduran milk producers, 
the demands of an influential businessman, and the knowledge 
that raising the tariff above the WTO bound rate (which is 
15 percent for most categories of powdered milk) would 
invite legal action from the WTO.  Furthermore, the tariff 
in effect for one major category of powdered milk (tariff 
line 0402.10.00) was already at the WTO bound rate of 15 
percent, meaning that any increase whatsoever would violate 
WTO commitments. 
 
6. (U) To increase the pressure on the GOH, and taking 
advantage of the seasonal surplus production of milk, 
LACTHOSA stopped purchasing milk from producers in early 
October at the prices upon which they had previously agreed. 
This price decrease led the producers\' organization FENAGH 
to bring further pressure on the GOH to increase import 
tariffs.  The result was the agreement of October 20th, in 
which the GOH announced the tariff increases and LACTHOSA 
promised to return to the previously set prices for milk 
producers.  By agreeing to raise tariffs on a whole range of 
products, not just nonfat powdered milk, the Ministry of 
Trade and Industry was able to keep the new tariffs within 
the WTO bound rates. 
7. (U) GOH officials have also stressed to EmbOffs that the 
new tariffs will apply only to countries with which Honduras 
has no other specific bilateral or multilateral trade 
agreements.  Hence, lower tariff rates are expected under 
CAFTA and FTAA, and are already in effect for Honduras\' 
Central American neighbors.  (Of course, lower CAFTA rates 
for U.S. exporters would only apply when CAFTA comes into 
effect - until then, U.S. exporters will presumably be 
subject to the higher tariffs.)  New Zealand is often cited 
as the country that exports the most powdered milk to 
Honduras. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Other Measures to Support the Dairy Industry 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) The October 20th agreement also lists several vague 
\"commitments\" that the GOH makes to support the national 
dairy industry.  For example, the government promises to 
take steps (presumably in addition to the tariff increase, 
but unspecified) to encourage importers of powdered milk to 
purchase nationally produced powdered milk instead.  The 
government also pledges to place the income derived from the 
increased tariffs into a fund, which will be used to 
implement mechanisms to increase milk consumption among 
children and to support measures to increase the 
competitiveness of milk production nationally.  (Officials 
at the Ministry of Agriculture have estimated that the 
tariff increases will generate roughly USD 6 million 
annually, which would amount to an 8 percent increase in the 
Ministry of Agriculture\'s annual budget.  Their methodology, 
however, assumes that imports continue at their pre-tariff 
levels, which is probably unrealistic; hence the real amount 
raised will likely be considerably lower.) 
 
9. (SBU) In addition, the government commits to \"establish 
guidelines for donations of milk, so that such donations 
will not create unfair competition with national 
production\".  While no details are given (and officials at 
the Ministry of Agriculture were unable to elaborate, saying 
that not even a draft of such guidelines exists at the 
moment), the statement is indicative of the political 
sensitivity of the dairy sector, and of concerns that 
donated goods may be disrupting local markets.  (Note: In 
November, USDA donated 500 metric tons of nonfat dry milk to 
the U.S. NGO Project Concern International (PCI), which is 
planning to sell the milk in Honduras and use the proceeds 
for HIV/AIDS programs.  PCI\'s initial import application for 
the donated milk was refused by the Ministry of Agriculture 
for reasons that were unclear; however, the NGO was later 
able to get the import application approved by working 
through an intermediary.  End note.) 
 
---------------------- 
Impact on U.S. Exports 
---------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) One U.S. company has already contacted the embassy 
for advocacy regarding this issue.  Allied Domestic QSR, 
parent company of Baskin-Robbins ice cream, signed a 
licensing agreement earlier in 2003 with a Honduran company, 
intending to introduce its products into Honduras by early 
2004.  However, their business plan was based upon the 15 
percent tariff then in effect, and it is not clear that they 
will be able to continue under the new tariff of 35 percent. 
When Econ officers raised this company\'s concern with GOH 
officials, the response was that specific U.S. exporters can 
be accommodated through lower tariff offers in the CAFTA 
negotiations. 
 
------------------------- 
Appendix: The new tariffs 
------------------------- 
 
11. (U) Below are the old and new tariff rates, in percent, 
for the thirty products affected.  In each case, the new 
tariff rate is equal to Honduras\' WTO bound rate. 
 
General         8-digit        Previous      New 
Category      Tariff line       Tariff      Tariff 
--------      -----------      --------     ------ 
Fluid Milk    0401.10.00          15          35 
              0401.20.00          15          35 
              0401.30.00          15          35 
 
Powdered      0402.21.11          15          20 
 Milk         0402.21.12          15          20 
              0402.21.21           5          15 
              0402.21.22           5          15 
              0402.29.00          15          25 
 
Evaporated    0402.91.10          10          20 
 Milk         0402.91.20          15          20 
              0402.91.90          15          20 
Condensed     0402.99.10          10          20 
 Milk         0402.99.90          15          20 
 
Yogurt and    0403.10.00          15          35 
 Cream        0403.90.10          15          35 
              0403.90.90          15          35 
              0404.90.00          10          35 
 
Butter        0405.10.00          15          20 
              0405.20.00          15          20 
              0405.90.10           5           8 
              0405.90.90          15          20 
 
Cheese        0406.10.00          15          20 
              0406.20.90          15          35 
              0406.30.00          15          35 
              0406.40.00          15          35 
              0406.90.20          15          35 
              0406.90.90          15          35 
 
Malt extract  1901.90.20           0          15 
 
Ice Cream     2105.00.00          15          35 
 
Milk drinks   2202.90.90          15          35 
 
Pierce 
"
"12639","12/10/2003 22:18","03TEGUCIGALPA2882","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002882 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, AND DRL/PHD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, PHUM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION PROSECUTOR IN SAN PEDRO SULA 
ARRESTED FOR ALLEGED LINKS TO ORGANIZED CRIME 
 
1. (U)  On December 1, Ruben Adolfo Reyes, a prosecutor in a 
unit designed to combat corruption in San Pedro Sula was 
arrested by Honduran authorities for his alleged links to 
organized crime. Reyes, who works for the \"Common Crime\" unit 
of the Public Ministry in San Pedro Sula, was arraigned on 
charges of falsifying public documents and grand theft auto. 
Amazingly, eleven months ago the court of justice in 
Tegucigalpa issued the arrest warrant for Reyes, but it was 
not until last week that they \"realized\" he had been working 
as a prosecutor in San Pedro Sula.  The arrest warrant for 
Reyes was issued on January 3, 2003, more than five months 
before he accepted the position of prosecutor on May 14. 
 
2. (U)  According to the press reports, in March of this 
year, when the selection process for the position as 
prosecutor began, the institution responsible for checking 
his criminal background, the Criminal Investigative Police 
(DGIC), relayed to the Public Ministry that Reyes had no 
previous criminal record.  (Note:  The Miami Herald reported 
that Reyes\' position was that of the chief of the government 
anti-corruption office in northern Honduras, which is not 
correct.  End Note.)  Officials are downplaying this 
situation as merely a lack of coordination among 
institutions, and classifying it as a \"processing error.\" 
 
3. (SBU) Comment:  This error made by DGIC at the minimum 
demonstrates gross negligence and, in the worst case 
scenario, suggests that someone within the organization 
knowingly turned a blind eye when performing Reyes\' 
background check.  It is possible that Reyes\' arrest is not 
merely a timely coincidence, but rather the result of Reyes 
agitating other corrupt officials that thought it better he 
be removed.  End Comment. 
Pierce 
"
"12640","12/10/2003 22:22","03TEGUCIGALPA2883","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA1497","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002883 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN POLICE SEIZE 636 KILOS OF COCAINE AND 
ARREST PARLACEN STAFF MEMBER FOR DEALING COCAINE 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1497 
 
1. Summary: On December 4, Honduran authorities seized 
approximately 636 kilos of cocaine from a truck in San Pedro 
Sula.  The seizure of the drugs was the result of 
well-executed police work, acting upon a tip that a large 
amount of drugs would soon be moving through the country. 
The drugs were discovered in a concealed compartment in the 
back of a truck.  This brings the total amount of cocaine 
seized this year in Honduras to approximately 5,700 kilos. 
Also, later that same day, Jorge Alberto Caceres, (a PARLACEN 
staff member) was arrested for distributing and selling 
cocaine in the parliament\'s offices. End Summary. 
 
2. On December 4, Honduran authorities seized approximately 
636 kilos of cocaine from a truck in San Pedro Sula.  Police 
initially stopped the vehicle because his windows were 
completely tinted (Note:  It is technically illegal in 
Honduras to have one\'s windows 100 percent tinted.  End 
note).  After approaching the vehicle, the police noticed 
that the \"very nervous\" driver possessed two cellular phones, 
a radio, and various sets of keys.  The driver, who claimed 
to be from Honduras, then presented \"suspicious\" 
identification, and when police asked him some very basic 
questions about Honduras, he was unable to answer.  The 
police then performed a complete search of the vehicle 
leading to the discovery of the concealed compartment. 
 
3. According to the Vice Minister of Security, Armando 
Calidonio, the seizure was the product of an operation led by 
the National Police, who acted upon general information they 
had received that a rather large shipment of drugs would soon 
transit the country.  It appears that the 636 kilos were only 
a part of the original shipment of approximately 1,200 kilos. 
 According to the driver, the remainder had been placed in 
another identical vehicle.  It is suspected that the other 
half of the shipment has already left the country. 
 
4. In an unrelated incident later that same day, police 
arrested Jorge Alberto Caceres, a staff member of the Central 
American Parliament (PARLACEN), for distributing and selling 
cocaine in the parliament\'s offices in Tegucigalpa.  Hours 
before Caceres\' arrest, four other men were arrested upon 
leaving PARLACEN, all of whom were found to be in possession 
of cocaine, presumably for the purpose of selling it. 
 
5. The sting operation at PARLACEN was part of a month-long 
investigation, in which government officials claim to have 
videotaped Caceres selling cocaine on various occasions.  A 
search of Caceres\' office came up empty, but authorities 
presume that the drugs are hidden somewhere else in the 
PARLACEN complex.  (Note: According to press reports, the 
director of PARLACEN only gave authorities permission to 
search Caceres\' office. End Note).  Caceres is the second 
Honduran at PARLACEN this year to be arrested on drug-related 
charges.  Earlier this year, Cesar Diaz was arrested in 
Nicaragua when police found seven kilos of heroin in his 
vehicle (reftel).  He was later convicted of trafficking and 
possession of heroin. 
 
6. These latest seizures bring the total amount of cocaine 
seized this year in Honduras to approximately 5,700 kilos. 
This is significantly more than has been seized in the last 
seven years combined. 
Pierce 
"
"12712","12/15/2003 18:58","03TEGUCIGALPA2900","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/TPP DCLUNE, AND 
IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR AGASH, BMAKENS, AND JWOLFE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, DECEMBER 11, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
on 12/11 entitled \"CAFTA: inequality and opportunities\". 
\"Nowadays, when economic and trade globalization keeps 
growing and generating excellent results for developed 
countries but increased impoverishment for developing 
countries, it\'s becoming very obvious that the ability to 
compete in the global free market is closely tied with the 
socioeconomic background of a country.\" 
 
\"In terms of CAFTA, Honduras which is one of the poorest 
countries in Central America, is clearly the one with less 
comparative advantages in this trade exchange that doesn\'t 
properly address the asymmetries between a powerful country 
and a poor region, which is being forced to open its market 
to products that are particularly sensitive, not only in 
economic, but also in social terms.  The CAFTA negotiations 
were an obligation for Central America, to avoid being left 
without any chances of achieving economic growth.\" 
 
\"We\'re compelled to be part of the global economy, and our 
negotiators should defend the interests of all Hondurans 
because if we\'re able to negotiate a positive agreement 
with the richest country of the world, and we work hard to 
improve the quality and quantity of our production, we\'ll 
have a better chance of not only surviving, but getting 
some benefits from the whole globalization process.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 12/11 entitled \"An excellent CAFTA\".  \"The lead U.S. 
negotiator in the CAFTA negotiations has said that by next 
week the U.S. expects to end the negotiations to establish 
a free trade agreement with five Central American countries 
which already enjoy some trade advantages that make that 
75% of their products already enter the U.S. free of 
tariffs.\" 
 
\"She added that she believes all parts will benefit from 
this excellent agreement, starting from the fact that these 
countries already sell to the U.S. about 75% of all their 
production, thanks to the benefits granted by the Caribbean 
Basin Initiative.\" 
 
\"On the other hand, the Honduran Catholic church has 
demanded to postpone the signing of CAFTA, because it will 
increase poverty and will weaken our food security.  It 
will also eradicate the benefits that workers have achieved 
for many years, and create more taxes.\" 
 
\"Cardinal Oscar Andres Rodriguez himself has demanded to 
promote a broader discussion on the issues that are being 
negotiated.  He added that the access to international 
markets may be a necessary condition to fight poverty, but 
it\'s not enough by itself.  The challenge of combating 
poverty also requires coherent social policies, and a 
better distribution of wealth within the society.\" 
 
\"It\'s clear that the secretive manner in which the CAFTA 
negotiations have been managed has not permitted many 
sectors with important interests in it to be well informed, 
therefore we can expect to have more demonstrations and 
protests against this agreement.  Nobody can support 
something that they see as detrimental when they haven\'t 
been convinced of its benefits.\" 
 
3. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 12/11 entitled \"CAFTA\".  \"A few days before the conclusion 
of the negotiations of the CAFTA agreement, the Catholic 
church has released its views about this issue, based on 
its own research of the agreement\'s economic and commercial 
implications.  The Church\'s main proposal, as expressed by 
the Cardinal Oscar Andres Rodriguez, is to postpone the 
signing of CAFTA until it establishes all the necessary 
conditions to enable the agreement to be beneficial for all 
parts.  The document affirms that if the Central American 
countries sign this agreement as it is now, it will bring 
more poverty for all Central Americans.\" 
 
\"The proposals of the Catholic church correspond to the 
views of some sectors, including some private sector and 
workers organizations.  However, they have been released at 
a time when the negotiations have nearly reached their end, 
although they\'re important to support the latest 
negotiations, particularly those related to the U.S. policy 
to subsidize its agricultural production.\" 
 
\"The key point will be the existence of economic and 
financial policies to promote investment, especially for 
the micro, small and medium enterprises which are the 
backbone of our development.  However, these policies don\'t 
exist yet, and they should be part of a broad framework of 
a permanent political, economic and social development.\" 
 
PALMER 
"
"12739","12/16/2003 20:34","03TEGUCIGALPA2912","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002912 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INR/B, EUR/WE, AND DRL/IRF 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT AND EB/TPP/MTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI, PHUM, PGOV, ETRD, PINR, KIRF, HO 
SUBJECT: CARDINAL RODRIGUEZ CELEBRATES 25 YEARS OF SERVICE; 
DELIVERS SPEECH CRITICAL OF FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS 
 
 
1.  On December 8, Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez celebrated 25 
years as a bishop (he has 33 years total in the priesthood). 
For his service, the Government of Honduras awarded him the 
\"Great Extraordinary Cross\", considered to be the highest 
award given by the GOH.  At two separate ceremonies, attended 
by high-level GOH officials, prominent businessmen and 
members of civil society, the Cardinal used the opportunity 
to promote his social and political philosophy.  Considered a 
strong candidate for the papacy, Cardinal Rodriguez possesses 
great clout in Honduras, and adroitly used his anniversary to 
address Honduran society on a wide scope of issues facing 
both the country and the world. 
 
2.  The controversial issue of globalization provided the 
framework for the Cardinal\'s main speech before the National 
Congress, which touched on topics such as the socioeconomic 
disparity among classes and social marginalization.  For the 
most part, his speech covered macro issues confronting the 
world, and rarely did he choose to address the specific 
concerns of Honduras.  However, on two such occasions, the 
Cardinal took ideological jabs at both the GOH and the United 
States.  The Cardinal expressed that he would like to see the 
National Congress grant explicit authority to the Supreme 
Court to interpret the Honduran Constitution, a past 
political hot potato.  He also more fervently attacked the 
FTAA and CAFTA, explicitly calling on the Congress to delay 
consideration of the agreement.  According to statistics 
presented by Cardinal Rodriguez, United States farm subsidies 
would cause 500,000 Hondurans employed in the agricultural 
sector to lose their jobs under CAFTA.  This, in effect, 
would cause a wave of migration to the cities, placing 
additional strain on public services and leading to higher 
levels of crime, he claimed.  Cardinal Rodriguez said he 
would like to see these free trade agreements postponed until 
the agricultural industry becomes more efficient and the 
United States changes its policy on farm subsidies. 
 
3.  COMMENT:  Cardinal Rodriguez, who has three PhDs and 
speaks eight languages, possesses a great philosophical 
acumen that often times strays from the pragmatic realities 
of society.  By nature of his position as the leader of the 
Catholic Church in Honduras, he appears to view the world as 
what it can become.  It is therefore evident in his public 
appearances that he is not an incrementalist and can at times 
vigorously advocate for the causes of social justice and 
economic equality.  As such, the reach of his political 
philosophy often exceeds the ability of Honduran society to 
grasp it.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"12761","12/17/2003 14:16","03TEGUCIGALPA2915","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA2034|03TEGUCIGALPA2662|03TEGUCIGALPA2792","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, EB/IFD/OMA, AND DS 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR ETHAN ILZETZKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EFIN, EAID, PGOV, SOCI, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN TEACHERS UNIONS OPPOSED TO ANY REDUCTIONS 
IN SALARIES/BENEFITS TO FULFILL DEAL WITH IMF 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2792 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2662 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2034 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Honduran teachers\' unions are a key player 
in the ongoing effort by the GOH to complete the domestic 
requirements of a deal with the IMF (ref A).  The five 
teachers\' unions, three for primary teachers and two for 
secondary teachers, strongly oppose a proposed civil service 
law (ref C) that would make any changes in the cherished 
teachers\' law that has been the subject of much debate due to 
its salary and benefits provisions.  The teachers\' unions 
argue strongly that teachers\' pay and benefits are not the 
cause of the weak fiscal situation of the GOH, although they 
do acknowledge that the sheer number of teachers (almost 
45,000) made the overall impact on public sector salaries 
significant.  The two secondary teachers\' unions in 
particular are prolific protesters, and are unlikely to back 
down in the face of GOH pressure to reach a compromise. 
However, Post continues to believe (ref B) that Congress will 
pass necessary legislation, encompassing several 
controversial issues, to allow the GOH to complete its side 
of the IMF deal.  In addition, Post believes that any 
resulting protests will not destabilize the government.  End 
Summary. 
 
Honduran Teachers\' Unions - a Thumbnail Sketch 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2. (U) Over the last couple of months LabAtt has spoken with 
representatives of all five teachers\' unions in Honduras 
(three primary teachers\' unions and two secondary teachers\' 
unions).  The five are: 
 
COPEMH - College of Secondary School Teachers of Honduras 
- part of the United Confederation of Honduran Workers) CUTH 
labor confederation, but not currently active in the 
confederation 
- claim 15,000 members (secondary teachers) 
- led by Eulogio Chavez (being replaced in January by Nelson 
Calix) 
 
COLPROSUMAH - Honduran Professional Teachers College 
- part of the CUTH confederation 
- claim 22-25,000 members (mostly primary teachers) 
- led by Rafael Izaguirre 
 
COPRUMH - Honduran Professional Association Teachers Union 
- not affiliated with one of the three labor confederations 
- claim 4,500 members (mostly secondary teachers) 
- led by Angel Martinez 
 
PRICPHMA - First Professional Honduran College of Teachers 
- part of the General Workers Central (CGT) confederation 
- claim 18,000 members (primary teachers) 
- led by Alejandro Ventura 
 
SINPRODOH 
- part of the CGT confederation 
- claim 7-8,000 members (primary teachers) 
- led by Fanny Alvarez 
 
Note:  Primary teachers require degrees from a \"normal\" 
school (a teachers\' high school).  Secondary teachers must 
have university degrees, and some have master\'s degrees.  The 
Ministry of Education states that there are approximately 
35,529 public primary teachers (including pre-school 
teachers) and approximately 8,970 public secondary teachers. 
There are 130,980 public sector employees, including 
municipal and parastatal employees, which is 5.8 percent of 
all formal sector employees.  End Note. 
 
2002 Agreement and the Teachers\' Law 
------------------------------------ 
 
3. (U) COLPROSUMAH, PRICPHMA, and SINPRODOH, as well as the 
Pedagogical College, all signed the July 5, 2002 agreement 
with the GOH that lays out terms for applying the teachers\' 
law in 2002-2005 (signed by Minister of Education Carlos 
Molina, Minister of Labor German Leitzelar, and then-advisor 
to President Maduro, Cesar Batres).  The GOH applied the 
terms of the agreement to the other two teachers\' unions that 
did not sign, COPEMH and COPRUMH.  COLPROSUMAH said that they 
believe that teachers made concessions in this agreement and 
are loath to make more.  SINPRODOH claimed the GOH is not 
even living up to its side of the 2002 agreement, and COPEMH 
said that the GOH is not fully abiding by the terms of the 
teachers\' law.  All the unions criticized the GOH as not 
being serious about investing in quality education. 
 
4. (U) All of the teachers\' unions are opposed to any changes 
by the GOH that would alter the teachers\' law (1997) that 
spells out pay and benefits for primary and secondary public 
teachers.  (Note:  Most teachers\' unions distanced themselves 
from the doctor\'s law that sets pay and benefits for doctors, 
although COPEMH pointedly said they support that law as well 
out of solidarity.  The doctors are represented by a 
professional association that is not affiliated with one of 
the three labor confederations.  End Note.)  Any new general 
\"Law of Salary Equity\" for public sector workers under 
consideration by the GOH must not negatively affect the 
teachers\' law, said PRICPHMA. 
 
5. (U) Specifically, the teachers oppose getting rid of: 
seniority pay (automatic pay increases every few years), 
academic qualification bonus (saying it is a key factor in 
motivating teachers to improve their professional expertise 
by seeking a higher degree), or any change in: hourly pay, 
pension benefits, or the income tax exemption for teachers 
(even though most teachers make under the minimum income tax 
threshold according to COPEMH). 
 
6. (U) All the unions noted that even the highest paid 
teacher does not make much when compared to doctors, but 
agreed that the sheer number of teachers (almost 45,000) made 
the overall impact on public sector salaries significant. 
(Note:  In comparison, according to the Ministry of Health, 
there are only 1,790 public sector doctors, 911 professional 
nurses, and 5,369 \"auxiliary nurses,\" as of December.  End 
Note.)  SINPRODOH claimed that only Nicaraguan teachers are 
paid less than Honduran teachers in Central America.  The 
teachers\' unions argue strongly that teachers pay and 
benefits are not the cause of the weak fiscal situation of 
the GOH.  Teachers\' unions point to the weak economy, 
insufficient tax receipts, bailouts for failed banks, loan 
forgiveness to farmers, tax breaks for certain businesses, 
pay to political appointees, and corruption as the causes of 
the GOH\'s problems.  The GOH is not concerned with the poor 
or working class, but rather the rich and powerful, claimed 
the unions. 
 
Teachers a Regular Participant in Anti-GOH Protests 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
7. (SBU) The secondary teachers are the more radical of the 
teachers\' unions, having refused to sign the 2002 agreement 
with the GOH and taking part in numerous protests, some of 
which have included Molotov cocktails, vandalism, and the 
desecration of a U.S. flag outside the Embassy in one 
instance.  COPEMH is closely linked with the Popular Block, a 
leftist association of unions, NGOs, a leftist political 
party (UD) and protesters, led by Carlos H. Reyes.  As such, 
COPEMH, by its own admission, has been a constant adversary 
of the GOH on the issue of teachers pay and benefits.  COPEMH 
is also a member of the National Coordinator of Popular 
Resistance, a newer protest group that fiercely opposes 
changes to the teachers\' law.  Any significant action by 
Congress that teachers interpret as reforming or revoking 
aspects of the teachers\' law is likely to bring teachers out 
on the streets in large numbers to protest. 
 
8. (U) The primary teachers\' unions are more mainstream: 
COLPROSUMAH explicitly told LabAtt that they are not 
interested in social chaos and SINPRODOH said they understand 
that an IMF agreement is needed. 
 
9. (U) The teachers\' unions criticized the GOH for 
threatening them and not negotiating in good faith.  None of 
the unions had met with the IMF to discuss these issues, but 
the CGT and CUTH labor confederations, in coordination with 
the Federation of Teachers Organizations of Honduras (FOMH) 
and the Permanent Forum of Civil Society Organizations 
(FPOSC), did publish a large ad in newspapers during the 
recent visit of the IMF team laying out their objections to a 
prospective GOH deal with the IMF. 
 
Teachers a Powerful Interest Group 
---------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Comment:  In addition to the almost 45,000 current 
public teachers and the numerous retired teachers, there are 
many Hondurans who either (a) studied to be a teacher but 
hold a different type of job, or (b) have friends/family that 
are teachers.  The teachers\' law was passed in 1997 with 
bipartisan (National and Liberal Party) support.  This means 
that any new legislation viewed as detrimental to the 
teachers will both be politically painful to get through 
Congress and could find negative resonance in a significant 
part of the population, much more so than with the doctors. 
Teachers\' unions, which have not met with the IMF, warn that 
the Fund neglects this potential negative reaction at its own 
peril.  However, Post continues to believe (ref B) that 
Congress will pass the necessary legislation (on civil 
service salaries and other issues) to allow the GOH to 
complete its side of the IMF deal, and that any resulting 
protests are unlikely to destabilize the GOH.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"12762","12/17/2003 14:41","03TEGUCIGALPA2916","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002916 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, SNAR, KJUS, EFIN, ETRD, HO 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA HOSTS MINI-DUBLIN GROUP 
MEETING; USG ONLY SIGNIFICANT DONOR FOR COUNTERNARCOTICS 
 
 
1. Summary. On December 5, Post hosted a meeting of the 
Tegucigalpa Mini-Dublin Group to coordinate with 
participating countries on counternarcotics assistance 
programs and the overall effectiveness of such programs. 
Along with the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), 
countries that participated in the meeting include: the 
United States; United Kingdom; Japan; France; Spain; Sweden; 
Germany; and Italy.  Discussion among participants provided a 
comprehensive examination of trends,threats, and 
counternarcotic assistance to Honduras.  End Summary. 
 
2. Post hosted a meeting December 5 of the Tegucigalpa 
Mini-Dublin Group to coordinate with participating countries 
on counternarcotics assistance programs and the overall 
effectiveness of such programs.  The meeting began with 
members of the Embassy briefing the other countries. 
According to DEA, the most common and preferred method of 
transporting illegal narcotics is maritime go-fasts coming 
from Colombia (San Andreas Island), refueling off the 
Caribbean coast of Honduras, and then continuing to Mexico 
and the United States.  Using small planes to transport 
narcotics is the second most common manner that drugs pass 
through Honduras destined for the United States.  Planes land 
in Gracias a Dios, a remote northeasterm region of Honduras, 
using clandestine runways.  The least preferable method of 
transportation is by land, via the Pan-American highway, 
which is estimated to be used only 10 percent of the time, 
compared to air at 30 percent, and maritime at 60 percent. 
 
 
3. Representatives from countries attending the meeting were 
interested in a wide range of issues, including:  the 
systematic process of shipping the drugs from their point of 
origin to the final destination; who benefits from the 
transit process, and how much; the trend in the number of 
shipments each year; and whether or not authorities\' efforts 
were impacting the market price of drugs.  Methods of 
transportation, the economics of the drug trade, corruption, 
and the correlation between crime and drugs were other topics 
discussed at the meeting. 
 
4. The support offered by participating countries varies 
greatly.  The U.S. is by far the greatest provider of both 
direct and financial counternarcotics assistance to the 
Government of Honduras (GOH).  Currently, the U.S. has a USD 
2,750,000 assistance program for counternarcotics and police 
assistance aimed at helping the Ministry of Public Security, 
particularly the Frontier Police, to aid the fight against 
drug trafficking and to improve the police overall.  The U.S. 
also has a USD 250,000 program to help the GOH more 
effectively investigate money laundering.  For the past year, 
the U.S. has been helping the Organized Crime Unit of the 
Public Ministry, the Frontier Police, and the Financial 
Information Unit. The new Port Security Initiative will help 
better control trafficking in persons, terrorism, money 
laundering, and other transnational crimes. 
 
5. At the present time, no other participating Mini-Dublin 
country has any special programs to help combat 
narco-trafficking.  Spain primarily focuses on strengthening 
government organizations, socio-economic issues, and reducing 
the demand for drugs.  France does not work directly in the 
war against drugs in Honduras, but offers some assistance to 
police.  Japan provides minor technical assistance.  The 
United Kingdom has two agents in Panama that work closely 
with Honduran police, although their focus is Jamaica, which 
serves as the transit point for most drugs entering Western 
Europe.  The UNDP has an agreement with the European Union to 
identify and prevent trade in precursor chemicals, for which 
the UNDP spends ten million euros annually in the entire 
Central Amercian region.  Sweden provides funding to the 
forensics department of the Public Ministry, but is delaying 
any further aid until the next Attorney General is selected 
early next year.  Germany has donated communications 
equipment and computers to the police and is currently 
considering assisting the K-9 unit.  Italy provides no direct 
assistance to the GOH, but does provide some cooperation 
within the region. 
Palmer 
"
"12775","12/17/2003 22:31","03TEGUCIGALPA2929","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, MOPS, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, DECEMBER 15, 2003 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 12/13 entitled \"Reward\".  \"The distribution of the 
lucrative Iraq reconstruction contracts, as were decided by 
Washington, to be allocated only to those countries that 
sent soldiers to fight Saddam Hussein has reopened the 
wounds caused by the war.  Moreover, this decision came at a 
time when a U.S. emissary was sent to Europe to obtain a 
reduction of the Iraqi debt.\" 
 
\"The decision to give the large booty of 18 billion dollars 
in contracts was justified by President Bush by saying that 
\"the war was mostly financed by the money of the U.S. 
contributors and the sacrifice of the coalition soldiers and 
for that reason they deserve priority\".\" 
 
\"The United Nations Secretary General, Kofi Annan, asked 
Washington to reverse its decision about the contracts. 
Nevertheless, President Bush has been emphatic, repeating 
that, \"the costs in dollars reflect the fact that the 
American soldiers and other soldiers risked their lives in 
Iraq\".\" 
 
\"More than 60 countries will be eligible to compete for the 
contracts. and although it was not specifically mentioned by 
the Pentagon, we suppose that Honduras is also eligible.\" 
 
\"The old saying \"work for what you want\" says it well.  This 
is our opportunity.  If we couldn\'t send any unemployed 
Hondurans to work in Iraq, now whoever wants to participate 
in the bidding process for Iraqi reconstruction contracts 
has to wait in line just as those Hondurans did in the hopes 
of going to Iraq for work.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"12807","12/18/2003 15:47","03TEGUCIGALPA2932","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE310954","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 002932 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/MST AND WHA/CEN 
PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR GBLUE 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT MLARSEN AND AGATT SHUETE 
SAN SALVADOR FOR DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EFIN, HO 
SUBJECT:  HONDURAS NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE REPORT 2004 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 310954 
 
1.  The text of the 2004 National Trade Estimate report for 
Honduras follows. 
 
------------- 
TRADE SUMMARY 
------------- 
 
2.  (Note that the following paragraph is to be updated by 
Washington with USDOC statistics.)  In 2002, the U.S. trade 
deficit with Honduras was $699 million, an increase of $10 
million (1.5 percent) from the U.S. trade deficit of $689 million 
in 2001.  U.S. goods exports to Honduras were $2.6 billion, an 
increase of $128 million (5.3 percent) from the level of U.S. 
exports to Honduras in 2001.  Corresponding U.S. imports from 
Honduras were $3.3 billion in 2002, an increase of $138 million 
(4.4 percent) from the level of imports in 2001.  Honduras is 
currently the United States\' 35th largest export market. 
 
3.  (We understand that this paragraph will also be updated with 
USDOC statistics.)  The stock of U.S. foreign direct investment 
(FDI) in Honduras in 2001 amounted to $249 million, down from 
$257 million in 2000.  U.S. FDI is concentrated largely in the 
manufacturing sector. 
 
------------------- 
(A) IMPORT POLICIES 
------------------- 
 
4.  In 1995, Honduras and other members of the Central American 
Common Market (CACM) agreed to reduce and harmonize the common 
external tariff (CET) at zero to 15 percent, but allowed each 
member to determine the timing of the reductions.  In 2002, 
Honduras lifted tariffs on capital goods and raw materials 
(including those used for manufacture of pharmaceutical products 
and agricultural inputs) for those imports produced outside of 
the CACM.  Additionally, tariffs on most non-CACM intermediate 
goods were reduced to 10 percent, and final goods were reduced to 
15 percent.  Per the tax reform law of 2002, import tariffs on 
cars were reduced from 40 percent to 15 percent ad valorem, and a 
tariff based on engine size was eliminated. 
 
5.  Partially in response to remaining differences in Central 
American external tariffs, in October 2003 the GOH increased 
tariffs on thirty specific dairy products, including milk and 
powdered milk, sour cream, yogurt, some cheeses, butter, and ice 
cream.  For most of the products, the tariff was raised from 15 
percent to 35 percent, the maximum allowable tariff rate under 
Honduras\' WTO commitments. 
 
6.  Honduras implements a price band mechanism for imports of 
yellow corn, sorghum, and corn meal.  This price band is 
calculated from a time series of international prices on a given 
product for the prior 60 months.  The 15 highest and lowest 
monthly prices are eliminated, with the remaining highs and lows 
establishing the price band.  Imports entering with values within 
the defined band are assessed a 20 percent tariff.  Imports 
entering with prices above the band are assessed duties at a rate 
lower than 20 percent, according to a predetermined schedule; 
those imports priced below the band are assessed a tariff higher 
than 20 percent.  The government also maintains a seasonal 
restriction on the price band.  From September to January the 
minimum allowable duty is 20 percent for corn and 15 percent for 
cornmeal and sorghum.  From February to August, duties are 
allowed to fluctuate according to the predetermined duty tables 
for each commodity.  This seasonal restriction has been added to 
provide additional protection to local grain farmers during the 
main harvest season. 
 
7.  In addition to the above, the Government of Honduras, farm 
groups, and importers have agreed to a quasi-tariff-rate quota in 
which the price band remains in effect until local grain supplies 
are exhausted, after which a one percent duty is applied to 
imports.  A similar quasi-tariff-rate quota system is in place 
for imports of rice.  The United States has strongly opposed the 
Honduran policies on these grains as limiting access for U.S. 
agricultural products, and revision or elimination of the system 
is a possible outcome of the U.S.-Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA), currently under negotiation. 
 
8.  Honduras implemented the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement in 
February 2000.  WTO records show that Honduras has not yet 
notified its legislation nor the Customs Valuation Checklist to 
the WTO Committee on Customs Valuation. 
 
9.  Under the tax reform law of June 2002, cars older than seven 
years and passenger buses older than ten years are not allowed to 
enter Honduras, with the exception of ambulances. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
(B) STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING AND CERTIFICATION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
10.  Honduras maintains a ban on some U.S. raw poultry imports, 
based on sanitary and phyto-sanitary concerns.  Local importers 
charge that Honduran officials are using these sanitary and phyto- 
sanitary measures to block U.S. imports to protect local 
producers and, in some cases, to promote diversion of trade to 
other Central American countries.  USDA FAS estimates that if 
Honduran restrictions on U.S. raw poultry and poultry parts were 
lifted, U.S. producers could export an additional $10 million of 
poultry products to Honduras, annually. 
 
11.  The Honduran government has also cited sanitary and phyto- 
sanitary concerns in periodically denying applications for the 
importation of pork and dairy products.  Application of sanitary 
and phyto-sanitary requirements is lacking in transparency, and 
changes in sanitary and phyto-sanitary requirements are seldom 
reported to the WTO as required.  This results in uncertainty 
among U.S. suppliers and Honduran importers.  In both 2002 and 
2003, Honduran importers had initial difficulty in receiving 
permission to import turkey into Honduras, though in each year 
permission was eventually granted.  Administration of sanitary 
and phyto-sanitary systems is under discussion in the CAFTA 
negotiations. 
 
12.  The Honduran government requires that sanitary permits be 
obtained for all imported foodstuffs.  These permits are granted 
by the Ministry of Health.  During 2003, a U.S. supermarket chain 
complained that delays in the process of granting these permits 
were hampering the company\'s ability to import its products into 
Honduras.  The Ministry of Health agreed to accelerate the 
process by focusing most closely on products considered to be at 
high risk for sanitary concerns (such as raw meat) and 
simplifying the procedures for low-risk products. 
 
13.  Labeling requirements for food products are very specific. 
Honduran law requires that all processed food products be labeled 
in Spanish and registered with the Division of Food Control (DFC) 
of the Ministry of Public Health.  In general, labels of all 
consumer-oriented products are required to include the following 
basic information: name of the product, name of the manufacturer, 
country of origin, sales price, expiration date, content, list of 
ingredients and any applicable health warnings. 
 
-------------------------- 
(C) GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
-------------------------- 
 
14.  Under the Government Contracting Law which entered into 
force in October 2001, all public works contracts over one 
million lempiras ($55,690) must be offered through public 
competitive bidding.  Public contracts between 500,000 and one 
million lempiras ($27,845 and $55,690) can be offered through a 
private bid, and contracts less than 500,000 lempiras ($27,845) 
are exempt from the bidding process.  To participate in public 
tenders, foreign firms are required to act through a local agent. 
Local agency firms must be at least 51 percent Honduran-owned, 
unless the procurement is linked to a national emergency. 
Government purchases and project acquisitions are generally 
exempted from import duties. 
 
15.  While foreign firms are granted national treatment for 
public bids, some still complain of mismanagement and lack of 
transparency in the bid processes.  The GOH has tried to improve 
transparency and fairness in government procurement by hiring the 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) to manage procurement 
for an increasing number of ministries and state-owned entities. 
 
16.  Honduras is not a signatory of the WTO Government 
Procurement Agreement.  In the past, the United States has raised 
concerns regarding Honduras\' lack of cooperation in the WTO 
Working Party on Transparency in Government Procurement.  In 
recognition of increased cooperation in the WTO Working Party on 
Transparency in Government Procurement, the United States 
reinstated a waiver of \"Buy America Act\" provisions in 2002, 
which had previously been suspended for Honduras. 
 
-------------------- 
(D) EXPORT SUBSIDIES 
-------------------- 
 
17.  Honduras does not have export subsidies or export-promotion 
schemes other than the tax exemptions given to firms in free 
trade zones.  A company located in a free trade zone, industrial 
park or export processing zone is exempt from paying import 
duties on goods and capital equipment, charges, surcharges, 
selective consumption taxes, and sales taxes.  In addition, the 
production and sale of goods within these areas are exempt from 
Honduran municipal taxes for 10 years, and from federal taxes for 
20 years. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
(E) LACK OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
18.  Honduras has largely complied with the WTO Agreement on 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs), 
through legal revisions enacted in December 1999.  To be in full 
TRIPs compliance, the Honduran Congress must still pass laws 
governing the design of integrated circuits and plant variety 
protection.  Current expectations are that no action will be 
taken on these two laws until early 2004, but that the laws will 
then be included in a larger bill that is likely to be approved 
without controversy. 
 
19.  Honduras became a member of the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) in 1983.  Honduras and the U.S. initialed a 
Bilateral Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Agreement in March 
1999, but both parties decided to fold the provisions into CAFTA, 
currently under negotiation.  Honduras became party to the WIPO 
Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Performances and Phonogram 
Treaty (WPPT) in May 2002. 
 
Copyrights 
 
20.  Honduras\' copyright law, updated in 1999, added more than 
twenty different criminal offenses related to copyright 
infringement and established fines and suspension of services 
that can be levied against offenders.  However, the piracy of 
books, sound and video recordings, compact discs, and computer 
software is still widespread in Honduras, due in part to limited 
enforcement capacity.  U.S. companies are concerned that recent 
attempts to prosecute computer software infringement cases have 
been met with resistance by officials in the Ministry of Industry 
and Trade\'s IPR Division and the Attorney General\'s office. 
 
21.  U.S. software companies are currently focusing on 
legalization of pirated software used in some ministries and 
state-owned entities.  A major U.S. software company estimates 
that it loses $5 million annually due to software piracy in 
Honduras. 
 
Patents and Trademarks 
 
22.  Honduras ratified the Paris Convention for the Protection of 
Industrial Property in 1994.  The Honduran Congress enacted a 
1999 Law of Industrial Property to provide improved protection 
for both trademarks and patents.  To be protected under Honduran 
law, patents and trademarks must be registered with the Ministry 
of Industry and Trade. 
 
23.  Recent modifications to the Patent Law of 1993 include 
patent protection for pharmaceuticals, and extend the term of 
protection for a patent from seventeen to twenty years from the 
date of filing to meet WTO standards.  The term for cancellation 
of a trademark for lack of use has been extended from one year to 
three years.  Trademarks are valid for up to ten years from the 
registration date.  The illegitimate registration of well-known 
trademarks has, however, been a persistent problem in Honduras. 
 
24.  In 2002, a U.S. pharmaceutical company complained that the 
Ministry of Health, in approving a competing company\'s 
pharmaceutical product, did not respect their data exclusivity 
rights as guaranteed under article 39 of the WTO TRIPs agreement 
and article 77 of Honduras\' Industrial Property Law.  (Honduran 
law provides five-year exclusive use of data provided in support 
of registering pharmaceutical products.)  The Ministry of Health 
approved the competing pharmaceutical product despite 
communication from Honduras\' IPR Division that the U.S. company\'s 
research and data were protected under Honduran law.  The U.S. 
company argues that in order for the competing product to be 
legally registered with the Ministry of Health, the company needs 
to provide the research and data to support their application. 
When a similar situation arose with a separate application in 
2003, the Ministry of Health recognized that the competing 
company\'s product was a copy of the U.S. company\'s protected 
product, and did not approve the competing company\'s application. 
However, the GOH\'s uneven history in protection of intellectual 
property rights leads to uncertainty for U.S. investors. 
 
---------------------- 
(F)  SERVICES BARRIERS 
---------------------- 
 
25.  Special government authorization must be obtained to invest 
in the tourism, hotel and banking services sectors.  Foreigners 
may not hold a seat in Honduras\' two stock exchanges or provide 
direct brokerage services in these exchanges.  Honduran 
professional bodies heavily regulate the licensing of foreigners 
to practice law, medicine, engineering, accounting, and other 
professions. 
 
------------------------ 
(G)  INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
------------------------ 
26.  The Constitution of Honduras requires that all foreign 
investment complement, but not substitute for, national 
investment.  Companies that wish to take advantage of the 
Agrarian Reform Law, engage in commercial fishing, forestry, or 
local transportation activities, serve as representatives, 
agents, or distributors for foreign companies, or operate radio 
and television stations must be majority-owned by Hondurans. 
Government authorization is required for both foreign and 
domestic investors in basic health services, telecommunications, 
generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity, air 
transport, and mining. 
 
27.  In addition, special government authorization is required 
for foreign investment in the following sectors: forestry, 
telecommunications, basic health, air transport, fishing and 
aquaculture, mining, insurance and financial services, private 
education, and those agricultural and agro-industrial activities 
exceeding land tenancy limits established by law. 
 
28.  Small-scale commercial and industrial activities with an 
investment less than 150,000 lempiras (about $8,353), excluding 
land, buildings, and vehicles, are reserved exclusively for 
Honduran nationals.  For all investments, at least 90 percent of 
a company\'s labor force must be Honduran, and at least 80 percent 
of the payroll must be paid to Hondurans. 
 
29.  Foreign ownership of land within 40 km of the coastlines and 
national boundaries is constitutionally prohibited, though 
tourism investment laws allow for certain exceptions.  Inadequate 
land title procedures have led to numerous investment disputes 
involving U.S.-citizen landowners. 
 
30.  In 2001, a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between the 
U.S. and Honduras entered into force.  The treaty provides for 
equal protection under the law for U.S. investors in Honduras and 
permits expropriation only in accordance with international legal 
standards and accompanied by adequate compensation.  U.S. 
investors in Honduras also have the right to submit an investment 
dispute to binding international arbitration. 
 
31.  Honduras has taken the following limited exceptions to its 
BIT national treatment obligation: properties on cays, reefs, 
rocks, shoals or sandbanks or on islands or on any property 
located within 40 km of the coastline or land borders of 
Honduras, small scale industry and commerce with total invested 
capital of no more than $40,000 or its equivalent in national 
currency, ownership, operation and editorial control of broadcast 
radio and television, ownership, operation and editorial control 
of general interest periodicals and newspapers published in 
Honduras. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
(H)  LACK OF GOVERNMENT ACTION AGAINST ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES 
     OF STATE-OWNED AND PRIVATE FIRMS THAT RESTRICT THE SALE OF 
     U.S. PRODUCTS AND SERVICES 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
32.  U.S. companies occasionally encounter anti-competitive 
practices by private firms, especially in the case of large 
investments in sectors with one or two national players.  The GOH 
hopes to address these problems more systematically with the 
drafting and approval in 2004 of a Competition Law.  The World 
Bank is assisting with this project. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
(I)  TRADE RESTRICTIONS AFFECTING ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
33.  There is currently no domestic legislation concerning 
electronic commerce in Honduras.  The Electronic Commerce System 
Directorate (DISELCO), a project of the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Tegucigalpa (CCIT), the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Cortes (CCIC) and the National Industry Association 
(ANDI), is the institution in charge of establishing the policies 
and norms pertaining to electronic commerce in Honduras. 
 
34.  Electronic commerce is still not developed in the Honduran 
market.  Although improving, the country still lacks adequate 
basic telecom infrastructure and internet bandwidth capacity to 
effectively support significant electronic commerce at the 
present time.  Except for web page promotional material, 
companies are not yet utilizing computer sales as an additional 
distribution channel in Honduras.  Twenty-five private ISPs 
compete for an estimated 30,000 Internet users.  Internet dial-up 
fees are fairly significant, and comparable to those in other 
Central American countries. 
 
------------------- 
(J)  OTHER BARRIERS 
------------------- 
 
35.  Historically, U.S. firms and private citizens have found 
corruption to be a problem which seriously complicates doing 
business in Honduras, and thus a constraint on foreign direct 
investment.  Corruption appears to be most pervasive in the 
following areas: government procurement, performance 
requirements, the regulatory system, and the buying and selling 
of real estate, particularly land title transfers.  Honduras\' 
judicial system is easily influenced; investment and business 
disputes involving foreigners have rarely been resolved in a 
transparent manner.  The administration of justice is a key 
challenge to domestic and foreign companies.  With considerable 
U.S. help, the government is reforming Honduras\' judicial system 
and fighting corruption, though serious problems remain in these 
areas. 
 
Palmer 
"
"12811","12/18/2003 21:01","03TEGUCIGALPA2938","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA2221|03TEGUCIGALPA2757","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002938 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL, INL/C, AND IO/UNP 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KTIA, KCRM, KJUS, EFIN, ECON, PHUM, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS INDICATES IT WILL SIGN UN ANTICORRUPTION 
CONVENTION 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2221 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2757 
 
1. (SBU) Honduras was surprisingly absent among the 94 
countries that gathered December 11 in Merida, Mexico to sign 
the United Nations Convention Against Corruption.  According 
to press reports, apart from Honduras, the only other Latin 
American and Caribbean countries not to sign were Uruguay, 
Belize, the Bahamas, the Cayman Islands, and Jamaica.  Some 
two weeks before the signing ceremony, Marco Bogran, Legal 
Advisor to the Ministry of the Presidency, had told PolOff 
that Honduras would in fact be among the original convention 
signatories. 
 
2. (SBU) In comments before the Honduran press, Foreign 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista said the Government of 
Honduras (GOH) was still in the process of internal 
consultations regarding the convention and had been unable to 
reach a consensus before the signing ceremony.  However, 
based on PolOff\'s conversations with other high ranking MFA 
officials, it appears the GOH was simply caught unaware and 
unprepared for the convention ceremony.  At this point, it is 
unclear whether the Honduran mission to the UN ever informed 
the MFA about the convention.  (Comment:  On December 18, the 
International Court of Justice in The Hague announced its 
decision on El Salvador\'s request to revise the court\'s 
original 1992 decision demarcating the Honduras - El Salvador 
border in Honduras\' favor (ref A & septel).  The border 
demarcation issue continues to be among the MFA\'s highest 
priorities (ref B), and much of its energy these last few 
weeks has been focused on this issue.  As such, many high 
ranking MFA officials are in The Hague attending to the 
court\'s proceedings and were not available to focus on the UN 
Anticorruption Convention.  End Comment) 
 
3. (SBU) On December 17, Wendy Flores, Director for 
Multinational Affairs at the MFA, told PolOff that Honduras 
would indeed sign the convention, but she was not sure 
exactly when.  PolOff encouraged the MFA to move the signing 
process forward as soon as possible so as to avoid sending 
the wrong type of signals to the international community. 
 
4.  (SBU) Post will continue to encourage Honduras to sign 
the convention and closely monitor Honduras\' progress on this 
issue. 
Palmer 
"
"12812","12/18/2003 21:09","03TEGUCIGALPA2939","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE328024","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 002939 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR INL/LP, EB/ESC/TFS, S/CT, DRL/PHD, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC AND G 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OILS AND OFFICE OF DIVERSION CONTROL 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, EAID, PREL, ETTC, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, PTER, HO 
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY REPORT 
(INCSR) - HONDURAS 2003 
 
REF: A. STATE 328024 
 
     B. STATE 324347 
 
1.  Summary 
 
The trans-shipment of cocaine through Honduras by air, land, 
and maritime routes continued, but with significant 
disruption in 2003.  Overall, seizures in Honduras were 
higher than the past five years combined, with 5,738 kilos 
of cocaine seized.  Corruption within the police, Public 
Ministry (Attorney General and prosecutors), and the 
judiciary remain a primary impediment to successful law 
enforcement cooperation.  However, the Government of 
Honduras has moved forward with the implementation of new 
units in support of the new Money Laundering Law, which was 
passed in 2002.  The National Council for the Fight Against 
Drug Trafficking (CNCN) renewed its commitment to lead the 
country\'s counternarcotics efforts.  The Supreme Court is 
operating with greater political independence, however, 
political pressures within the court have had less than 
positive results on many occasions.  Available funds to 
implement a government approved counternarcotics master plan 
remain severely limited.  While the Ministry of Public 
Security (which includes all police) and the Honduran Armed 
Forces have taken a more active and successful role in 
counternarcotics operations, the Public Ministry remains 
unable or unwilling to prosecute suspects and/or seize 
assets.  In addition, those assets that have been seized 
have yet to be disposed of properly.  Honduras is a party to 
the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
 
2. Status of Country 
 
Honduras does not produce drugs in any meaningful 
quantities.  Its primary drug problem stems from the 
trafficking of drugs, in particular, cocaine, via air, land, 
and Western Caribbean maritime routes.  There are direct air 
and maritime links to U.S. cities and the Pan-American 
Highway crosses southern Honduras.  The Honduran police and 
Honduran Navy do not have sufficient maritime assets to 
attack drug trafficking along its north coast.  There was a 
significant increase in drug interdiction this year, with 
the total amount of cocaine seized increasing from 76 kg in 
2002 to 5,738 kg as of December 15, 2003.  Despite the 
recent passage of a broader money laundering law, money 
laundering in Honduras remains a serious concern. 
 
3. Country Actions against Drugs in 2003 
 
Policy Initiatives:  The Government of Honduras launched a 
combined police and military effort in the anti-narcotics 
efforts in April to create a negative impact on the 
transiting of along the North Coast and Southern Borders 
areas.  A new Pan American Highway checkpoint, constructed 
with INL assistance, provides a constant deterrent to the 
flow of narcotics into Honduras from its southern border 
with Nicaragua. 
 
The new money laundering law now allows cases to be 
investigated that are not directly linked to narcotics, 
including corruption, terrorism, and other crimes.  The 
Government of Honduras formed a Financial Investigation Unit 
and assigned prosecutors and investigators to special money 
laundering units to insure that suspected narcotics 
traffickers are fully investigated. 
 
The Honduran Congress is in the process of reviewing a new 
anti-narcotics law that will provide law enforcement with 
expanded authority to initiate undercover operations.  The 
current law, as written, prohibits these types of narcotics 
operations and mandates that police participating in sting 
operations be arrested for the purchase or sale of 
narcotics. 
 
The new Criminal Procedures Code took effect on February 20, 
2002.  This code changes Honduras\' criminal legal system 
from an inquisitorial system to an accusatorial one.  While 
the code\'s primary goal was to decrease opportunities for 
accused criminals to manipulate the justice system, it has 
been used to block efforts to prosecute drug-trafficking 
cases. 
 
Accomplishments:  As of December 15, 2003, 5,738 kilograms 
of cocaine and 13 kilograms of heroin have been seized.  In 
addition, over 364,592 marijuana plants have been detected 
and destroyed.  Close to a thousand narcotic related arrests 
have been made.  The Honduran Frontier Police have been 
largely responsible for these seizures, drawing on INL 
provided counternarcotics training, technical assistance, 
and equipment.  Law enforcement agencies have also seized 
cash totaling USD 1,119,130, and boats and vehicles with a 
total worth of approximately USD 1,000,000. 
 
Law Enforcement Efforts:  Counternarcotics efforts are a 
priority for the Government of Honduras, however the 
Directorate for the Fight Against Narcotrafficking (DLCN) 
suffers from poor leadership, inadequate funding, and 
unqualified personnel.  The DLCN appointed a new director in 
June 2003, selecting a person with only military experience, 
who has been unable to work effectively with U.S. and 
Honduran law enforcement agencies.  Despite the 
ineffectiveness, the DLCN, Frontier Police, military, and 
other Government of Honduras agencies have had successes. 
 
Corruption:  While the Government of Honduras has taken some 
steps to address internal corruption, the judicial system 
continues to be a significant impediment to effective law 
enforcement.  The Ministry of Public Security has taken 
significant steps to investigate corrupt individuals in the 
ministry.  A new police Internal Affairs Unit has been 
formed and several cases have been brought to trial. 
However, corruption in the Public Ministry as well as the 
judiciary provided significant road blocks in the 
prosecution and conviction of alleged narcotraffickers, 
money launderers as well as corrupt officials.  In the past 
eight months, two members of congress have been arrested for 
participating in illegal narcotics related activity. 
Although they initially claimed diplomatic immunity, one 
voluntarily relinquished his immunity so that his case could 
be fully investigated and brought to trial.  The other, a 
member of the Central American Parliament, was not able to 
use his immunity due to his arrest in a third country, 
Nicaragua. 
 
Agreements and treaties:  Honduras has counternarcotics 
agreements with the United States, Belize, Colombia, 
Jamaica, Mexico, Venezuela and Spain.  The Ministry of 
Public Security and the taxing authority for Honduras (DEI) 
have signed an agreement that provides the Ministry of 
Public Security the authority to open sealed containers with 
probable cause, an authority that was formally solely held 
by the DEI.  The Honduran government is an active member of 
the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD). 
Honduras also hosts the Regional Center for Counternarcotics 
Development and Judicial Cooperation in Central America, 
headed by a Nicaraguan.  In November 2003, Honduras 
completed all necessary domestic requirements to become a 
party to the UN Convention on Organized Crime. 
 
Cultivation/Production:  Cannabis remains the only illegal 
drug known to be cultivated in Honduras.  Although thousands 
of plants were destroyed in 2003, the Government of Honduras 
does not use aerial herbicides in eradication efforts.  As a 
rule, when marijuana farms are detected, the plants are cut 
down and destroyed. 
 
Drug Flow/Transit:  Despite increased interdiction efforts, 
the volume of drugs transiting Honduras continues to 
increase.  There has been a noticeable growth in the number 
of suspect air-tracks and maritime vessels en route to 
southern Mexico and the United States.  Overland routes 
using commercial and private vehicles continue to be used to 
smuggle cocaine and heroine.  Approximately 90 percent of 
drugs entering/transiting Honduras is destined for the 
United States, although it has now become a common practice 
for traffickers to pay local transporters in drugs rather 
than cash.  Gang members are increasingly used to distribute 
these in-kind payments to Hondurans in urban areas and along 
the North Coast.  There is evidence of the existence of an 
illicit trade of \"arms for drugs,\" with the arms from these 
deals presumably destined for use by terrorist groups in 
Colombia.  Drug smuggling, using ships departing Honduran 
ports on the Caribbean, is common.  The Government of 
Honduras has made a concerted effort to implement a port 
security program with the goal of having it in place and 
functional by July 2004. 
 
Domestic Programs/Demand Reduction:  The Maduro 
Administration has launched two pilot programs directed at 
Honduran youth to fight drug abuse.  The CNCN is making 
demand reduction a major part of Honduran counternarcotics 
efforts.  It reflects the government\'s appreciation that 
drug trafficking through Honduras is not only a national 
security threat, but a major public policy problem as well. 
Drug use continues to increase among youth in Honduras; 49 
percent of Hondurans are under 18 years of age.  Drug abuse 
by gang members is a growing issue of public concern.  It is 
viewed by some as only one of many public health and social 
problems linked to unemployment, poverty and economic under- 
development.  Cannabis is the most widely abused illegal 
drug in Honduras, followed by inhalants, and to a much 
lesser extent cocaine and designer drugs. 
 
The CNCN\'s program and the Ministry of Public Security\'s 
program link the efforts of the government\'s demand 
reduction entity, the Institute for the Prevention of 
Alcoholism and Drug Addiction (IHADFA), with an umbrella 
group (CIHSA) of NGOs working in demand reduction and drug 
rehabilitation efforts.  The new programs combine those 
formerly operated by the Ministries of Public Health and 
Education, IHADFA and CIHSA, to launch a community-wide 
effort to inform youth about the dangers of drugs and 
provide alternatives in the form of sports, the arts, and 
after school projects.  The U.S. Embassy is working with the 
National Council and the Ministry of Public Security to 
support this approach. 
 
4. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
 
U.S. Policy Initiatives:  U.S. counternarcotics initiatives 
aim to strengthen Honduran law enforcement entities, with a 
special focus on enhancing Government of Honduras maritime 
interdiction along the north coast.  The Maduro 
Administration has worked hard to support implementation of 
bilateral counternarcotics projects and has expressed 
interest in expanding program cooperation, though resources 
continue to be extremely limited. 
 
Bilateral Cooperation:  The United States added almost USD 
750,000 to its bilateral counternarcotics program during 
2003.  The U.S. Government funded additional training and 
equipment to the Frontier Police, continued to support 
existing canine and maritime projects, as well as the 
checkpoint project along the Pan-American Highway, which was 
implemented in March 2003. 
 
The Road Ahead:  The Honduran government has demonstrated a 
strong renewed commitment, backed by concrete action, to 
attack drug trafficking through its national territory.  It 
is organizing police, military, social services, and 
national security policy to more effectively respond to this 
challenge on a limited budget.  We expect to see an 
increased level of maritime and land interdiction operations 
during the next year.  The CNCN has taken a revitalized 
leadership role within the government.  We expect to work 
closely with the Council to better address implementation of 
the national counternarcotics master plan.  Corruption, 
threats, and violence continue to pose a major challenge to 
effective law enforcement. 
 
5.  Statistical tables 
 
Summary Tables for Three Years 
 
For Calendar Years:       2003 -- 2002 -- 2001 
 
1.  Coca: 
 
-- A. Cultivation         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- B. Eradication         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- C. Harvestable after Eradication 
                          N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
2.  Potential Coca Leaf:  N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
3.  Opium: 
 
-- A. Cultivation         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- B. Eradication         N/A      N/A     N/A 
-- C. Harvestable after Eradication: 
                          N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
4. Cannabis (in plants) 
 
-- A. Cultivation:        Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
-- B. Eradication:        364,592  41,402  269,000 
-- C. Harvestable after Eradication: 
                          N/A      N/A     N/A 
 
 
5. Potential Cannabis Yield: 
                          Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
 
6. Drug Seizures (in kilos) 
 
A. Coca leaf              N/A      N/A     N/A 
B. Cocaine paste          N/A      N/A     N/A 
C. Cocaine base           N/A      N/A     N/A 
D. Cocaine HCL            5,738    76      182 
E. Opium poppy straw      N/A      N/A     N/A 
F. Opium gum              N/A      N/A     N/A 
G. Heroin                    13      0       0 
H. Cannabis               3,205   2.85    2.74 
I. Crack Cocaine (rocks)  2,157    708     714 
 
8. Illicit Labs Destroyed:    0      0       0 
 
9. Domestic Consumption of illicit drugs: 
                          Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
 
10. Arrests:                1,058      722     896 
 
11. Users:                Unknown  Unknown Unknown 
 
6.  Chemical Control:  The Government of Honduras continues 
attempts to limit the illicit introduction of precursor 
chemicals into the country.  Comprehensive regulations to 
control the sale of chemicals necessary for the processing 
of illegal narcotics, however, have yet to be developed. 
During the year, the government, in conjunction with the 
UNDP, installed a national data system to more effectively 
track precursor chemical transactions. 
 
7.  Money Laundering:  Honduras is not regarded as an 
important regional financial center nor is it considered to 
have a significant black market for smuggled goods. 
However, Honduras does have a growing money laundering 
problem, due to its connection to the narcotics trade. 
Honduras passed a tough new money laundering law in February 
2002 (Decree 45-2002).  In 2003, the government took steps 
to implement the law, by establishing and equipping the 
entities responsible for combating money laundering. 
Further progress, however, will depend on the training and 
retention of personnel familiar with money laundering and 
financial crimes, clearer delineation of responsibility 
among different government entities, and improved ability 
and willingness of the Public Ministry to investigate and 
prosecute financial crimes aggressively.  In 2003, there 
were ten cases brought to court under the new money 
laundering law, which were pending at year\'s end. 
 
The money laundering that takes place in Honduras is 
primarily related to narcotics trafficking, although there 
are connections to other forms of criminal activity as well. 
The 2001 arrest of the Jimenez drug trafficking cartel on 
the north coast of Honduras revealed an extensive money 
laundering operation of both domestic and foreign illicit 
proceeds.  Their operation revealed a variety of criminal 
activities including narcotics trafficking, auto theft, 
kidnappings, bank fraud, smuggling, prostitution and 
corruption.  Money laundering activities are not limited to 
the banking sector, but likely include currency exchange 
firms, casinos and front companies. 
 
The 2002 money laundering law expands the definition of the 
crime of money laundering to encompass (1) any non- 
economically justified sale or movement of assets and (2) 
asset transfers connected with trafficking of drugs, arms 
and people, auto theft, kidnapping, bank and other forms of 
financial fraud, or terrorism.  The penalty for money 
laundering is a prison term of 15 to 20 years.  The law 
includes banker negligence provisions that make individual 
bankers subject to two to five-year prison terms for 
allowing money-laundering activities. 
 
The law created a Financial Information Unit in the National 
Banking and Insurance Commission to which banks and other 
non-bank financial institutions must send information on all 
transfers exceeding USD 10,000 or 500,000 lempiras (about 
USD 28,000), or other atypical transactions.  The law 
requires the Financial Information Unit and the reporting 
banks to keep a registry of reported transactions for five 
years.  The Financial Information Unit receives over two 
thousand reports per month of transactions over the 
designated threshold. 
 
The money laundering law requires that a public prosecutor 
be assigned to the Financial Information Unit.  In 2002, a 
prosecutor from the Public Ministry was assigned to the Unit 
full time.  However in 2003, the Public Ministry changed 
this arrangement so that now there are four prosecutors 
assigned to the Unit, each on a part time basis, with 
responsibility for specific cases divided among them 
depending on their expertise. 
 
Public prosecutors, under urgent conditions and with special 
authorization, may subpoena data and information directly 
from financial institutions.  In 2003, the Financial 
Information Unit initiated investigations into 74 atypical 
transactions, as compared to 24 in 2002.  The Unit also 
responded to 156 requests for investigation made by the 
Public Ministry, as compared to 48 in 2002. 
 
Early in 2003, there was ambiguity as to which of two units 
within the police forces would have responsibility for the 
investigation of financial crimes.  This issue was resolved 
by mid-year, with responsibility assigned to the Office of 
Special Investigative Services (DGSEI).  By the end of 2003, 
it appeared the various government entities involved in the 
fight against money laundering (the police investigators, 
the Financial Information Unit and the prosecutors) were 
beginning to work well together and communicate more 
effectively among themselves. 
 
International Cooperation:  In October 2002, Honduras became 
a member of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force. 
Honduras cooperates with U.S. investigations and requests 
for information pursuant to the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
Honduras has signed Memoranda of Understanding to exchange 
information on money laundering investigations with Panama, 
El Salvador, Guatemala and Colombia, and has signed and 
ratified the UN Convention against Organized Crime.  The 
Honduran government adheres to the core principles for 
effective banking supervision that the Basel Committee 
adopted in 1997.  At the regional level, Honduras is a 
member of the Central American Council of Bank 
Superintendents, which meets periodically to exchange 
information. 
 
Asset Seizure and Forfeiture:  The National Congress enacted 
an asset seizure law in 1993 that subsequent Supreme Court 
rulings substantially weakened.  The 2002 money laundering 
legislation greatly strengthened the asset seizure 
provisions of the law, establishing an Office of Seized 
Assets under the Public Ministry.  The law authorizes the 
Office of Seized Assets to guard and administer \"all goods, 
products or instruments\" of a crime.  However, the actual 
process of establishing and equipping this office to carry 
out its function has been slow. 
 
The implementing regulations governing the Office of Seized 
Assets were finalized and published in March 2003, and a 
director of the office was named at the same time.  However, 
plans to build separate offices and a warehouse for this 
entity are still incomplete, with the result that seized 
assets are currently kept in various locations under 
dispersed authority.  Moreover, in September another 
government entity made an attempt to take over the function 
of controlling seized assets from the nascent Office, though 
unsuccessful.  Consequently, the Office of Seized Assets 
cannot yet be said to have established firm control over the 
asset seizure and forfeiture process.  The physical 
transportation of large sums of cash is also a growing 
phenomenon in Honduras.  As reported in last year\'s cable at 
year-end the \"Captain Ryan Case\" resulted in a seizure of 
USD 460,000.  This marked the beginning of a trend and since 
last year\'s report there has been seizures of cash and 
assets totaling over USD 2,000,000. 
 
Terrorist Financing:  The National Banking and Insurance 
Commission has issued freeze orders promptly for the names 
on the UN 1267 Sanctions Committee\'s consolidated list and 
each of the subsequent lists of individuals and entities the 
U.S. has designated under relevant authorities.  The 
Commission has reported that, to date, no accounts linked to 
the individuals or entities on the lists have been found in 
the Honduran financial system.  The Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs is responsible for instructing the Commission to 
issue freeze orders.  The Commission directs Honduran 
financial institutions to search for, hold and report on 
terrorist-linked accounts and transactions, which, if found, 
are frozen. 
 
While Honduras is a major recipient of flows of remittances 
(estimated at USD 800 million in 2003), there has been no 
evidence to date linking these remittances to the financing 
of terrorism.  Remittances primarily flow from Hondurans 
living in the United States to their relatives in Honduras, 
and the great majority of these remittances are sent through 
wire transfer or bank services. 
 
Honduras has signed and ratified the 1999 International 
Convention for the Suppression on the Financing of 
Terrorism. 
 
Offshore financial centers: Honduras is not considered an 
offshore financial center.  Per a January 2002 National 
Banking and Insurance Commission Resolution (No. 012/08-01- 
2002), the operation of offshore financial institutions is 
prohibited. 
 
Palmer 
"
"12813","12/18/2003 21:09","03TEGUCIGALPA2941","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002941 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: RUMORS OF POSSIBLE RESTRUCTURING OF HONDURAN 
GOVERNMENT MINISTIRES 
 
 
1.  In an effort to decrease government spending, and meet 
the specifications of the recently negotiated IMF agreement, 
the GOH has announced that there will be \"changes\" within 
various government ministries.  As such, President Ricardo 
Maduro appears to be planning to streamline the GOH by 
restructuring certain departments, and in some cases 
eliminating certain ministries altogether. 
 
2.  It is rumored that the Ministry of Culture, Arts, and 
Sports and the Honduran Institute of Science and Technology 
will be absorbed by the Ministry of Education.  (Note: The 
Minister of Culture position is currently held by Mireya 
Batres, President Maduro\'s ex-fiancee.  End Note.)  Also, it 
is rumored that the Ministry of International Cooperation 
(SETCO) will be absorbed by either the Ministry of the 
Presidency or the Foreign Ministry. 
 
3.  Other possible changes within the GOH include fusing the 
National Agrarian Institute, the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock, and the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment into one separate entity, as it once was.  Also, 
it is rumored that the Honduran Foundation for Social 
Investment (FHIS) will be eliminated, with the Ministry of 
Government taking over certain duties performed by FHIS. 
Other potential targets of the restructuring effort include 
the fusion of the Central Bank and the National Commission of 
Banks and Insurance, as well as combining the duties of the 
Office of Procurement, the National Telecom Commission, and 
the Office of Licenses and Commissions. 
 
4.  Rumors also continue of impending changes in President 
Maduro\'s cabinet.  After two years in office, President 
Maduro may possibly exchange some \"technical\" ministers 
(technocrats) for more \"political\" ones (politicians).  The 
following individuals are rumored in the press to be on their 
way out for a wide array of reasons:  Minister of Public 
Works Jorge Carranza; Minister of Government Jorge Ramon 
Hernandez Alcerro; Minister of Finance Arturo Alvarado; 
Minister of Education Carlos Avila; Minister of Health Elias 
Lizardo; Minister of Culture Mireya Batres; Minister of Trade 
Norman Garcia; Minister of International Aid Coordination 
Brenie Matute; the National Electric Company\'s Angelo 
Botazzi; and Hondutel\'s Arturo Valenzuela.  Possible reasons 
for dismissals vary from minister to minister, but include 
government reorganization, a desire to run for political 
office, political scapegoating, and lack of political skills. 
 
5.  COMMENT:  Currently, any specifics about the 
restructuring process or cabinet changes are only rumors. 
President Maduro appears to have decided that certain 
adjustments will help fulfill the IMF agreement and create a 
less bureaucratic, more efficient government.  However, the 
President has not yet spoken publicly about possible changes. 
 It does seem that the targets of the realignment will be the 
ministries whose work is on the periphery of the most 
pressing political issues.  Post notes that several of the 
potentially affected ministries have told EmbOffs that their 
ministries will not be eliminated.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"12814","12/18/2003 21:14","03TEGUCIGALPA2942","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP 
GUATEMALA FOR COMMATT:MLARSEN 
DEPT OF COMMERCE FOR THE ADVOCACY CENTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EINV, KPRV, HO 
SUBJECT: UNDP Responds to Embassy Inquiries on Telecom 
 
Ref: a) Tegucigalpa 02612, b) Kushnir, Chang, Matthewman, 
 
Urdaneta, Williams teleconference of 12/9 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Post thanks Washington agencies for a 
rapid response to reports of possible unfair procurement 
practices by UNDP Honduras.  We have been able to discuss 
the Hondutel telecom tenders involving Harris Communications 
and Midwest Cable with UNDP General Coordinator for telecom 
bids, Mr. John Morris, and Juan Diego Zelaya (his 
counterpart from Hondutel).  Morris and Zelaya were more 
forthcoming than any other UNDP representatives to date, 
providing the timeline of the bid, describing the process 
and addressing the rumors of undue influence by the French 
company, Alcatel.  Both contracts have now been signed, so 
advocacy for the U.S. companies does not appear to be 
feasible at this point.  However, post would welcome IO\'s 
offer to address the transparency of the process with UNDP 
New York.  End Summary 
 
2. (SBU) On December 4 and 11, EconOffs spoke with Juan 
Diego Zelaya and John Morris, the Coordinators for Hondutel 
bids for Hondutel and the UNDP, respectively.  Morris noted 
his contracting section has accounted for over USD 109 
million in telecom contracts this year.  Though it appeared 
that two of the 46 tenders were conducted in a less than 
fair manner (reftel), both were very open and forthcoming on 
both the process and the background on the two projects in 
which U.S. companies lost to Alcatel. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Harris and the Microwave Network Tender 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Morris laid out the timeline for the microwave bid, 
referring to UNDP-kept minutes at times for exact dates. 
The microwave bid was published on May 16, 19 and 23. 
Twenty-three companies purchased bid packet materials, but 
only 4 companies -- Alcatel, Harris, Siemens, and Erickson - 
- turned in bid packets on the due date, August 25.  The 
first two envelopes, the legal and technical packages, were 
opened that same day.  According to Morris and UNDP minutes, 
Alcatel, Harris and Siemens all presented technically 
acceptable bids.  The evaluation committee submitted its 
report and opened envelope 3, the economic envelope, on 
September 11.  Alcatel\'s bid was roughly USD 7.9 million. 
Harris offered the second lowest bid at USD 10.2 million, 
and Seimens finished out the group at USD 13.2 million. 
 
4. (SBU) On September 19, the bids were sent to the local 
contract committee for review and confirmation of the 
evaluation committee\'s recommendation.  Since the project is 
valued at over USD 1 million, following approval by the 
local committee, the packets were all sent to UNDP\'s 
Procurement Advisory Committee in New York on September 22. 
New York approved UNDP Honduras\' recommendation on October 
16 and notified Alcatel.  Hondutel and Alcatel signed the 
microwave contract on October 22, 2003. 
 
5. (SBU) U.S. company, Harris Communications, requested USG 
advocacy because of rumors that Alcatel\'s original offer 
omitted USD 3 million worth of equipment in its bid which 
was added in later for free.  The bid also is alleged to 
have included a low-quality network system that would have 
to be upgraded later so that Alcatel\'s bid would remain the 
lowest.  Morris addressed this rumor explaining it as 
follows:  the project contains 80 different site locations 
with each site requiring a variety of equipment, towers, 
etc.  After the evaluation committee opened the economic 
envelopes, they proceeded to verify that Alcatel supplied 
the lowest bid.  During the verification of prices, the 
committee contacted Alcatel to make sure the lot price for 
each site matched the equipment count in the technical 
proposal, and that all individual unit prices and overall 
lot prices added up.  In the technical proposal (envelope 
2), all equipment was detailed but not priced.  When asked 
point blank if Alcatel had omitted any equipment and was 
later allowed to add the same in, Morris responded by saying 
no.  Alcatel had included all equipment required from the 
beginning.  Note: Morris was concerned by the fact that 
there was a leak in the evaluation committee and that 
somehow other companies discovered that the evaluation 
committee had even contacted Alcatel to verify equipment 
count and prices. End note. 
 
6. (SBU) The evaluation committee for the microwave tender 
was made up of 8 members, 5 voting and 3 non-voting.  All 3 
non-voting members are UNDP employees, and the 5 voting 
members were 1 UNDP engineer, 2 contractors / consultants, 
and 2 Hondutel representatives.  The local contracting 
committee is comprised of all UNDP officials.  While there 
were no French members or observers on the evaluation 
committee (all members were from Central and South America), 
there was one French observer on the local contract 
committee, Mr. Richard Barathe.  Barathe is the Director for 
corporate strategy and foreign relations.  He reports 
directly to UNDP representative, Jeff Avina.  Barathe has 
been quoted in recent months as telling Honduran colleagues 
of his delight that U.S. companies are losing UNDP bids, 
indirectly taking credit for the phenomenon. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Midwest Cable - Fiber Optic Tender 
---------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) In the case of the fiber optic contract, the 
economic bids were opened at the same time as the technical 
bids and NO clarifications were allowed.  Midwest Cable had 
the lowest bid ($3 million lower than winner Alcatel\'s $13 
million).  However, because of the lack of ability for 
clarification and the extreme strictness of the evaluation 
committee, all applicants were disqualified on technical 
grounds except for Alcatel.  Midwest had 16 deficiencies, at 
least half of which were trivial.  UNDP claims that it has 
no responsibility for the skewed outcome of this tender 
(with every company but one being disqualified) because 
Hondutel prepared the whole packet including the technical 
specs.  Hondutel claims that the technical specs were 
completely reviewed and substantially revised by UNDP.  We 
asked Hondutel staff if it is true that Alcatel had written 
an unsolicited bid for a fiber optic project (one of the 
rumors) on which the technical specs were based, which would 
have explained why that company alone was found to qualify. 
Zelaya indicated that Hondutel had developed its draft specs 
and posted them on the web, asking for public comment.  Any 
company could have commented.  So it is possible that 
Alcatel\'s comments could have influenced the original design 
of the bid.  But Zelaya reiterated that the bid 
specifications were revised by UNDP before the tender was 
launched.  UNDP has never explained, to our satisfaction, 
the early notice of Midwest\'s disqualification provided to 
Alcatel and subcontractors, weeks before Midwest itself was 
notified. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Background on UNDP Procurement Process 
-------------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) The fiber optic and microwave tenders were two of 51 
tenders that had been planned for 2003.  Of these, 46 are in 
the pipeline.  The fiber optic project was the first.  Based 
on the experience with it, the procedures were revised.  A 
Hondutel official provided us with the following description 
of the typical process. 
 
9. (U) Hondutel staff put together a project profile 
(sometimes with technical specs, if they have the expertise) 
and an in-house cost estimate.  The project goes to the 
Hondutel board of directors for a decision on whether to do 
it or whether to send it to UNDP.  Hondutel tends to handle 
simple procurements (tire repair, water supply) and civil 
works itself.  They will always send to UNDP any complicated 
procurement that has any chance of generating legal 
challenges. 
 
10. (U) If the Board decides to send the project to UNDP, 
the Hondutel staff sends the documentation to UNDP.  UNDP 
then hires consultants to either write the technical specs 
or to review and revise the specs provided by Hondutel. 
Once completed, UNDP launches the bids.  There is a question 
and answer period, and Hondutel and UNDP always respond to 
the questions together. 
 
11. (U) Once the Q&A period is completed, an evaluation 
committee is formed, and the bids are received and reviewed. 
The technical proposal is opened at the time of bid 
submittal to ensure all necessary documents are included. 
The evaluation committee will include up to one or two 
members from Hondutel; the remaining members should be UNDP 
employees although sometimes consultants will be included as 
well if specialized expertise is needed.   The majority will 
always be UNDP (Hondutel will never have majority).  A UNDP 
rep will always chair the group.  There should be no 
outsiders included in the evaluation process.  The committee 
evaluates the bids, engages in a clarification process with 
bidders when needed, and decides which bids are compliant in 
meeting the technical requirements.  For those bidders that 
are compliant, the economic bids are opened, and the lowest 
price wins.   The evaluation committee prepares its report. 
 
12. (U) The evaluation committee\'s report goes to the local 
contract committee, which decides to approve or not.  If 
approved, it goes to the advisory committee on procurement 
in New York for final decision.  If approved, Hondutel is 
then notified and asked if they have any objections to the 
final decision.  Hondutel would only object if the offer 
price of the finalist is higher than budgeted.  This has not 
happened to date. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
13. (SBU) As the contracts have already been signed, Embassy 
recommends informing Harris that it will not be possible to 
request a re-bidding of the microwave tender.  Zelaya and 
Morris provided a plausible version of events in these two 
tenders.  They appear to demonstrate that the procurement 
processes, while controversial and in some ways less than 
transparent, were not overtly unfair.  We will not be able 
to obtain more information from UNDP or Hondutel here in 
Honduras.  If Washington agencies deem it feasible, we 
welcome inquiries in New York about the unusual outcomes in 
these two tenders (all bidders but Alcatel being 
disqualified in the first and Alcatel winning the microwave 
tender with a price far below the expected budget), as well 
as the lack of transparency, and the apparent coziness among 
Hondutel, UNDP and Alcatel officials.  End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"12850","12/19/2003 23:01","03TEGUCIGALPA2952","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03TEGUCIGALPA2221|03TEGUCIGALPA2757","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002952 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND L 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS, KTIA, PREL, PGOV, ES, HO 
SUBJECT: ICJ REJECTS EL SALVADOR\'S APPLICATION FOR REVISION 
ON BORDER DEMARCATION WITH HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2221 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2757 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
1. On December 18, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
in The Hague, by a vote of 4-1, rejected El Salvador\'s 
September 10, 2002 application for revision of the Court\'s 
original 1992 decision demarcating the land and maritime 
border between El Salvador and Honduras as \"inadmissible.\" 
The ICJ\'s latest judgment is final, without appeal, and 
binding on both parties.  At issue were 74 square kilometers 
lying between Los Amates and the Gulf of Fonseca in a region 
known as Goascoran. 
 
2. El Salvador\'s application for revision was based on the 
Government of El Salvador\'s (GOES) assertion that, under 
Article 61 of the Statute of the Court, El Salvador had 
\"discovered\" new facts of a decisive nature that were unknown 
to the Court and the GOES when the original judgment was 
rendered.  In its finding, the Court determined that El 
Salvador\'s newly presented evidence did not meet the 
\"decisive factor\" threshold, and thus could not be considered. 
 
3. The ICJ\'s decision, while expected (ref A), was met with 
jubilation and exhilaration in Honduras. In remarks to the 
Honduran press, President Maduro characterized the Court\'s 
decision as \"historic\", marking a momentous day in Honduran 
history.  For others at the MFA, yesterday\'s ICJ decision 
marks the end of some 50 years of working to resolve 
Honduras\' border dispute with El Salvador.  The Government of 
Honduras (GOH) has been anxious to move forward on border 
demarcation with El Salvador (ref B), and the ICJ\'s latest 
decision removes the final legal obstacle delaying El 
Salvador\'s compliance with the original ICJ decision.  The 
GOH now looks forward to moving expeditiously on completing 
the border demarcation process. 
 
4. During that same evening, Ambassador attended a ceremony 
hosted by President Maduro to mark the ICJ\'s decision.  Among 
those present was the El Salvadoran Ambassador to Honduras. 
Palmer 
"
"12883","12/22/2003 23:45","03TEGUCIGALPA2965","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002965 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, CA/FPP, EB, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KFRD, CVIS, ASEC, KCRM, KJUS, EFIN, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: CHINESE SMUGGLING RING IN HONDURAS - CHINAZO 
RESURFACES 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY - As part of an ongoing investigation, the 
Honduran Criminal Investigative Police (DGIC), Prosecutor\'s 
from the Organized Crime Division of the Public Ministry, 
and DHS personnel from Tegucigalpa participated in a series 
of raids in the cities of San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa, 
uncovering a major alien smuggling ring.  The ring 
specialized in smuggling aliens from the PRC and Hong Kong 
to the U.S., via Honduras, using falsified Honduran 
passports and civil documents.  Among the documents 
discovered were false Honduran drivers licenses, false 
identity cards, stolen Honduran passports, altered Honduran 
passports, false bankbooks, false civil documents and 
official seals from the Preventive Police.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) On Monday, December 8, Honduran police and 
prosecutors accompanied by members from the DHS office in 
Tegucigalpa, arrested two naturalized Honduran citizens at 
the airport in San Pedro Sula.  The arrestees were part of 
an alien smuggling ring that, according to police, has been 
in operation for at least four years. 
 
3. (U) On Tuesday, December 9, another naturalized Honduran, 
Hu Weng Rong, was arrested at the San Pedro Sula airport 
along with two Chinese aliens.  Rong had accompanied the two 
aliens to the airport and attempted to purchase tickets for 
them on the Sol Air flight to Miami.  Both aliens were 
traveling with falsified Japanese passports.  Subsequently, 
search warrants were issued for two houses owned by Rong in 
San Pedro Sula.  Evidence uncovered in the search of the two 
houses included stolen Honduran passports, fraudulent 
Honduran identity cards and drivers licenses, copies of 
Honduran naturalization certificates, original seals used by 
the Honduran Transit Police, a laminating machine and large 
amounts of laminate.  Also found were copies of airway bills 
for packages that had previously been intercepted by U.S. 
Customs Miami. 
 
4. (U) On Wednesday, December 10, police arrested another 
naturalized Honduran, Jia Bin He, outside one of his 
residence in San Pedro Sula.  A search of the premises 
revealed two negatives of immigration seals used by the 
governments of Panama and Honduras.  Also, a large quantity 
of Western Union receipts for large amounts of money, 
several bank books, false civil documents, and USD 4,000 
were found. 
 
5. (U) Hu Weng Rong was taken into custody and charged with 
alien smuggling, falsifying documents and money laundering. 
Jia Bin He has been charged with forgery of public 
documents, possession of instruments for producing 
fraudulent documents, alien smuggling and money laundering. 
Police contend that the two were using their status as 
Honduran citizens to acquire and falsify documents to be 
used smuggling aliens into Honduras and eventually into the 
U.S. 
 
6. (SBU) Immigration Director Ramon Romero and public 
prosecutors indicated that many of the former Chinese 
citizens who had acquired Honduran nationality during the 
infamous \"Chinazo\" scandal are the organizers and leaders of 
this ring.  During \"Chinazo\", Honduran nationality was sold 
to persons who were supposed to become business investors. 
The scheme began in 1995 and ended in October 1996.  It 
allegedly netted hundreds of millions of dollars for the 
Hondurans who organized and ran the operation.  Allegations 
have flourished here about who was involved in Chinazo.  The 
allegations have included former president Callejas and 
members of his administration who supposedly kept the money, 
instead of depositing it in the Central Bank, as was 
required by law.  Prosecutors estimate that up to 25,000 
people paid from USD 20,000 to USD 25,000 in order to 
acquire Honduran nationality.  Romero pointed out that 
actual immigration records exist for only two of the 
estimated 25,000 Chinese investors.  In addition, during the 
operation of Chinazo, there was no control over the issuance 
of passports, naturalization certificates, or identification 
cards to the alleged investors. 
 
7. (SBU) Director Romero expressed to FSN Supervisor and 
Consul General, that he believes this ring is a continuation 
of the Chinazo scheme.  The persons who applied for investor 
visas in 1995-96 were issued Honduran passports, 
naturalization certificates, identity cards and received 
other documents such as land titles and business records. 
These same documents, he believes, are now being re-used to 
smuggle aliens into Honduras.  Since there was no control 
over the initial issuance process, there are only estimates 
as to the total number of fraudulent naturalization 
certificates and identification cards in circulation. 
Coupled with the theft of as many as 1,500 Honduran 
passports in 2001, Romero believes that an influx of Chinese 
aliens could easily become uncontrollable for his limited 
staff and facilities. 
 
8. (U) COMMENT: The large number of Chinese immigrants 
appearing in Honduras has alarmed local immigration 
officials.  It is believed that passage money is being paid 
to the smuggling ring, or that the aliens work for local 
businessmen here in Honduras in order to pay their fare. 
After paying for their passage, the persons purchase false 
documentation in order to apply for U.S. visas, or they 
attempt to enter the U.S. using stolen Japanese passports. 
To complicate matters, the Immigration Director indicated 
that he is likely being replaced because he has strictly 
enforced the law against this smuggling ring.  He believes 
that influence is being brought by the Ministry of 
Government and Justice, where the Immigration directorate is 
located, in order to allow this operation to continue.  As 
an aside, he mentioned that many current government 
officials were also in government service at the time of the 
Chinazo scandal and some made personal fortunes from the 
scheme.  Post will continue to monitor the situation and 
keep Department informed of actions taken by the GOH. 
 
PALMER 
"
"12925","12/23/2003 21:41","03TEGUCIGALPA2970","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL/C/CP, DRL/PHD, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, PHUM, SOCI, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: ACCUSATIONS OF WRONGDOING PLAGUE HONDURAN CHIEF OF 
POLICE 
 
1. (U) On December 10, Aida Romero, Special Prosecutor for 
Human Rights, accused Chief of Police, Coralia Rivera Ramos, 
Commissioner Mirna Suazo, and the assistant to the Minister 
of Public Security, Juan Manuel Aguilar, with obstruction of 
justice and abuse of power.  According to the prosecutor, 
these officials were responsible for the destruction of six 
AK-47s, which were being held as evidence in pending 
investigations of various alleged extrajudicial killings. 
 
2. (U) According to press reports, the investigation showed 
that both Sauzo and Aguilar directly participated in the 
destruction of the weapons.  Afterwards, it is presumed that 
the Chief of Police directed a \"cover-up\" and instructed 
those involved to lie to investigators. 
 
3. (SBU) Post had heard that the Police Internal Affairs 
office had completed its recommendation for criminal 
investigation and prosecution and had numerous more serious 
charges to file, including: charges against Ramos for 
conspiracy in the murder of alleged kidnappers, obstruction 
of justice (for attempting to cover up the ordering of a 
murder as well as the destruction of evidence), 
misappropriation of funds, and abuse of power; Sauzo was to 
be formally charged for conspiracy in the murder of alleged 
kidnappers, obstruction of justice (for attempting to cover 
up the ordering of the destruction of evidence), and the 
misappropriation of funds.  It is not clear why these more 
serious charges were not filed. 
 
4. (U) According to Human Rights Commissioner Ramon Custodio, 
the results of the investigation have been known to the 
Public Ministry since last year.  Custodio has stated 
publicly that action against these individuals should have 
been taken well before now to prevent Honduras from being 
known around the world as a country where impunity impedes 
the rule of law. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT:  If Custodio\'s accusations are accurate, 
this demonstrates yet again the reluctance within the Public 
Ministry to prosecute high-ranking officials.  Also, as 
previously mentioned, it had been reported to Post that 
charges brought against these individuals would include 
conspiracy charges.  It now appears that by dropping the more 
serious charges, the accused will receive little more than a 
slap on the wrist, if they are convicted.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"12967","12/29/2003 18:12","03TEGUCIGALPA2980","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND EB/TPP/ABT 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EIND, ELAB, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduran Textile Sector Gives CAFTA High Marks 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Jesus Canahuati, President of the Honduran 
Manufacturers Association, was effusive about the content of 
the textiles chapter of the recently negotiated CAFTA.  He 
identified three areas in particular which are positive 
developments for Honduras: 1) cumulation with Mexico, 2) the 
single transformation rule of origin for certain items, and 
3) the provision that CAFTA tariff rates would be applied 
retroactively to January 1st, 2004.  He is also pleased with 
the expanded short-supply provisions and the revised 
mechanism for qualifying for short supply, while he accepts 
the lack of trade preference levels (TPLs) for Honduras as a 
necessary sacrifice if the agreement is to be ratified by 
the U.S. Congress.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On December 23rd, EconOff spoke with Jesus 
Canahuati to discuss his views of the textiles chapter of 
the recently negotiated CAFTA.  Canahuati is the President 
of the Honduran Manufacturers Association (formerly known as 
the Honduran Maquila Association), and the owner and manager 
of one of Honduras\' largest maquilas.  He is also the 
brother of Honduran Ambassador to the United States Mario 
Canahuati, and Vice President of COHEP, the private sector 
umbrella organization.  Canahuati said he was extremely 
pleased with the agreement, and while the Honduran 
negotiators did not get everything they wanted, Canahuati 
believes that they got enough to place the Honduran textile 
industry on a secure footing heading into 2005 and the 
lifting of worldwide textile quotas. 
 
3. (SBU) In particular, Canahuati identified three major 
aspects of the agreement which will be beneficial for the 
Honduran textile industry.  First: cumulation with Mexico, 
which Canahuati said will encourage integration of the 
industry within the hemisphere.  Second: the granting of a 
single-transformation rule of origin for brassieres, boxer 
shorts and pajamas.  Canahuati said this will be especially 
important for Honduras in the case of brassieres, which can 
be made up of 16 different components and are difficult to 
source under a yarn-forward regime.  And third: the 
provision that CAFTA tariff rates would be applied 
retroactively to January 1st, 2004, which will allow greater 
confidence in making sourcing decisions now for production 
in 2004. 
 
4. (SBU) Canahuati also voiced his satisfaction over the 
expanded short supply provisions, and the proposed mechanism 
for qualifying for short supply.  He acknowledged that some 
in Central America have been frustrated with the slow and 
complex functioning of the existing short supply mechanism, 
and as a result are uncertain whether the new mechanism will 
truly be an improvement.  But for Canahuati, the simplified 
mechanism, particularly the shortened time-frame, and the 
fact that the mechanism takes into account the volume of a 
good required in determining whether a product qualifies for 
short-supply, is a significant improvement.  He said that 
the region\'s textile producers should give it a chance and 
trust that it will work in practice. 
 
5. (SBU) Canahuati voiced no regret over the near-absence of 
tariff preference levels (TPLs) in the agreement, saying 
that he recognized the political unpopularity of TPLs in the 
United States, and accepted the absence of TPLs as a 
necessary price to pay in order to improve the chances of 
CAFTA being ratified by the U.S. Congress.  He also stated 
that TPLs were not an essential requirement for the Honduran 
textile industry, which relies on locally sourced goods to a 
much greater extent than, for example, the industry in 
Guatemala. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: The Honduran private sector, as expected, 
is rallying quickly around the cause of selling the benefits 
of CAFTA.  The available information suggests that the 
textile chapter will be particularly beneficial in Honduras, 
where progress is already being made in developing a knit 
textile sector, brassieres and other undergarments are big 
business, and production could quickly expand to include 
higher-value woven products like blue jeans if cumulation 
with Mexican fabric becomes a reality.  The maquila sector 
has been one of the most important sources of employment in 
Honduras in recent years, and has an extremely close, 
symbiotic relationship with the U.S. sector.  We expect the 
influential textile and apparel sector here to be a 
constructive force in pushing for rapid Honduran 
ratification of the agreement, once it is signed.  End 
comment. 
 
Pierce 
"
"12985","12/30/2003 22:39","03TEGUCIGALPA2997","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03SANSALVADOR3518|03STATE348293","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT BARBARA YODER AND WHA/CEN 
USDA/FAS/DLP FOR HOWARD WETZEL 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, ETRD, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras Announces Suspension of U.S. Beef Imports 
 
REF: A) STATE 348293, B) SAN SALVADOR 03518 
 
1.  Summary: The Government of Honduras has announced a 
suspension of imports of U.S. beef and its derivatives, in 
accordance with guidelines issued by the OIE (World 
Organization for Animal Health).  The Honduran ban does not 
include dairy products or other products considered to carry 
no risk of BSE (Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy).  End 
Summary. 
 
2.  As early as December 25th, the Honduran press quoted Dr. 
Lizardo Reyes, Director of the GOH\'s Office of Animal 
Health, as declaring a ban on imports of U.S. beef. 
However, no official pronouncement was made until December 
29th, when Dr. Reyes, along with the Minister of Agriculture 
and Livestock Mariano Jimenez, held a press conference and 
released the statement translated below. 
 
3.  EconOff spoke with Dr. Reyes after the press conference, 
and delivered the talking points in ref A.  Dr. Reyes 
stressed that Honduras is simply conforming to OIE 
guidelines, and is not following any resolution of OIRSA 
(Regional International Organization for Agricultural 
Health) such as that mentioned in ref B.  (Note: In fact, 
when listing the products not covered by the ban, the third 
paragraph of the press release follows nearly word-for-word 
the OIE guidelines for restrictions of imports from 
countries with a high risk of BSE, as available on-line at 
http://www.oie.int/esp/normes/mcode/E_00068.h tm. End note.) 
 
4.  Dr. Reyes also made positive statements to the effect 
that he was sure that the infected cow was an isolated case, 
that he is confident the USDA is taking all necessary 
precautions in response to the case, and that Honduras will 
be able to lift the suspension on imports \"in the short 
term.\" 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Informal Translation of GOH Press Release 
----------------------------------------- 
 
5.  Begin Translation: 
 
Title: The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock announces 
the temporary suspension of the importation of animals and 
bovine-derived products from the United States 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock announced a 
suspension of the importation of animals, meat and bovine- 
derived products from the United States, after the 
Department of Agriculture of that country announced on 
December 23, 2003 a suspected case of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy, better known as \"Mad Cow Disease,\" in a cow 
slaughtered December 9, 2003 in the area of Washington. 
This suspected case was confirmed by information received 
December 28, 2003 from Dr. Peter Fernandez, Associate 
Administrator of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection 
Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, when the 
laboratory based in Weybridge (United Kingdom) confirmed the 
diagnosis of the National Veterinary Laboratories in Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Honduras, following the guidelines established by the OIE 
for this disease, has taken this decision with the goal of 
avoiding any potential risk to public health, or to national 
livestock. 
 
Exempt from the ban are certain products such as milk and 
milk products, semen, embryos, protein-free tallow, 
dicalcium phosphate, hides, skins, and gelatin and collagen 
obtained from hides and skins, since there exists no 
zoosanitary risk from this merchandise. 
 
These actions also have the goal of assuring third countries 
to whom Honduras exports that we have taken the necessary 
precautions to guarantee that our merchandise will not pose 
any risk to these other nations. 
 
It is also necessary to mention that the consumption of beef 
in Honduras is guaranteed by these actions, as well as by 
the fact that the great majority of our livestock are fed by 
pasture and forage. 
 
End Translation. 
 
Pierce 
"
"13092","1/7/2004 21:56","04TEGUCIGALPA31","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE295195|03STATE343186","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, ETRD, ECON, AFSI 
SUBJECT: NOMINATION FOR LES ECONOMIC TRADE AGREEMENT 
MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION COURSE (PE-222) 
 
REF: (A) 03 STATE 343186, (B) 03 STATE 295195 
 
1. Embassy Tegucigalpa would like to nominate Economic 
Section LES Carlos Diaz for the Trade Agreement Monitoring 
and Implementation Course for LES/FSNs (PE-222) to be held at 
FSI in May 2004. 
 
2. Listed below is the information requested in reftels: 
 
Name and grade of LES nominee:  Carlos D. Diaz, Grade 11 
Date of Birth: April 25, 1962 
Nationality: Honduran 
Passport Number: 349527 
Agency: State 
Position Title: Legal advisor 
American supervisor\'s name and email: Robin Matthewman, 
MatthewmanRH2@state.gov 
 
Education: 
 
1988, National Autonomous University of Honduras(UNAH) - 
Diploma, Law School, Graduate Degree in Law, with 
International Law Specialty 
 
2000, Universidad Tecnologica Centroamericana (UNITEC) - 
Certificate in Corporate Law 
 
2001, Universidad Jose Cecilio del Valle - Certificate in 
International Trade Law 
 
2001, Attorneys\' Bar Association - Training in the new Penal 
Procedure Law and Judicial issues 
 
2002-2003, Money Laundering Law courses - certificate in 
basic course and Train-the-Trainer 
 
2002, Attorney Diploma (equivalent of U.S. Bar Exam) 
 
UNAH  - Commercial Law Master Degree (2000).  After the 
thesis test (approx. March-April 2004), should receive Master 
Degree Diploma in Commerce Law 
 
Job experience: 
 
1982 - 1985, Administrative Assistant and Computer Officer, 
Tax Office, Ministry of Finance 
1985 - 1988, Attorney, law firm Bufete Deras 
1988 - 1998, Legal Advisor, HONDUTEL (Legal Assistant, Legal 
Advisor and Head of the Legal Office) 
1996 - 1998, Attorney, law firm Bufete Cardona y Asociados 
1999 - present, Legal Advisor, American Embassy 
 
Current responsibilities: As the Embassy legal advisor, 
Carlos manages Econ Section work on U.S. citizen and U.S. 
company investment disputes and provides recommendations on 
commercial disputes in which U.S. citizens appear to be 
receiving unfair treatment in Honduran courts. He also 
coordinates the Money Laundering technical assistance project 
and provides the Embassy with a wide range of legal advice. 
 
How course would enhance nominee\'s productivity at post: 
The Trade Agreement Monitoring and Implementation Course will 
prepare Carlos to better support the Econ Section and U.S. 
businesses on a wider variety of trade and investment 
disputes by having more in-depth knowledge of the Honduran 
government\'s obligations and commitments in the World Trade 
Organization, emerging Central America Free Trade Agreement, 
and the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas currently under 
negotiation. 
 
Post is not submitting this nominee\'s name for either of the 
other two LES/FSN training opportunities. 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"13163","1/9/2004 19:22","04TEGUCIGALPA55","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AID/W, PASS COPY TO LAUREN LANDIS, DIRECTOR, 
DCHA/FFP, FREDERICK R. VIGIL, DCHA/FFP/DP, P.E. 
BALAKRISHNAN, DCHA/FFP/DP, KATHY HUNT, DCHA/FFP/DP, 
LISA WITTE, DCHA/FFP/POD 
PORT-AU-PRINCE FOR USAID, MAIRE C. LAURENT, FOOD FOR 
PEACE, JAN WESSEL, FOOD FOR PEACE 
MANAGUA FOR USAID, ENRIQUE URBINA, ERD, STEVE OLIVE, 
ERD 
GUATEMALA FOR USAID, JULIA ASTURIAS, ENR, DAVID HULL, 
FOOD FOR PEACE 
LIMA FOR USAID, JOHN IRONS, ECONOMIC GROWTH, ALFREDO 
GUTIERREZ, ECONOMIC GROWTH 
LA PAZ FOR USAID, WALTER SHEPHERD, FOOD FOR PEACE, 
ANGEL VASQUEZ, FOOD FOR PEACE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA, HO 
SUBJECT:  FFP: RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE LATIN 
AMERICA/CARIBBEAN REGIONAL FOOD AID MANAGERS CONFERENCE 
HELD IN LA ESPERANZA, HONDURAS ON NOVEMBER 17-19, 2003 
 
 
1. SUMMARY 
 
THE HONDURAS OFFICE OF FOOD FOR PEACE (FFP) HOSTED A 
REGIONAL FOOD AID MANAGERS\' WORKSHOP IN LA ESPERANZA, 
HONDURAS, ON NOVEMBER 17 THROUGH NOVEMBER 19, 2003. 
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE WORKSHOP WERE THE PRESENTATIONS BY 
THE FFP DIRECTOR, LAUREN LANDIS AND OTHER FFP/W STAFF, 
ON NEW FFP POLICIES AND DIRECTIONS AS WELL AS THE 
DISCUSSIONS AND INFORMATION EXCHANGE THAT TOOK PLACE 
AMONG PARTICIPATING REGIONAL FFP OFFICERS.  THE 
WORKSHOP PRODUCED AN EXCHANGE OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
BETWEEN THE FIELD AND FFP/W PROGRAM AND MANAGEMENT 
ISSUES. END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  BACKGROUND 
 
FFP DIRECTOR LAUREN LANDIS DISCUSSED FFP\'S NEW VISION 
ON FOOD AID PROGRAMMING, AND FFP\'S MANAGEMENT 
STREAMLINING EFFORTS.  IN ADDITION TO AVAILABILITY, 
ACCESS, AND UTILIZATION, A NEW CRITERION, \"THE ABILITY 
OF PEOPLE TO COPE WITH STRESS, SHOCKS AND RISKS\", HAS 
BEEN ADDED AS TO HOW DCHA/FFP VIEWS FOOD SECURITY. 
FOOD AID CAN NOW BE USED TO IMPROVE HOUSEHOLDS\' ABILITY 
TO COPE WITH SHOCKS AND RISKS.  THE NEW CONCEPT OF 
INTEGRATING RELIEF AND DEVELOPMENT FOOD AID INTO 
MISSION STRATEGIES SUGGESTS A MAINSTREAMING OF FOOD AID 
INTO BILATERAL USAID PROGRAMS IN THE FIELD.  THE 
STREAMLINING IS INTENDED TO IMPROVE MANAGERIAL 
EFFICIENCY INCLUDING FFP STAFFING AND TIMELY UPDATES OF 
GUIDANCE AND REGULATIONS. 
 
LAUREN LANDIS, FFP DIRECTOR AND AID/W/FFP STAFF 
PRESENTED TECHNICAL WORKING SESSIONS DEALING WITH THE 
NUTS AND BOLTS OF FOOD AID MANAGEMENT, INCLUDING 
RECENTLY ISSUED GUIDELINES, REGULATIONS, MONETIZATION, 
COMMODITY MANAGEMENT, SECTION 202(E) AND INTERNAL 
TRANSPORT, STORAGE AND HANDLING (ITSH) GUIDELINES, ETC. 
INDIVIDUAL COUNTRY FFP OFFICERS GAVE PRESENTATIONS ON 
CURRENT TITLE II PROGRAMS IN THE FIELD.  THE GROUP 
DISCUSSED HOW TO INTEGRATE NEW FOOD AID THINKING INTO 
ONGOING PROGRAMS IN THE FIELD.  THE INFORMATION SHARING 
AND PROBLEM SOLVING DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN PARTICIPANTS 
AND PRESENTERS WERE EXTREMELY USEFUL AND SIGNIFICANTLY 
ENHANCED THE VALUE OF THE WORKSHOP. 
 
3.  RECOMMENDATIONS/ACTION ITEMS 
 
A LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS WAS DEVELOPED BASED ON IDEAS 
AND SUGGETIONS COMING OUT OF THE CONFERENCE.  THESE 
ARE: 
 
 
  A.   DCHA/FFP SHOULD CREATE A CERTIFICATION PROGRAM FOR 
     ITS STAFF.  FOR THIS PURPOSE, FFP SHOULD IMPROVE, 
     CONSOLIDATE AND FORMALIZE A COMPREHENSIVE FFP OFFICER 
     TRAINING PACKAGE.  THE FOLLOWING COURSES WERE SUGGESTED 
     FOR ALL FFP FIELD STAFF (PARTICULARLY NEW STAFF): 
 
           FOOD AID REQUEST ENTRY SYSTEM (FARES) 
           COGNIZANT TECHNICAL OFFICER CERTIFICATION 
           AUTOMATED DIRECTIVES SYSTEM (ADS) 
    DAP MANAGEMENT 
           DAP TRACKING SYSTEM 
           PLANNING, ACHIEVING, LEARNING (PAL) 
           ECONOMIC GROWTH 
           INTRANET TRAINING (INTERIM MEASURE) 
           INTERNSHIP OR FIELD/WASHINGTON EXCHANGE PROGRAM 
 
  B.   MISSIONS SHOULD MAKE A CONCERTED EFFORT TO MONITOR 
     WFP PROGRAMS AND INFORM FFP/W OF PROBLEMS OR SUCCESSES 
     (ESPECIALLY IN THE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS). 
 
GRAMS). 
 
  C.   THE IMPACT OF MONETIZATION ON FOOD SECURITY AND 
     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT NEEDS TO BE BETTER QUANTIFIED ON A 
     WORLD-WIDE BASIS. A COUPLE OF PARAGRAPHS ON THE IMPACT 
     OF MONETIZATION ON A PARTICULAR TITLE II PROGRAM SHOULD 
     BE REQUIRED IN THE COOPERATING SPONSOR RESULT REPORT 
     AND RESOURCE REQUEST (CSR4) REPORTING PROCESS. 
 
  D.   DCHA/FFP SHOULD PRESENT THE NEWLY AWARDED 
     INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY BUILDING (ICB) PROGRAMS TO FIELD 
     MISSIONS AND PUT A SUMMARY OF THE ICB PROGRAMS ON THE 
     USAID INTRANET. 
 
  E.   FFP SHOULD CONSIDER HOW BEST TO ADDRESS VULNERABLE 
     POPULATIONS WITH TITLE II PROGRAMMING, PARTICULARLY 
     HIV/AIDS AFFECTED COMMUNITIES, VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE OR 
     NEGLECT, AND THE URBAN POOR. 
 
  F.   FFP/W AND FIELD STAFF SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED TO 
     PARTICIPATE IN THE KANSAS CITY COMMODITY OFFICE FOOD 
     AID CONFERENCE IN APRIL. 
 
  G.   MISSIONS\' RESPONSIBILITIES FOR MANAGING FOOD AID 
     PROGRAMS SHOULD BE INCORPORATED IN THE POLICIES AND 
     PROCEDURES MANUAL; FFP/W EXPECTATIONS OF MISSIONS\' 
     ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES (INCLUDING MANAGEMENT) 
     SHOULD BE CLEARLY STATED IN THE ANNUAL CRITERIA CABLE 
     SENT BY FFP/W TO THE FIELD. 
 
  H.   FOR THE NEWLY CREATED DAP TRACKING SYSTEM, INCLUDE 
     THE MISSION SUPPORT CABLE NUMBER IN THE DAP TRACKING 
     SYSTEM; AND INCLUDE SPACE FOR FIELD COMMENTS IN DAP 
     TRACKING SYSTEM.  THE MISSION LEVEL TRACKING SYSTEMS 
     SHOULD BE REVIEWED AS FFP DEVELOPS NEW TRACKING SYSTEMS 
     TO ENSURE CONSISTENCY AND LACK OF DUPLICATION OF 
     EXISTING SYSTEMS. 
 
  I.   WORK WITH THE OFFICE OF POLICY AND PROGRAM 
     COORDINATION TO DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN THE LIFE OF 
     ACTIVITY (LOA) AND FISCAL YEAR FINANCIAL REPORTING 
     EXPECTATIONS. 
 
  J.   EXPLORE WAYS FOR THE MISSIONS TO MORE FULLY REPORT 
     ON TITLE II PROGRAMS AS REPORTING THROUGH ONLY ONE 
     STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE MAY NOT ADEQUATELY REFLECT THE 
     IMPACT OF THE TOTAL PROGRAM.  E.G. INTEGRATED FOOD 
     SECURITY APPROACH COVERING HEALTH, EDUCATION AND 
     AGRICULTURAL DIVERSIFICATION. 
 
  K.   ESTABLISH A VIABLE NETWORK (TEAM) MECHANISM AT THE 
     MISSION LEVEL FOR COORDINATING THE FAMINE EARLY WARNING 
     SYSTEM (FEWS) PROGRAM. 
 
   M. HOLD SUCH REGIONAL FOOD AID MANAGEMENT 
CONFERENCES AT LEAST 
      ONCE A YEAR IN THE FIELD. 
 
 
HONDURAS/FFP IS INCORPORATING RECOMMENDATIONS THAT 
PERTAIN TO THE REGIONAL WORKSHOP INTO ITS FY04 
ACTIVITIES.  HONDURAS/FFP THANKS AID/WASHINGTON STAFF, 
THE REGIONAL FFP OFFICERS WHO PARTICIPATED, AND THE 
MISSIONS THAT SENT THEM, FOR THEIR COMMITMENT AND 
ENTHUSIASM TO FURTHERING THE WORK OF FOOD FOR PEACE IN 
THE FIELD.  THANKS TO THE FFP DIRECTOR LAUREN LANDIS 
FOR HER PARTICIPATION AND FOR BRINGING FFP/W\'S \"NEW\" 
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT CONCEPT TO THE FIELD. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13166","1/9/2004 20:42","04TEGUCIGALPA56","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1880","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SCUL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN MINISTER OF CULTURE RESIGNS; CITES 
ON-GOING DISPUTE WITH FIRST LADY 
 
REF: 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1880 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (U) On January 6, Honduran Minister of Culture Mireya 
Batres (former fiancee of Honduran President Ricardo Maduro) 
publicly announced her resignation.  Batres\' resignation 
comes as no surprise, as her tense relationship with First 
Lady Aguas Ocana has flared publicly on more than one 
occasion.  It is unclear at this point who will be selected 
to replace Batres; and there are rumors that her ministry 
will be subsumed into the Ministry of Education.  Batres\' 
father, a presidential advisor, had resigned earlier due to 
the First Lady\'s behavior (reftel). 
 
2. (U) In a press conference on January 7, Batres indicated 
that \"when personal and professional situations interfere 
with one another, then it is time to go.\"  Apparently, Batres 
made her final decision to resign after National Security 
Advisor (and de facto Chief of Staff) Ramon Medina Luna 
intercepted her on her way into a January 5 New Year\'s 
reception for the diplomatic community at the presidential 
palace.  According to Batres, Medina Luna requested (on 
behalf of Maduro) that she not attend the ceremony \"because 
it would upset the First Lady,\" even though all other 
ministers were invited to the event. 
 
3. (U) In an open letter to President Maduro, Batres (who up 
to this point had refrained from caustic public remarks 
regarding the First Lady) called Ocana\'s actions 
\"intolerable,\" claiming that the First Lady on more than one 
occasion had impeded her from carrying out her official 
responsibilities.  Ocana subsequently publicly denied any 
involvement in the decision to exclude Batres from the 
diplomatic event and Maduro has denied to comment on his 
reasons for excluding Batres from the event. 
 
4. (C)  COMMENT: The manner in which Batres was eased out of 
her cabinet position is indicative of the leadership style 
exhibited by President Maduro and his administration thus 
far.  Rather than confronting prickly personnel situations 
head-on or delivering unpopular policy decisions himself, 
Maduro often prefers that his subordinates carry the water 
when any type of bad or uncomfortable news is announced, 
which at times creates even more conflict.  END COMMENT 
PALMER 
"
"13167","1/9/2004 22:13","04TEGUCIGALPA58","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE348650|04STATE443","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/USOAS, WHA/EPSC (SLISTON), AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, KSUM, KDEM, XM, XL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS TO BE HELPFUL AT SPECIAL SUMMIT OF THE 
AMERICAS 
 
REF: A. STATE 443 
     B. 03 STATE 348650 
 
Classified By: Francisco L. Palmieri, Political Counselor; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador Palmer delivered Ref A demarche to Honduran 
President Ricardo Maduro and Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa 
Bautista on January 8 and 7.  (Note: Post had delivered Ref B 
demarche to MFA on December 29. End Note.)  In separate 
meetings with President Maduro and FM Rosa Bautista, 
Ambassador Palmer emphasized the importance of the Summit 
producing credible results that are meaningful to both 
nations\' general public.  He particularly stressed the 
importance of strong language on transparency and 
anti-corruption efforts, education, terrorism and the need 
for specific dates for completion of actions.  President 
Maduro and FM Rosa Bautista expressed their support for U.S. 
objectives.  Rosa Bautista told the Ambassador that he 
expected MFA Director General for Foreign Policy Ambassador 
Mario Fortin to work closely with the U.S. delegation to 
ensure that the Summit declaration is geared towards 
producing tangible results. 
 
2. (C) FM Rosa Bautista told the Ambassador he would arrive 
in Mexico on Sunday, January 11, and that President Maduro 
would arrive on January 12.  He noted that Ambassador Fortin 
was already in Mexico and encouraged the U.S. delegation to 
seek him out in order to explore ways that Honduras can be 
more supportive of U.S. goals and objectives. 
PALMER 
"
"13168","1/9/2004 22:46","04TEGUCIGALPA59","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04USDAOTEGUCIGALPAIIR6841998043","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, INR/B, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2014 
TAGS: MARR, PGOV, PREL, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN SENIOR HONDURAN MILITARY 
LEADERSHIP, MAINLY FOR THE BETTER 
 
REF: A. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 684199804 03 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2844 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On January 5, the Honduran Armed Forces made 
significant changes among its senior leadership, installing 
new officers in the positions of Vice Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, Inspector General of the Armed Forces, and 
Commander of the Navy.  These leadership changes reflected 
the normal retirement process, the sidelining of a 
disgruntled officer, and the advancement of another officer 
for his superior performance.  On balance, the changes should 
be beneficial for U.S. interests in Honduras.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (U) On January 5, the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) made 
significant changes among its senior leadership.  Brigadier 
General Jorge Abelardo Andino Almendares was relieved as Vice 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and replaced by Colonel 
Hector Leonel Pavon Lopez, formerly the Director of 
Operations on the Joint Staff.  BGEN Andino was retired after 
thirty years of service.  BGEN Luis Alonzo Maldonado Galeas 
was relieved as Inspector General of the Armed Forces and 
replaced by Colonel Nelson Willys Mejia Mejia, the commanding 
general of the Navy.  Captain Jose Eduardo Espinal Paz, 
formerly the Chief of the Navy Staff, was selected to replace 
COL Mejia as Commander of the Navy. 
 
3. (C) Notable among these changes is the relief of BGEN 
Maldonado as Inspector General.  He was considered by many to 
be the logical replacement for Chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff (CJCS), Major General Jose Isaias Barahona Herrera, 
whom President Ricardo Maduro and Minister of Defense 
Federico Breve had decided to retain in command of the HOAF 
for at least an additional year (ref B).  This decision 
effectively assures that Maldonado, who has been openly 
critical of CJCS Barahona\'s policies and leadership style, 
will not be awarded a higher command.  Maldonado will 
probably be assigned as a military attache to another country 
until it is time for him to retire, a common Honduran method 
of removing officers from contention for higher command. 
 
4. (C) COL Mejia\'s assignment to Inspector General is the 
most significant development for U.S. interests.  It also 
indicates high-level approval for the way he has reformed the 
Honduran Navy.  Mejia, an army artillery officer, took 
command of the Navy two years ago after a narco-corruption 
scandal left no suitable naval officer available to command 
it.  The Navy, under Mejia\'s leadership, has had 
unprecedented success in interdicting narcotraffickers along 
Honduras\' Caribbean coast.  The appointment of CAPT Espinal 
to replace COL Mejia should also raise moral among the Navy 
rank and file as he is a career naval officer.  However, CAPT 
Espinal is unlikely to be as dynamic as COL Mejia, and the 
Navy\'s counternarcotics successes may decline. 
 
5. (C) A widely anticipated personnel change that has failed 
to take place is the relief of Colonel Manual Enrique Caceres 
Dias, Commanding General of the Honduran Air Force (ref A). 
COL Caceres has been under increased scrutiny for allegedly 
mismanaging Air Force funds.  As this would have been the 
ideal time to replace COL Caceres, he will probably retain 
his command (pending no further allegations of malfeasance) 
for at least another year. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  On balance, these changes should be 
beneficial to U.S. interests.  Sidelining BGEN Maldonado was 
a wise move, but not replacing COL Caceres was questionable. 
COL Mejia has already expressed to DAO that the Embassy can 
come directly to him if they experience any problems with the 
Navy under CPT Espinal\'s command.  COL Mejia\'s promotion to 
the IG job will enable him to continue being a positive force 
in support of U.S. counternarcotics objectives.  End Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13169","1/9/2004 23:12","04TEGUCIGALPA61","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON); IIP/G/WHA; EB/EPPD 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, SMIG, KPAO, HO, PA 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON NEW IMMIGRATION POLICY, 
JANUARY 9, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 1/9 entitled \"A door of opportunity\".  \"The new 
immigration program proposed by president Bush has had 
diverse reactions internationally.\" 
 
\"For instance, for some Central American governments that 
every year have to deal with a difficult negotiation process 
to extend the benefits of the TPS, this program provides an 
opportunity for our fellow countrymen to work in the U.S. 
for at least three years.  However, we still don\'t know what 
it\'ll happen to our immigrants when the three-year period 
ends.  The Bush proposal doesn\'t say they can stay. 
Analyzing the details of the proposal, we see that it 
contains some measures regarded as \"incentives\" for illegals 
to go back to their countries.\" 
 
\"The immigrants\' aspiration has always been to permanently 
resolve their irregular status.  Honduran president Ricardo 
Maduro expressed his pleasure, saying \'it might be the 
chance to achieve a permanent status for our countrymen.\' 
Without a doubt, this is a door, but it\'s not the complete 
shelter that millions of Hondurans in the U.S. had hoped 
for.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 
1/9 entitled \"A lot of noise, but.\".  \"Bush\'s plan on the 
legalization of undocumented workers drew wide-ranging 
reactions, being called \"just a plan for temporary workers\" 
to \"an innovative immigration policy.\"  The opinions are 
certainly diverse, but the common background behind these 
views is undoubtedly the upcoming elections in the U.S.\" 
 
\"Will this new policy make the U.S. borders any safer?  This 
is the question everyone is asking, but we think that 
migratory flows to the U.S. will not be stopped, and believe 
that the minimal regulations included in Bush\'s plan should 
be expanded to favor the workers\' and their families\' 
inclusion in American society.\" 
 
\"This plan has nothing special to celebrate, because the 
causes of migration are worse than they were twenty years 
ago.\" 
 
\"In one way or another, the Hondurans who struggle every day 
to avoid being captured by immigration authorities should be 
relieved by this plan, which is yet to be approved by the 
U.S. Congress.\" 
 
3. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 1/9 entitled \"The proposal of George W. Bush\". 
\"If the new immigration policy proposed by George W. Bush 
finally becomes law, it should be a good development, not 
only for the eight million undocumented aliens who work and 
live in the U.S., but also for the economies of their 
countries of origin that significantly depend on their 
remittances.\" 
 
\"Everyone knows that the Bush proposal, just a few months 
before the November elections, is an attempt to attract the 
Hispanic vote.  Considering this point, we hope that mere 
political distrust doesn\'t tear it down.  We hope Bush knows 
how to defend it, not only as an example of his goodwill 
toward the poor undocumented immigrants who are usually 
exploited due to their irregular status, but also as a 
mechanism to guarantee the supply of labor for American 
companies.\" 
 
\"We expect that both Republicans and Democrats will provide 
their full support for the plan.  There\'s no doubt that all 
Hondurans will greatly gain from this reform of the U.S. 
immigration laws to match the current reality.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"13236","1/13/2004 16:30","04TEGUCIGALPA70","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000070 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
POSTS FOR DHS AND CONS 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, CA/FPP, EB, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, KFRD, KHLS, ASEC, KCRM, EFIN, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: ALIEN SMUGGLERS OF CHINESE NATIONALITY ARRESTED IN 
HONDURAS; GOH ATTACKS CONTINUING ALIEN SMUGGLING FRAUD FROM 
CHINAZO PASSPORT SCAM 
 
Ref: 03 Tegucigalpa 002965 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On December 9 and 11, Hu Weng RONG (DPOB: 
7/28/1975, China) and He Jia BIN (DPOB: 5/06/1975, China) 
were arrested in Honduras.  Both had obtained Honduran 
nationality in the early 1990s. The arrests were carried out 
by the Honduran General Directorate of Special Investigative 
Services (DGSEI-Police in the Ministry of Public Security) 
and the Honduran Public Ministry. Intelligence assessment 
was provided by DHS/Tegucigalpa. The individuals were key 
members of an international alien smuggling ring that 
specialized in bringing PRC citizens into Europe, the U.S. 
and Latin America with forged Honduran, Japanese, and 
Taiwanese passports and naturalization documents.  This 
organization\'s fee for smuggling services was US$60,000.00 
per alien.  Sixty-five percent of this fee, between 
US$35,000 to US$40,000, is the estimated cost of the 
documents.  The organization is linked to Juan Francisco 
Flores-Ochoa, a former employee of the Honduran immigration 
office. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) BACKGROUND: During the early 1990s, the Honduran 
Congress passed a decree permitting the naturalization of a 
specific number of Chinese citizens who would invest in 
private sector enterprises in Honduras.  Nationality was 
acquired after a certain amount was paid into the Honduran 
Central Bank.  Unknown thousands of PRC citizens as well as 
persons from Hong Kong and Taiwan took advantage of this 
decree.  The advantage of holding a Honduran passport was 
that they could pass through countries in the European Union 
and Central America without a visa.  Abuses became 
widespread and eventually, authorities lost control over the 
process.  The vulnerability of Honduran systems for the 
issuance of passports, birth certificates, identification 
cards and driver\'s licenses became public knowledge. 
Individuals and organizations took advantage of the weak 
systems to start a scam that became known as \"Chinazo\".  In 
Chinazo, the aliens paid money directly to GOH officials or 
alien smugglers and were issued false documents indicating 
that they had become Honduran.  None of the money, however, 
was deposited in the Central Bank.  It is estimated that 
Chinazo netted millions of dollars for the perpetrators and 
no one has ever been prosecuted.  In spite of the repeal of 
the decree in 1996, a large number of false documents are 
still in circulation and are being used by alien smugglers. 
 
3.(U) To add to local problems, 1,600 Honduran passports 
were stolen from the passport office in San Pedro Sula in 
2001.  The GOH issued a world-wide alert detailing the 
theft.  In spite of the alert, Chinese travelers carrying 
stolen passports have been intercepted in Asia and Europe. 
A report from Germany stated that a citizen of Kazakhstan, 
who was involved in money laundering, had used a stolen 
Honduran passport to travel through Germany, by land. 
 
4. (SBU) In March 2002, two Lebanese citizens were arrested 
in Tegucigalpa attempting to leave Honduras with two of the 
stolen passports. Interestingly, they had entered Honduras 
using two other Honduran passports which had been issued to 
Honduran citizens, but which had been falsified. 
Investigations revealed that the Honorary Honduran Consul in 
Jordan, Faiz El Madi Khuri, sold twenty-five of the stolen 
passports in the Middle East. Of these twenty-five 
passports, only three have been intercepted. El Madi Khuri 
had obtained the passports from a former GOH Immigration 
employee, Juan Francisco Flores-Ochoa.  Flores-Ochoa spent 
seven months in jail after being fired from his immigration 
job during the theft investigation.  Flores-Ochoa remains at 
large in spite of the fact that local authorities issued a 
new warrant for his arrest (see paragraph 6 below.)  El Madi 
Khuri remains a fugitive from Honduran authorities and is 
reported to be residing in Kuwait. 
 
5. (SBU) Some stolen passports have been intercepted by U.S. 
Customs at the Miami International airport as they were 
being sent via DHL to China, Japan, Germany, Belgium, 
Argentina, Ireland, Spain, England and Hungary.  Customs 
Miami intercepted nine packages containing seventeen stolen 
Honduran passports.  DHL Airway bills from the packages 
revealed that the senders were located in Tegucigalpa and 
had used false names and addresses.  An ensuing 
investigation revealed the identity of several senders, 
including arrestee, Hu Weng Rong.  Also, DHS Rome reported 
that authorities in France intercepted two packages at the 
International airport in Roissy. One person was arrested in 
France.  DGSEI is continuing investigation of the use of DHL 
and other international courier services to send stolen 
passports abroad. 
 
6. (U) In June 2003, an Indian national, Pritesh 
Bhupendrabhai Patel, was arrested in San Pedro Sula for 
being in possession of one of the stolen passports.  His 
arrest led to the arrest and conviction of Nicolas 
Arquimides Cisneros, a citizen of El Salvador, on charges of 
alien smuggling and forgery of public documents.  An arrest 
warrant was also issued for Juan Francisco Flores-Ochoa on 
the same charges.  Flores-Ochoa has not yet been taken into 
custody. 
 
7. (SBU) In August 2003, the DGSEI temporarily halted 
investigation of Chinese smuggling activities because a 
police officer had disclosed confidential information to 
members of the Chinese community in Tegucigalpa.  However, 
during November, activities resumed.  On November 15, police 
arrested two PRC citizens traveling on forged Japanese 
passports.  They were being assisted by another PRC who 
became a naturalized Honduran. 
 
8. (U) Police surveillance also successfully tied Hu Weng 
RONG and several other members of the smuggling operation to 
Juan Francisco Flores-Ochoa.  On December 9, Hu Weng RONG 
was arrested at the San Pedro Sula airport on charges of 
alien smuggling and document forgery.  RONG had accompanied 
two other PRC citizens, traveling on forged Japanese 
passports.  The two had attempted to board a Sol Air flight 
to Miami.  Their arrest and further surveillance supported 
the issuance of a search warrant for residences of Hu Weng 
RONG.  At one residence, police found three unopened China 
Express packages with \"passports\" listed on the content 
labels.  Also, large numbers of false Honduran 
identification cards, false drivers licenses, false 
naturalization certificates, copies of airway bills for 
packages that had been intercepted by Customs/Miami, airway 
bills for packages mailed to He Jia BIN, two stolen Honduran 
passports with complete biographical information but no 
photographs, a laminating machine, rolls of laminate, and 
original seals from the Honduran Transit Police.  In 
addition, there were blank authorization forms for Honduran 
non-immigrant and immigrant visas that lacked only the 
signatures of the Director of Immigration, and blank 
stationery from the GOH Ministry of Government and Justice 
and Immigration offices.  There was also a check issued to 
Juan Francisco Flores-Ochoa and a notarized authorization 
form from Flores-Ochoa to HU Weng Rong, granting HU 
permission to drive Flores-Ochoa\'s vehicle throughout 
Central America. 
 
9. (U) The evidence that tied HU to HE Jia Bin was 
sufficient for the police to get search warrants for BIN\'s 
residence.  They found large numbers of naturalization 
certificates, forged migration seals from Honduras and 
Panama, Western Union money transfers amounting to more than 
sixty thousand U.S. dollars, and a large amount of cash in 
Lempiras as well as U.S. dollars. 
 
10. (U) He Jia BIN was ordered arrested on charges of 
forgery of public documents, possession of instruments for 
the forgery of public documents, money laundering and alien 
smuggling.  Hu Weng RONG was held on charges of forgery of 
public documents.  Both are being held without bail.  The 
Ministry of the Interior has openly expressed interest in 
revoking their naturalization. 
 
11. (SBU) DHS/Tegucigalpa has successfully identified other 
PRC and Honduran members of this alien smuggling 
organization and will coordinate with the Public Ministry 
and DGSEI in the continuing investigation. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13239","1/13/2004 20:26","04TEGUCIGALPA77","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000077 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD, WHA/CEN, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, KSUM, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON THE SPECIAL SUMMIT OF THE 
AMERICAS, JANUARY 13, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 1/13 entitled \"Less differences\".  \"The Summit of the 
Americas was inaugurated in Monterrey, Mexico, in a context 
of apparent or real differences among some of the countries 
participating on it.\"  \"The Summit will touch on a series of 
interesting issues, and although there\'s always some doubt 
about the practical results of discussions, the Summit could 
help to reduce the tension between the U.S. and some Latin 
American countries.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 1/13 entitled \"The Summit of the Americas\".  \"The Summit 
of the Americas meets in a relatively volatile environment, 
seeking to define the themes of a broad declaration about 
the most important issues in our Hemisphere.\" 
 
\"Ppoverty, which was one of the most widely present issues 
in previous Summits, no longer has the impact it used to, 
largely because its influence on the media has obviously 
decreased, although its importance has not.  Now, we need 
concrete and tangible actions to combat it, rather than just 
political declarations on poverty.\" 
 
\"It appears that the final document of the Summit will 
highlight the importance of small and medium enterprises for 
the development of Latin America, as well as the need to put 
an end to corruption.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"13240","1/13/2004 21:01","04TEGUCIGALPA78","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD, WHA/CEN, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, KSUM, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTIONS ON THE SPECIAL SUMMIT OF THE 
AMERICAS, JANUARY 12, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 1/12 entitled \"The Monterrey Summit\".  \"The 
Summit of the Americas in Monterrey will be a crucial test 
for the relationship between Latin America and the U.S. due 
to the controversy that has arisen lately over sensitive 
issues of foreign policy and the internal affairs of certain 
Latin American countries.\" 
 
\"This Summit will be, without a doubt, charged with tension, 
and it could be the starting point of a `Latin American 
axis\' led by Brazil, Argentina, and Venezuela.\" 
 
\"Central American governments have kept themselves out of 
this controversy.  Their current interests are mainly 
related to CAFTA and the new U.S. immigration policy that 
was announced by President Bush a few days ago.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"13241","1/13/2004 21:45","04TEGUCIGALPA80","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: IN FIRST MAJOR BUST OF THE YEAR, HONDURANS SEIZE 
APPROXIMATELY 1,000 KILOS OF COCAINE FROM PLANE 
 
 
1. On January 10, Honduran authorities seized approximately 
1,000 kilos of cocaine after a drug-laden aircraft, en route 
from Colombia, crashed landed in an attempt to avoid 
interdiction.  The plane, under escort by the Honduran Air 
Force and apparently low on fuel, crash landed on the 
Caribbean coast near the Barcelo Beach resort outside of La 
Ceiba as it was attempting evasive maneuvers.  The aircraft 
landed intact and the crew escaped.  Apart from the cocaine, 
police also confiscated numerous fuel drums. 
 
2. This seizure represents another successfully coordinated 
effort between the Honduran military and the INL-funded 
Frontier Police, who have been working jointly in an 
unprecedented capacity.  Honduran authorities destroyed the 
cocaine on January 12. 
PALMER 
"
"13345","1/16/2004 17:08","04TEGUCIGALPA116","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161708Z Jan 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
POSTS FOR DHS AND CONS 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, CA/FPP, EB, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, KFRD, KHLS, ASEC, KCRM, EFIN, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: TAIWANESE ALIEN SMUGGLER ARRESTED IN HONDURAS AS HE 
TRIED TO SMUGGLE THREE PRCS IN A FLIGHT BOUND FOR THE U.S. 
 
Ref: 03 Tegucigalpa 02878 (NOTAL) 
 
1. LIN WEI-CHUNG (alias LIN WAYNE, WAYNE LIN, COC: TAIWAN, 
POB: TAIWAN, date of birth 09-08-1965, PASSPORT M20182450, 
NIV foil 52681302), is the second Taiwan citizen arrested in 
Honduras during 2003 on charges of alien smuggling.  LIN 
tried to smuggle three impostor PRCs with bona fide 
Taiwanese passports that contained bona fide LINCOLN NIVs. 
LIN successfully smuggled two PRCs in the same circumstances 
in a previous trip. 
 
2. The first Taiwanese arrested on these same charges was 
CHEN Ke Jung, arrested in San Pedro Sula on October 12, 2003 
for trying to smuggle two PRCs with forged Belizean 
passports. (Tegucigalpa 02878). CHEN violated probation 
status and is currently a fugitive of Honduran authorities. 
 
3. Just like CHEN, LIN picked up the alien PRCs in 
Guayaquil,Ecuador. The nationality of the smugglers and the 
route of travel point to a single alien smuggling 
organization probably based in Los Angeles, California with 
connections in Quito, Guayaquil (Ecuador), Honduras, Belize, 
Guatemala and Taiwan. 
 
4. Unfortunately, LIN successfully smuggled two PRCs during 
his first trip to Honduras in early December 2003.  LIN 
arrived in Honduras on December 10, 2003 accompanied by HOU 
Jui Fong (alias: YU WU HSIUNG, Taiwanese passport M15062277, 
dob: 12-21-1976, NIV foil: 52681185), and LIU Su Chen 
(Taiwanese passport M16012569, dob: 06-21-1972, NIV foil: 
41867147), all travelers carried Taiwanese passports.  LIN\'s 
agenda indicates that he purchased a round trip ticket (TGU- 
SPS-TGU) for himself and a one-way ticket to San Pedro Sula 
for the PRCs.  LIN makes a point in his agenda to \"evaluate 
the situation at the airports in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro 
Sula\". 
 
5. In San Pedro Sula, LIN and the PRCs stayed at the GRAN 
HOTEL SULA for four nights.  The PRCs left for the United 
States on December 15, 2003 on board American Airlines 
flight 942.  The PRCs used the Taiwanese passports they used 
to enter Honduras. DHS/TGU ignores the PRCs\' real names but 
received word from American Airlines in San Pedro Sula, that 
the two PRCs are asylum applicants in Miami. 
 
6. LIN left Honduras for Guayaquil on December 16, 2003 and 
stayed at the GOLD CENTER HOTEL until his return to Honduras 
on December 18, 2003.  In this second trip, LIN brought 
three PRCs posing as Taiwanese nationals. LIN and the last 
three PRCs were arrested in Tegucigalpa on December 21, 2003 
as the PRCs attempted to board American Airlines flight 954 
bound for Miami, Florida. 
 
7. Biographic information on this last group follows: (1) 
PENG SEN-WANG, dob: 10-28-1971, pob: Kaohstung City, Taiwan, 
ID Number E120924382, passport 200491254, NIV foil 69406896; 
(2)CHUANG, CHIH-HUNG, dob: 12-11-1977, pob: Taiwan, ID 
number: T122622301, passport 210174446, NIV foil 69407308; 
and, (3)LEE TUSAN-MIN, dob: 07-02-1963, pob: Taiwan, ID 
number T120051260, passport 132888941, NIV voil 51152247. 
 
8. On December 26, 2003 LIN and the three impostor Taiwanese 
were ordered preventive arrest by the criminal court of 
Tegucigalpa.  LIN is held on charges of alien smuggling and 
document forgery and his companions are charged with use of 
false names and public document forgery.  Noteworthy is the 
fact that the translator for this hearing was LILIANA HAN, 
common-law spouse of HU WENG RONG, one of the targets of 
Operation LATIN TRIAD.  HU is in custody in San Pedro Sula 
on charges of alien smuggling and document forgery. 
 
9. The stamps on LIN\'s passport indicate extended trips to 
Cairo, Egypt; Guayaquil, Ecuador; Kingston, Jamaica; Belize, 
Guatemala, and Costa Rica. 
9. Post requests Taipei to review applications made by the 
referenced Taiwanese nationals. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13390","1/20/2004 20:27","04TEGUCIGALPA124","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE6662","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, HO, WTRO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS REACTS POSITIVELY TO ZOELLICK LETTER 
 
REF: STATE 6662 
 
On January 15th, EconOff confirmed that Minister of Industry 
and Trade Norman Garcia had received Ambassador Zoellick\'s 
letter urging movement on the WTO Doha Development Agenda in 
2004.  Minister Garcia said that his office is preparing a 
formal reply, but that his response is positive and 
supportive.  Garcia stated that it is absolutely important 
to continue to push for progress on the Doha round, and not 
let the outcome in Cancun become an obstacle to further 
advancement. 
 
Palmer 
"
"13392","1/20/2004 22:15","04TEGUCIGALPA125","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

202215Z Jan 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOJ/OFL, STATE DEPARTMENT FOR L/DL; INFO WHA/EX, USAID/W/GC 
 
PERSONAL INFORMATION 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, KLIG, KTIA, AMGT, HO 
SUBJECT: FOREIGN ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDING, 
USAID/TEGUCIGALPA 
 
 
1. Summary: The purpose of this cable is to notify 
Washington legal offices of USAID, the Department of State 
and the Department of Justice of an administrative labor 
claim filed by a Honduran National. Also, this cable seeks 
Department guidance on stopping a GOH pattern of repeatedly 
transmitting such cases to the U.S. Mission in Honduras.  In 
the present case, a Honduran national was offered employment 
by USAID/Honduras based on a temporary security clearance, 
and subsequently not hired when she failed to obtain a 
permanent security clearance. The claim was submitted to the 
Ministry of Labor and the transmitted to USAID through the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Honduras. 
The claim seeks a `reconciliation hearing\' between USAID\'s 
Executive Officer and the claimant\'s legal representative. 
 
2.  Information related to the claim is listed below: 
A. Name of plaintiff(s) and defendant(s): 
Plaintiff:  Lidia Margarita Fromm Cea; and defendant: USAID. 
USAID/Honduras Executive Officer Neil Kester is summoned to 
respond to the labor claim. 
 
B. Court or tribunal where the suit was filed and any case 
caption and docket number: 
Ministry of Labor and Social Security; case number 106. 
 
C. How (mail, hand delivery, diplomatic channels, etc.) and 
to whom notice of suit was served (USAID, embassy, 
contractor, etc.): Mail through diplomatic channels 
addressed to Mr. Neil Kester, Executive Officer of the 
Agency for International Development in Honduras. 
 
D. Date of service (on the notice itself) and date service 
was received by the mission or embassy: 
Date of transmittal is 16 December 2003 and note and 
documents were received at USAID on 19 December, 2003. 
 
E. Time period provided in which to appear or respond: 
None provided. 
 
F. Description of documents received: 
F1. Transmittal Letter from Ricardo-Alonso Flores, General 
Director of Diplomatic Ceremony (Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs) addressed to Mr. Neil Kester, Executive Officer of 
the Agency for International Development which transmits 
case no. 106 in reference to the labor claim presented by 
Lidia Margarita Fromm Cea, dated 16 December, 2003. 
F2. Transmittal Note from the General Secretariat (Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs) to the General Direction of Diplomatic 
Ceremonial, dated 16 December, 2003. 
F3. Document entitled \"Solicitation for Conciliation 
Hearing\" signed by Lidia Margarita Fromm Cea, and naming as 
her legal representative German Edgardo Leitzelar Hernandez, 
dated 13 November, 2003. 
F4. Copy of a letter offering employment to Lidia Fromm, 
signed by Neil Kester, Executive Officer, USAID/Tegucigalpa, 
dated 5 September, 2003. 
F5. Copy of Personal Services Contract Number 522-S-00-03- 
00217-00, between Lidia Fromm and USAID acting thru Neil 
Kester Contracting Officer. [NOTE:  The copy of contract 
submitted by Ms. Fromm omits Article VI, which states \"The 
contract is contingent on Security and Medical Clearances. 
If the Security and Medical Clearances are not granted, the 
contract will be terminated effective immediately.\"] 
F6. Email from USAID/Honduras Personnel Specialist Vivian 
Idiaquez to Lidia Fromm, dated 26 September, 2003 discussing 
the grant of a `temporary\' security clearance. 
F7. Letter from Neil Kester to Lidia Fromm dated 10 October, 
2003, informing Ms. Fromm of new information, that her 
temporary security clearance would not be converted to a 
final clearance, and that the provisional security clearance 
had been rescinded. 
F8. Letter Fromm/Kester 13 October, 2003. 
F9.  Letter Fromm to U.S. Ambassador Palmer dated 16 
October. F10. Letter Kester/Fromm of 22 October responding 
to letters from Fromm. 
F11. Ms. Fromm\'s document listing the succession of events. 
F 12.  Ministry of Labor receipt of claim dated 14 November, 
2003. 
F13.  Ministry of Labor authorization to transfer the claim 
to Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated 12 December, 2003. 
 
G.  Copies of all above documents are available as 
electronic documents in word format by contacting: Mr. Neil 
Kester (nkester@usaid.gov), Executive Officer,USAID/Honduras 
- ph.: (504) 236-9320 and fax (504) 236-7776. 
 
3. Short description of the nature of the legal suit, 
proceeding, or action: Ms. Fromm was selected by competitive 
process to fill an FSN PSC position as USAID/Honduras\' 
Project Management Specialist for Education.  On 11 
September, 2003, the Regional Security Office provided an 
initial `temporary\' security clearance for Ms. Fromm\'s 
initial period, NTE 120 days. Based on the foregoing, and on 
Medical Clearance, USAID/Honduras/EXO signed a contract with 
Ms. Fromm on 23 September.  By 10 October, the RSO had 
determined based on further information that Ms. Fromm would 
not be eligible for a security certification for full 
employment.  USAID/Honduras/EXO immediately informed Ms. 
Fromm that she would not be eligible for employment under 
the authority in the contract, clause A.6.3 which states 
\"The contract is contingent on Security and Medical 
Clearances.  If the Security and Medical Clearances are not 
granted, the contract will be terminated effective 
immediately.\"  NOTE: Ms. Fromm had not yet entered on duty 
at the time she received notice that she would not be 
granted the full security clearance.  On 19 December, 2003, 
USAID/Honduras received Ms. Fromm\'s request for a 
reconciliation hearing. 
 
4. Mission observations and proposed course of action. 
 
A. Mission proposes to deny Ms. Fromm\'s request for a 
reconciliation hearing with the USAID Executive Officer on 
the basis that Mr. Kester is an accredited diplomatic agent 
under Article 31 (1) of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic 
Relations and enjoys complete immunity from criminal 
jurisdiction of Honduras and comprehensive immunity from the 
civil and administrative jurisdiction of Honduras.  In 
addition, under Article 31 (2) of the Vienna Convention, Mr. 
Kester is not obligated to provide evidence as a witness. 
 
B. Furthermore, the Mission proposes to put the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs on notice to prevent future transmittal of 
administrative labor claims such as this one, four of which 
have been transmitted in the past year, naming accredited 
diplomatic agents in civil matters under practices set forth 
in the Honduran Labor Code. 
 
C. Mission proposes to respond by diplomatic note which, in 
addition to rebutting the claim from Lidia Fromm, will 
provide general terms so that any future such claims that 
subject the U.S. Mission administrative labor cases under 
Honduran law could be returned to the MOFA with reference to 
the present dipnote, and no futher discussion. 
 
5. Am/Embassy Tegucigalpa seeks concurrence with this 
proposal, or appropriate alternate guidance. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13427","1/21/2004 16:41","04TEGUCIGALPA141","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR BHartman 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO EXIM, OPIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, BTIO, KIPR, CASC, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: AmCit-owned Cable TV Company Claims Harassment by 
Powerful Honduran Rival 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  A U.S.-owned cable TV company, Mateo\'s 
Cable Vision, claims that it has been subject to an unusual 
number of audits and investigations from various GOH 
agencies over the past year.  The owners of this company, 
Michael and Sally Mitrovic, see these investigations as acts 
of harassment that are being orchestrated by their main 
competitor, who is an influential Honduran Congressman. 
This case was first brought to the attention of USTR in 
Washington, which notified the Embassy.  EconOffs have 
looked into the case and clarified the situation, and have 
provided advocacy by bringing the case to the attention of 
the appropriate GOH officials.  We have encouraged Honduran 
officials to ensure that their agencies conduct 
investigations fairly, not focusing only on U.S.-owned 
companies or allowing themselves to be affected by political 
considerations.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
U.S. Company Claims Harassment 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) Michael Mitrovic, a U.S. citizen, and his wife 
Sally Navarrete-Mitrovic, a Honduran-born, naturalized U.S. 
citizen, are owners of a cable TV company named Mateo\'s 
Cable Vision.  The company operates in the north coast city 
of Tela. 
 
3. (SBU) The only other cable TV company which operates in 
Tela is called SatelCab, and is owned by Rodolfo Irias 
Navas, a very powerful Congressman from the National Party. 
Congressman Navas served as President of Congress from 1990 
to 1994, and has been involved in other controversial 
business projects.  According to the Mitrovics, their own 
company, Mateo\'s Cable Vision, is doing very well, and 
steadily taking market share from SatelCab.  They believe 
that, as a result, Congressman Navas is using his political 
influence to bring pressure upon Mateo\'s Cable Vision 
through various government agencies.  The Mitrovics say that 
over the past year, they have been subject to an unusual 
number of investigations and audits from several government 
agencies, which constitute \"harassing and discriminatory 
acts.\" 
 
4. (SBU) Post first learned of the Mitrovics\' case from a 
December 12th letter sent from the Mitrovics\' U.S. attorney 
to Ambassador Zoellick of USTR.  This letter was then 
forwarded to post.  At the time, the only record of the 
Mitrovics in embassy files was the consular section file 
regarding the kidnapping attempt against Mrs. Navarrete- 
Mitrovic in 1999 (see paragraph 19 below); we had no record 
of the company\'s investment dispute.  Upon making contact 
with Mrs. Navarrete-Mitrovic, we arranged a meeting at the 
embassy to learn the details of the case, and have been in 
contact with the Mitrovics ever since.  After this meeting, 
Mrs. Mitrovic filled out an advocacy request, which the 
embassy received on January 13th. 
 
5. (SBU) The specific investigations and audits to which 
Mateo\'s Cable Vision has been subject are as follows: 
 
-- ENEE 
 
6. (SBU) In May 2003, the Honduran Electricity Company ENEE 
threatened to cut off electricity for Mateo\'s Cable Vision 
unless bills were paid immediately upon receipt.  The 
Mitrovics believe this reflects political pressure, because 
Mateo\'s Cable Vision holds a 42,000 Lempira (about USD 
2,300) bank bond in the name of the electricity company, and 
because the usual practice is to allow 30 to 60 days to pay 
electricity bills. 
 
-- Immigration Department 
 
7. (SBU) An Argentine national who works for Mateo\'s Cable 
Vision as a Technical Director was nearly deported from 
Honduras in early 2003.  The Mitrovics\' Honduran counsel 
quickly filed a request for residency papers for this 
consultant to avoid the deportation.  They believe that 
Congressman Navas was behind the unusually quick and 
efficient action taken by the GOH Immigration Department on 
this case. 
 
-- CONATEL 
 
8. (SBU) The Mitrovics claim that four times during 2003, 
officials from CONATEL, the GOH agency which regulates cable 
TV companies, have performed unannounced audits and 
inspections of Mateo\'s Cable Vision.  The Mitrovics believe 
that it is highly unusual for one company to be the subject 
of four audits and inspections during the course of a year. 
In the first three audits, the Mitrovics say that their 
company was found to be fully in compliance with 
regulations.  In the most recent audit, it was discovered 
that Mateo\'s Cable Vision had missed a payment earlier in 
the year; they have acknowledged this and agreed to make the 
payment and pay a late fee. 
 
-- IPR Division 
 
9. (SBU) The Copyright Office of the Division of 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), in the Ministry of 
Industry and Trade, is conducting an investigation into 
allegations that Mateo\'s Cable Vision has broadcast about 
thirty channels for which it does not have a contract.  The 
investigation was triggered by a complaint from ESPN, but 
the Mitrovics believe that ESPN received the information 
about Mateo\'s Cable Vision from Congressman Navas, their 
competitor.  Note: When the Mitrovics first established 
Mateo\'s Cable Vision in 2002, they simultaneously denounced 
Congressman Navas\' company, SatelCab, to the IPR Division, 
correctly alleging that SatelCab was broadcasting sixteen 
pirated channels.  It seems very feasible, though we have 
seen no direct evidence, that Congressman Navas is indeed 
involved behind the scenes as this same tactic is now being 
used against Mateo\'s Cable Vision.  End note. 
 
10. (SBU) The Mitrovics and their attorneys claim that the 
company has never broadcast ESPN, and that the company 
possesses contracts for most, but not all, of the channels 
that they have been accused of pirating.  However, 
one of the company\'s attorneys has indicated that at least 
one station was listed as available to Mateo customers, 
without the company having a contract, and that the company 
might be subject to a fine for this misleading advertising. 
In addition, Mrs. Navarrete-Mitrovic privately admitted that 
they have at times brought down signals for which they do 
not have a contract. 
 
11. (SBU) Of these four types of government audits or 
investigations cited as examples of harassment, the only one 
that is currently ongoing is the investigation of the IPR 
Division of the Ministry of Industry and Trade. 
 
-- Defamation 
 
12. (SBU) In addition, according to the Mitrovics\' 
attorneys, Michael Mitrovic has been described on a 
television station owned by Congressman Navas as having 
connections to Colombian narcotraffickers, apparently in an 
effort to damage Mr. Mitrovic\'s reputation and discourage 
customers from subscribing to his company\'s cable service. 
Mr. Mitrovic\'s attorneys acted to stop the television 
station from making defamatory accusations. 
 
---------------- 
Embassy Advocacy 
---------------- 
 
13. (SBU) In conversations with both Mr. and Mrs. Mitrovic 
and their lawyers, EconOffs have made it clear that we can 
not ask Honduran government agencies to refrain from 
auditing companies or investigating claims of wrongdoing - 
in effect, to refrain from doing their job.  We have also 
discussed the importance of correcting any weak points in 
the Mitrovics\' case.  The Mitrovics and their counsel are 
now focusing on addressing these aspects of their situation 
and responding to the IPR Division\'s investigation through 
the established legal channels. 
 
14. (SBU) However, we do find it highly credible that the 
pattern of audits and investigations experienced by the 
Mitrovics reflects the influence of their competitor, 
Congressman Navas.  We have raised the case with the 
appropriate GOH officials in order to draw attention to the 
perception that a U.S.-owned company is being harassed by a 
politically influential rival. 
 
15. (SBU) First, on December 18th, EconCouns spoke with 
Marlon Tabora, the President of CONATEL, the Honduran 
telecommunications regulatory agency.  Tabora was unfamiliar 
with the audits of the company by his office, but indicated 
willingness to speak directly to the Mitrovics or their 
counsel and address the issue. 
 
16. (SBU) On December 23rd, EconOff spoke with Marvin 
Discua, Director of the Intellectual Property Division of 
the Ministry of Industry and Trade.  EconOff expressed 
approval that Discua\'s office is pursuing claims of 
satellite piracy, but stressed that it is important that all 
such claims be given equal attention, and that a company not 
be singled out because it is U.S.-owned.  Discua assured 
EconOff that this is not the case, and has promised to send 
the embassy information regarding all investigations 
performed by his division during 2003. 
 
17. (SBU) EconCouns has also mentioned the case to the 
President\'s Special Advisor for Foreign Investment, Camilo 
Atala. 
 
18. (SBU) On January 13th, the embassy received an advocacy 
request from Mrs. Mitrovic, which we have faxed to the 
Department of Commerce.  In the request, Mrs. Mitrovic asks 
that the embassy \"investigate if CONATEL, the copyrights 
office, ENEE and other offices are as persistent with their 
inspections of other companies as with Mateo\'s Cable 
Vision.\"  Embassy does not recommend an investigation of 
this issue per se, but will work with Commerce to determine 
if any further actions are advised to be responsive to this 
advocacy request. 
 
-------------- 
Consular Issue 
-------------- 
 
19. (SBU) A separate issue concerns Mrs. Navarrete- 
Mitrovic\'s personal safety and, in particular, a kidnapping 
attempt against her which took place in 1999.  The alleged 
perpetrator of this crime was arrested on the day of the 
attempt, but released from prison after three months.  A new 
warrant was eventually issued for his arrest, based upon the 
kidnapping attempt and other past crimes that he is accused 
of committing, but he has not yet been arrested. 
 
20. (SBU) While the kidnapping attempt is unrelated to the 
Mitrovics\' investment dispute, the two issues were linked 
when the case was brought to the attention of USTR, and thus 
to the embassy.  Mrs. Navarrete-Mitrovic is now in contact 
with the consular section concerning the kidnapping case, 
and the assistance that the consular section can provide in 
tracking the GOH\'s efforts to apprehend the suspect. 
EconCouns and the consular section have urged the Mitrovics 
to place the highest possible priority on their personal 
security. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
21. (SBU) Comment: EconOffs have proceeded cautiously with 
this case, considering that the various Honduran government 
agencies accused of harassing Mateo\'s Cable Vision are, 
after all, doing their jobs, and given the indication of 
some limited IPR violations on behalf of the U.S. company. 
At the same time, it does seem very plausible to EconOffs, 
given our knowledge of the political and business climate of 
Honduras, that an influential Congressman is pulling strings 
to make life difficult for a growing, U.S.-owned competitor. 
Congressman Navas has been involved in some other high- 
profile business disputes in the past, including seeking to 
influence the adjudication of a permit to build a hydro- 
electric dam on the Cangrejal River.  Probably the most 
worrisome issue of all has been the spread of false rumors 
in Tela about the Mitrovics, with some versions alluding to 
ties to Colombian narcotraffickers. 
 
22. (SBU) We have been successful in clarifying the various 
issues of this complicated case, explaining the proper role 
of the embassy to the Mitrovics and their attorneys, and 
encouraging them to correct any minor disputes immediately, 
so that their company will have nothing to fear from 
government investigations.  Post will continue to follow the 
issue, as the case is an example of the difficult investment 
climate that at times prevails for U.S.-owned businesses in 
Honduras.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"13428","1/21/2004 18:40","04TEGUCIGALPA154","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE568","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR CA/OCS/CI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOCI, CASC, HO 
SUBJECT: HAGUE COMPLIANCE REPORT PREPARATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 00568 
 
1. Post concurs with CA/OCS/CI\'s Assessment of Honduran 
non-compliance with the Hague Convention on International 
Child Abduction. 
 
2. Furthermore, on July 9, 2003, Consular reps once again 
explained to the IHNFA representatives that the 
applicability issue regarding the Hague Abduction 
Convention was settled in July 2001 when Ambassador 
Policarpo Callejas, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Advisor, 
confirmed that since both Honduras and the USA are 
signatories to the Vienna Convention, the Hague 
Convention on International Child Abduction is in force 
between the two countries.  The Vienna Convention Article 
27 states that a country may not invoke the provisions of 
its internal law (ratification requirement) as 
justification for its failure to implement specific 
provisions of a treaty.  The IHNFA reps provided us with 
a copy of a letter dated May 30, 2003 addressed to the 
President of the Honduran Congress, Porfiro Lobo, in 
which they requested that Congress define the 
applicability of the Hague Convention in Honduras. 
Consular reps also provided the IHNFA with copies of all 
the documentation indicating that this issue had already 
been resolved.  On June 11, 2003, Post sent a letter to 
the President of the Honduran Congress 
Porfirio Lobo, requesting a prompt response to IHNFA\'s 
original inquiry.  On November 18, 2003, Post sent a 
letter to Congressman Jorge Arturo Reina, assigned to 
handle this issue, requesting a status report.  Several 
days later Congressman Reina responded by phone stating 
that they are diligently working to ratify the Convention 
as soon as possible. 
 
4. Cases currently pending at IHNFA: 
 
- On May 27, 1998, Post submitted Hague application to 
the IHNFA for the return of Chelsea Nicolette Patterson. 
 
- On July 10, 2003, Post submitted Hague application to 
the IHNFA for the return of Kevin Obed Berrios. 
 
- On October 9, 2003, Post submitted Hague applications 
to the IHNFA for the return of Jonathan Nassar Morais, 
Joshua Nassar Morais and Erick Junior Nassar Morais. 
 
5. Post will continue to actively pursue resolution of 
this matter by GOH authorities representing the 
Legislative and Executive branches of the government and 
will advise the Department of any new developments as 
they become available. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13453","1/22/2004 18:41","04TEGUCIGALPA169","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON FREEDOM OF THE PRESS, JANUARY 22, 
2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 1/24 entitled \"No Access\".  \"Within the package of 
Constitutional reforms approved by Congress, there is a new 
concept called Habeas Data, which was closes access to 
public information, even though it isn\'t part of the 
political agreements negotiated by the parties in Congress, 
and it\'s still mostly unknown by the people.\" 
 
\"At first, the concept of Habeas Data tries to protect any 
person\'s honor, and his or hers personal and familiar life. 
However, this new Constitutional clause could have such a 
wide scope that and may be subject to an anti-democratic 
interpretation.  For instance, it may be used to forbid the 
disclosure of publications, information or opinions that 
could be of interest to the population in general, but they 
can\'t be disclosed because they might appear to damage the 
particular interests of certain person or group.\" 
 
\"That\'s why this new concept has produced concern in the 
population, because they feel it should have been discussed 
in a more comprehensive manner, to avoid any doubt of its 
content and goals.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"13454","1/22/2004 21:09","04TEGUCIGALPA172","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD, WHA/CEN, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, KSUM, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON THE SPECIAL SUMMIT OF THE 
AMERICAS, JANUARY 15, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 1/15 entitled \"A great deal of rhetoric and few 
results\".  \"The Latin American presidents arrived in 
Monterrey with few expectations, and they came back with 
their hands practically empty.  More than ever, this Summit 
was characterized by meaningless speeches and vain promises. 
It went by without the creation of concrete measures to 
concretize the good intentions of the governments to `focus 
on the most vulnerable social sectors and increase the 
efforts to reduce poverty and social inequality\'.\" 
 
\"It also clear that the conflicts between Latin America and 
the Northern colossus in several issues, such as the FTAA, 
and the relationship of certain nations with the Cuban 
government still remain.\" 
 
\"One of the positive developments of this Summit was the 
agreement to reduce the costs of sending remittances from 
the immigrants to their countries of origin, which benefits 
millions of families and the financial systems of these 
countries.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 1/15 entitles \"Just another declaration\".  \"The 
Summit of the Americas ended with yet another declaration of 
the good intention of our governments.  The conclusions of 
the final declaration were mainly focused on political 
issues, neglecting once again the severe problem of poverty 
and unemployment in the hemisphere.  The Declaration of 
Nuevo Leon is only one more document that didn\'t answer the 
key question of this region: how can Latin America finally 
achieve a stable development?.\" 
 
\"One of the novelties of this Summit, although it\'s still 
just a theoretical proposal, is the commitment of all 
governments to reduce in half the costs of sending 
remittances.  This is a concrete goal.  However, there\'s 
still a need to propose effective measures to compete with 
the big transnational companies that receive enormous 
profits from the remittances sent to Latin America.\" 
 
3. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 1/15 entitled \"Uneventful\".  \"The Summit of the Americas 
ended without any particular development, fulfilling one of 
the expectations the people of the hemisphere had on this 
event.\" 
 
\"The Declaration of Nuevo Leon is full of expressions of 
support and willingness to fight against poverty, 
corruption, terrorism, narcotrafficking, and the illegal 
traffic of arms, but few of them can actually be fulfilled 
by the Latin American governments.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"13455","1/23/2004 1:04","04TEGUCIGALPA179","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000179 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, INL, L, WHA, WHACEN AND WHA/PPC 
SOUTHCOM FOR GENERAL HILL 
JIATF-S FOR RADM SIROIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, PINS, PREL, MCAP, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: DRUG PLANE CRASHES AFTER INTERCEPT BY HONDURAN AIR 
FORCE; GOH INSISTS PLANE WAS NOT SHOT DOWN 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco L. Palmieri 
for reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  Honduran Air Force Commander insists 1/20/04 
crash of a drug-trafficking civilian aircraft was not a 
shoot-down.  According to published statements and 
conversations with U.S. mission military members, Colonel 
Caceres stated that Honduran Air Force (HAF) interceptors 
twice contacted the aircraft and ordered it to land. 
Finally, following established HAF procedures, Caceres 
explained that the HAF pilots, flying at the side of the 
aircraft in question, fired warning shots on a parallel track 
to the flight path.  He maintains that the plane was not shot 
down.  Post has sought, but been unable to confirm, any other 
information which contradicts Col. Caceres\' account.  Post 
continues to press Government of Honduras (GOH) and Honduran 
Armed Forces (HOAF) sources for additional details of the 
circumstances of the crash of this aircraft, including 
authorization to visit the crash site.  Post will obtain a 
copy of the incident report as soon as one is prepared.  Post 
recommends that the U.S. continue to share intelligence with 
the GOH until or unless information is received that 
indicates that the Hondurans actually shot down the aircraft. 
 Halting intelligence sharing could be counterproductive to 
U.S. national interests and counternarcotics efforts in 
Honduras.   END SUMMARY 
 
2. (C) On 1/20/04, Honduran authorities were alerted by U.S. 
sources of the intrusion of its airspace over the Gulf of 
Fonseca by an unidentified, suspicious aircraft.  According 
to HAF sources, the aircraft entered Honduran airspace around 
1430 hours.  In response to this information, the HAF 
scrambled two planes to intercept the intruding airplane, 
which had not filed a flight plan for Honduras.  The HAF 
planes (Tucanos) signaled for the white, twin-engine plane to 
land at Toncontin International Airport.  The pilot ignored 
this request and evaded the HAF aircraft.  Sometime later, 
the same plane was relocated and was again approached near 
Comayagua in central Honduras.  The HAF pilots then directed 
the plane to land at Soto Cano Air Base.  Their instructions 
were ignored.  Finally, after the plane changed course and 
began heading toward the El Salvador-Honduras border, the HAF 
pilots, flying at the side of the aircraft in question, fired 
warning shots on a parallel track to the flight path. 
 
3. (C)  HAF sources reported that shortly after those shots 
were fired packages of presumably drugs or fuel were tossed 
from the suspicious plane prior to the crash.  HOAF sources 
said that the plane then took a series of aggressive, evasive 
measures, descending rapidly, before finally stalling, 
crashing and burning.  The weather was bad at the time, and 
the crash took place in mountainous and forested terrain in 
isolated Lempira Department.  Honduran Air Force Chief 
Caceres openly admitted that warning shots were fired; 
however, he insists that the HAF pilot did not shoot the 
plane down.  Caceres reiterated that the HAF pilots followed 
established HAF procedures in this incident. Embassy will 
request that the HAF provide copies of its intercept and live 
ammunition policies. 
 
4. (C)  Post continues to press GOH and HOAF sources for 
additional details of the circumstances of the crash of this 
aircraft.  Mission requested and received authorization to 
visit the crash site.  It will be visited on 1/23/04 and we 
will report results septel.  Post has sought, but been unable 
to confirm, any other information, which contradicts Col. 
Caceres\' account.  MILGP and DAO expect that a report of the 
incident will be prepared, noting a report was prepared 
within days of the April 2003 shoot down incident.  Mission 
will obtain a copy of it as soon as received. 
 
5. (C)  Police sources informed post that on the morning of 
1/21 police reached the site of the plane wreckage.  The 
plane had tail number N95L (fictitious), which belongs to a 
Cessna 142, a different kind of aircraft.  More than 19 kilos 
of presumed cocaine were reportedly found at the crash site, 
as well as the charred bodies of the pilot and one crew 
member. 
 
6. (U)  Separately, the media reported today that the motor 
and serial number of the plane were: 642080, Model Fiuring, 
order 145236.  The other motor number was 642081, series 
TMD516TT, Continental.  The tail had an American flag on it. 
The two bodies have been moved to the morgue in San Pedro 
Sula.  We understand that both bodies were completely 
charred.  Identification of the remains is impossible. 
 
7. (C)  In another development, on afternoon of 1/21/04 
around 1500 hours, Honduran sources reported that another 
suspected drug plane entered Honduran airspace.  The HAF 
scrambled aircraft to intercept it.  They were able to spot 
the plane over Olancho traveling in the direction of San 
Pedro Sula.  When the drug plane saw the Hondurans it was 
able, due to superior instrumentation, to fly into heavy 
clouds and evade the HAF interceptors.  Apparently the HAF 
aircraft do not have radar that allows them to \"see\" in cloud 
cover.  The Hondurans radioed info about the plane to 
Guatemalan authorities.  The plane was a twin engine King Air 
with tail number N89K (probably false).  When relaying this 
information, HAF sources shared their concerns that, when HAF 
aircraft have approached these drug airplanes in the past, 
the suspect airplane\'s crews have aimed AK 47s at the HAF 
pilots.  The HAF also reported that, on previous occasions, 
pilots of drug planes execute aggressive, evasive measures, 
including attempts to collide in mid-air, endangering HAF 
planes and crews. 
 
8. (C)  COMMENT:  We do not believe, based on the current 
available information, that a cut-off of intelligence sharing 
appears to be warranted.  Post recommends that the U.S. 
continue to share intelligence with the GOH until information 
is received that indicates that the Hondurans actually shot 
down the aircraft on January 20.  Post notes the GOH made 
enormous strides in its interdiction efforts during 2003, 
interdicting almost 6,000 kilos of cocaine, which was more 
than in the previous five years combined.  The GOH is going 
to considerable lengths and expense to assist the U.S. in our 
joint fight against narcotics trafficking.  U.S. has to date 
provided token financial support for HOAF military 
operations.  The HOAF is doing most of this work at its own 
initiative and cost.  Halting intelligence sharing could be 
counterproductive to U.S. national interests and 
counternarcotics efforts in Honduras.  Significant quantities 
of drugs are passing through Honduras.  If the U.S. cuts off 
intelligence sharing based on the current information, the 
GOH and HOAF will feel they are being unfairly punished. 
Future counternarcotics cooperation could be jeopardized. 
END COMMENT. 
PALMER 
"
"13477","1/23/2004 17:41","04TEGUCIGALPA185","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON STATE OF THE UNION SPEECH, 
JANUARY 23, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 1/23 entitled \"State of the Union Message\".  \"The message 
of President Bush fell short, not only did it not address 
Latin American issues, but it was weak  on international 
issues as a whole.  For instance, Bush didn\'t talk about 
some other key subjects, such as the Israel and Palestine 
conflict, and the risks in Afghanistan and North Korea.\" 
 
\"Bush didn\'t talk about Latin American issues; he ignored 
them.  He tried to focus on the domestic issues that, 
according to his own view, are more appealing to the 
American voters.  Certainly, all those conflictive and 
argumentative issues aren\'t good material for a State of the 
Union speech, particularly before an electoral campaign.\" 
 
\"The Hondurans that had a chance to listen to this speech 
noted that Bush mentioned only one Central American country, 
when he cited the members of the coalition in Iraq, although 
we\'re certain Honduras is one of the other fifteen countries 
he failed to mention Honduras.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"13499","1/26/2004 12:50","04TEGUCIGALPA193","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE15961","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, INL, L, WHA, WHACEN AND WHA/PPC 
SOUTHCOM FOR GENERAL HILL 
JIATF-S FOR RADM SIROIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, PINS, PREL, MCAP, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: DRUG PLANE CRASH SITE VISIT -- NO SMOKING GUN JUST 
CHARRED WRECKAGE 
 
REF: A. STATE 15961 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 179 
     C. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 6 841 9971 04 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco L. Palmieri 
for reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) On 1/23/04, U.S. country team members (DEA, DAO, 
JTF-B, and MILGP) visited the site of 1/20/04 
drug-trafficking air crash and were given full and unimpeded 
access by Government of Honduran (GOH) authorities.  The 
Embassy team was accompanied by the Honduran Soto Cano Air 
Base Liaison Officer and a Honduran Air Force (HAF) Command 
staff intelligence officer.  The accompanying HAF officials 
facilitated access and responded forthrightly to all 
inquiries.  The team was on the ground at the site for almost 
two hours. 
 
2. (C) The country team group, which included two U.S. 
military pilots, were able to closely inspect the burned out 
fuselage, other strewn wreckage, and the entire surrounding 
area of the crash site.  They were able to examine four 
remaining pieces of aircraft (representing about 10 per cent 
of the aircraft):  two engines, a wing, and the tail section. 
 It did not appear that any of this wreckage was struck by 
bullet fire.  The remaining wreckage was either charred or 
destroyed beyond recognition.  Serial numbers were obtained 
off the engines and will be reported septel through DAO and 
DEA messages. 
 
3. (C) One U.S. team member noted that it appears that the 
drug-trafficking aircraft hit the ground on its belly and not 
on its nose, which would be consistent with the GOH\'s 
scenario of a stalled aircraft which lost control and 
crashed.  The site is quite difficult to reach in an area of 
treacherous and mountainous terrain.  The area would be 
extremely difficult to navigate on a low-altitude evasive 
flight path. 
 
4. (C) COMMENT:  For the moment, Honduran cooperation has 
been forthcoming, although both HAF officials did inquire 
about the specific objective of the site visit.  END COMMENT. 
PALMER 
"
"13519","1/26/2004 21:45","04TEGUCIGALPA201","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE11998","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IO, S/CT, L, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, KTIA, XL, XM, CA, HO, OAS 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN DELEGATION TO OAS CICTE; 2002 OAS CT 
CONVENTION PENDING CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL 
 
REF: STATE 11998 
 
1. PolOff delivered January 20 reftel demarche on the OAS 
CICTE to MFA Director for Multilateral Issues Wendy Flores. 
MFA Director General fro Foreign Policy Mario Fortin told 
PolOff January 26 that the GOH delegation will only be 
Frontier Police Chief Ramon Sabillon.  Note:  Sabillon is an 
excellent contact of the Embassy and the Frontier Police 
receives INL counternarcotics funding.  The Frontier Police 
is charged with handling counterterrorism law enforcement 
issues.  End Note. 
 
2. The GOH is still not a party to the two Organization of 
American States (OAS) counterterrorism conventions: 
-- 1971 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of 
Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and 
Related Extortion that are of International Significance 
(signed by the GOH February 2, 1971) 
-- 2002 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of 
Terrorism (signed by the GOH June 3, 2002). 
 
3. The Honduran Congress recently gave approval to the 1971 
CT convention and the official decree approving the 
convention should be sent soon for the President\'s signature 
and publication in La Gaceta (akin to the Federal Register). 
The 2002 CT convention has been debated by Congress but has 
yet to come to a vote. 
 
4. Comment:  EmbOffs continue to push hard for the GOH to 
become a party to these two CT conventions as soon as 
possible.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"13520","1/26/2004 23:29","04TEGUCIGALPA203","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA193","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000203 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, INL, L, WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
SOUTHCOM FOR GENERAL HILL 
JIATF-S FOR RADM SIROIS 
SECDEF FOR EFROTHINGHAM 
NSC FOR JBJOSTAD 
DOJ FOR MLWARREN AND DKOFFSKY 
ONDCP FOR BCRANE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, PINS, PREL, MCAP, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF DEFENSE REVIEWING DECISION TO PROVIDE 
RULES OF ENGAGEMENT 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 193 
 
     B. STATE 15961 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 179 
     D. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 6 841 9971 04 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C) On mid-afternoon of January 26 the Chief of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff of the Honduran Armed Forces informed USMILGP 
Commander that he would provide a written copy of the 
Honduran Air Force\'s rules of engagement for intercepting 
intruding civil aircraft violating Honduran airspace and for 
the use of live ammunition, including warning shots, against 
suspected narcotrafficking aircraft or other suspect aircraft 
flying in Honduran airspace.  He later called back to say 
that the requested documents had been referred to the 
Minister of Defense and MOD attorneys for a final review and 
decision on whether or not to release the information. 
Ambassador has a previously scheduled luncheon with the 
Minister of Defense for January 27 and will raise issue if 
documents are not received on January 26. 
 
2. (C) Once post receives documents in question, it will send 
a detailed cable January 27 specifying answers to questions 
raised in ref B and an informal Embassy translation of the 
rules of engagement. 
PALMER 
"
"13554","1/28/2004 1:09","04TEGUCIGALPA209","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","04TEGUCIGALPA203","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000209 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, INL, L/LEI, WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
SOUTHCOM FOR GENERAL HILL 
JIATF-S FOR RADM SIROIS 
SECDEF FOR EFROTHINGHAM 
NSC FOR JBJOSTAD 
DOJ FOR MLWARREN AND DKOFFSKY 
ONDCP FOR BCRANE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, PINS, PREL, MCAP, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF DEFENSE REITERATES NO SHOOT-DOWN 
POLICY AND SHARES AIR DEFENSE STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 203 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 193 
     C. STATE 15961 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 179 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C)  SUMMARY:  Minister of Defense (MOD) Frederico Breve 
delivered a document to the Ambassador on January 27 which 
explains the Honduran Air Force\'s (HAF) standard operating 
procedures for intercepting intruding civil aircraft 
violating Honduran airspace and the use of live ammunition, 
including warning shots, against suspected narcotrafficking 
aircraft or other suspect aircraft flying in Honduran 
airspace.  The Government of Honduras (GOH) also provided 
copies of the incident reports for the 1/20 plane crash in 
the department of Lempira.  The MOD and the Chief of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff stated unequivocally, and in writing, 
that the GOH has a strict policy of not shooting down civil 
aircraft.  Breve welcomed the possible visit of a U.S. team 
to discuss air interdiction policy issues.  He stated 
forthrightly that the GOH has nothing to hide in this case. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C)  At a luncheon with the Ambassador on January 27 
Minister of Defense (MOD) Frederico Breve delivered a 
document to the Ambassador on January 27 which explains the 
Honduran Air Force\'s (HAF) standard operating procedures for 
intercepting intruding civil aircraft violating Honduran 
airspace and the rules of engagement for the use of live 
ammunition, including warning shots, against suspected 
narcotrafficking aircraft or other suspect aircraft flying in 
Honduran airspace.  The GOH had provided on January 26 copies 
of the incident reports for the 1/20 plane crash in the 
department of Lempira, which will be reported septel.  Breve 
presented the information as a matter of fact and entertained 
follow-up questions from the Ambassador, Deputy Chief of 
Mission, USMILGP Commander and Defense Attache. 
 
3. (C)  The 2-page document, which is signed by General 
Isaias Barahona, the Chief of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of 
the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF), explains HAF air defense 
intercept policy and reiterates that the HAF has discarded 
any procedure which would result in the firing on a civil 
aircraft with the intention of shooting it down.  The 
document begins by explaining that the HAF uses the ICAO 
international procedures for the interception of unidentified 
aircraft.  (Independently, the HAF Command Staff provided the 
Embassy with the specific pages from the ICAO Annex A that 
they use to signal intruding aircraft in Honduran airspace.) 
The document then adds that the HAF has established standard 
operating procedures (SOP) for this type of operation. 
 
4. (C)  According to the document, the HAF SOP employs a 
series of established tasks from its First Air Defense 
Squadron\'s Normal Operations Plan prior to a HAF aircraft 
intercepting another aircraft.  In Chapter B--The Procedure 
for Unknown/Suspicious Aircraft, the SOP establishes the 
following procedure (informal translation): 
 
A. In the case of having to detain or having information 
about unknown/suspicious aircraft. The Watch Officer in the 
HAF Operations Center (aka COFAH) shall take the following 
steps: 
 
1.    immediately shall inform the HAF General Command, the 
Chief of the Air Force Staff (aka JEMGA), and the Commander 
of the First Air Defense Squadron (aka PEDA), 
2.    shall place on alert all air bases or the air base on 
stand-by alert according to its role, and 
3.    shall contact air control agencies about transiting 
aircraft and flight plans in order to obtain information 
about the aircraft. 
 
B. In the case of issuing orders from the HAF General Command 
for the take-off of interceptors, all necessary coordination 
shall be done in order to provide tactical air control of the 
intercepting aircraft within the air defense system. 
 
C. If the unknown/suspicious aircraft proceeds towards 
another neighboring country, the Watch Office in the COFAH 
shall contact the respective operations center of that 
country or the Liaison Officer and shall facilitate relevant 
information about said aircraft, such as velocity, flight 
path, altitude, time, actual position, and characteristics of 
the aircraft, if there was a visual identification. 
 
D. In the case of the interception of the unknown/suspicious 
aircraft, the Watch Officer shall give this information to 
the appropriate DEA agent, according to the list of names 
provided and to the U.S. Air Force Area Mission Chief. 
 
5. (C)  The document explains further \"during their execution 
of an interception, the air crews will faithfully observe the 
regulations established by the ICAO Annex 2 and the HAF\'s air 
regulations manual.\"  Only after completing all of the ICAO 
signals and procedures, the document states, may the air 
crews consider, in consultation with the COFAH, the option of 
firing warning shots from along side of (parallel to) the 
intruding aircraft without putting at risk either the life or 
safety of the occupants of the intruding aircraft. 
 
6 (C)  Finally, the document closes with a series of 
observations and policy statements.  First it notes that the 
actual violations of Honduran airspace are not coming from 
other States and are incompatible with civil aviation norms, 
such as drug-trafficking and other illicit flights without 
corresponding flight plans.  It says that, given this 
situation, Honduran pilots are obliged to make visual 
contact, to comply with all established procedures, and to 
try to visually check, if possible, if the illicit aircraft 
is carrying cargo.  The document further explains it is 
important to emphasize that these intruding aircraft are not 
on commercial routes but on routes that are utilized by 
drug-trafficking aircraft as identified by JIATF, which 
through its intelligence systems has been able to define a 
very constant pattern to the routes being used by 
drug-trafficking aircraft. 
 
7. (C)  The closing paragraph states that the GOH has 
discarded any policy of opening fire with the intention of 
shooting down an illicit aircraft.  It reaffirms that the 
policy of the HOAF high command is based on the agreement 
between our two nations to confront drug trafficking.  The 
last sentence maintains the right of the State of Honduras to 
protect its security in the face of a threat from an illicit 
flight connected to international terrorism. 
 
8. (S)  COMMENT:  This document tracks closely other 
conversations with HAF base commanders and pilots and cites 
specific confidential HAF SOPs.  Breve welcomed the possible 
visit of a U.S. team to discuss air interdiction policy 
issues.  He stated forthrightly that the GOH has nothing to 
hide in this case.  Post invites State and DOD to send an 
inter-agency team to Honduras to confirm the GOH\'s written 
assurances and to further discuss the GOH\'s air interdiction 
policy.  However, the team should be prepared to respond to 
specific questions from the GOH about the specific 
counternarcotics intelligence sharing arrangements in place 
with its other Central American neighbors.  END COMMENT. 
PALMER 
"
"13655","1/30/2004 21:43","04TEGUCIGALPA232","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA2792","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR 
TREASURY ALSO FOR RAMIN TOUOUI 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD/OMA, AND DRL/IL 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: UPON SIGNATURE OF THE HONDURAN LETTER OF INTENT 
   OR DECL OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2792 (WHICHEVER COMES FIRST) 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, EAID, ETRD, EINV, EPET, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS IMF AGREEMENT FULL STEAM AHEAD -- PRIOR 
CONDITIONS NOW FULFILLED AND BOARD APPROVAL OF PROGRAM 
SCHEDULED FOR FEBRUARY 18 
 
REF: A. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2792 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1581 
     C. PARIS 674 
     D. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2915 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  The Honduran government has fully completed 
the prior conditions listed in the preliminary Letter of 
Intent (LOI) for a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth 
Facility Program (PRGF) agreed to with the IMF mission on 
November 25.  In addition, the GOH has put to rest two new 
IMF concerns prompted by the flurry of measures taken in the 
last days of 2003.  On January 20, the Congress modified 
significantly a problematic price control law and, also in 
mid-January, the government made further changes to the 
administration of the new fuels tax to comply with concerns 
by the principal oil product importers and distributors. 
Based on this progress, the IMF staff has negotiated a few 
remaining changes in the program, and the final Letter of 
Intent is due to be signed in Tegucigalpa on February 2. 
Honduras\' PRGF will be considered by the IMF Board on 
February 18.  Embassy recommends USG support for this 
hard-fought and long-awaited program.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
Key Elements of the Program 
--------------------------- 
 
2. (C) As described in ref A, the central government deficit 
targets in the Honduran PRGF program are: 3.5 percent of GDP 
in 2004, 3.0 percent of GDP in 2005, and 2.5 percent of GDP 
in 2006.  For the consolidated public sector, the deficit 
targets in the LOI are: 3.0 percent of GDP in 2004, 2.5 
percent of GDP in 2005, and 1.7 percent of GDP in 2006. 
Central government wage bill targets are 10.6 percent of GDP 
for 2004, 10.4 percent of GDP for 2005 and 10.0 percent of 
GDP for 2006.  Public sector wage bill targets are 10.4 
percent of GDP in 2004, 10.0 percent of GDP in 2005, and 9.6 
percent of GDP in 2006.  The program also includes 
requirements for adoption of new financial sector reforms, 
overall civil service reform, a new tax code, and a 
prohibition on new agricultural debt bailouts. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
The GOH\'s Concerted Efforts to Meet the Prior Conditions 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
3. (C) The Letter of Intent listed four prior actions, with 
which the Honduran government has now complied: adoption of a 
government salary law that reestablishes executive branch 
control of central government wage policy; adoption of a 
fiscal package of expenditure cuts and revenue measures that 
results in fiscal savings of one percent of GDP (about USD 60 
million); adoption of a budget for 2004 that is consistent 
with expenditure reduction commitments in the program; and 
adjustment of the Poverty Reduction Strategy to reflect 
spending targets.  The IMF also privately insisted upon the 
publication of a previously-decided hike in electricity rates. 
 
The Long-Awaited Reining in of Government Wages 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
4. (SBU) On December 19, 2003, the Congress adopted Decree 
220-2003, the Law on Restructuring of the Compensation System 
of the Central Government.  It was signed by President Maduro 
on December 31, 2003, and published in the official La Gazeta 
on January 12, 2004.  This law establishes executive branch 
control of public sector wage policy, folds the teachers into 
the unified civil service salary policy by January 2008, 
freezes the collateral benefits for public sector teachers at 
December 2003 levels, and freezes salaries for medical 
personnel in 2004 (with future increases tied to the rate of 
inflation).  Planned salary increases for teachers for 2004 
and 2005 have been reduced by half and stretched out over a 
three-year period (2004-2006).  The legislation explicitly 
overrides any previous legislation, effectively repealing the 
economic clauses in the special professional statutes that 
have resulted in the unsustainable growth in the central 
government wage bill in recent years.  Decree 220-2003 
directs the Finance Ministry to decide each year on 
government wage increases, based upon the availability of 
budget resources, using the projected rate of inflation as a 
guideline. 
 
5. (SBU) The Congress changed the final law to put creation 
of a unified wage scale for teachers (to include basic salary 
plus benefits) in the hands of a special bipartite 
government-teacher commission.   The IMF has added language 
to the program, explicitly requiring that the work of this 
commission be carried out in a manner consistent with the IMF 
program.  The repeal of the economic clauses of the teacher 
and doctor statutes represents a major success by the GOH, as 
it is a basic structural reform that has been urged by the 
IMF and World Bank, and a few Honduran commentators, for 
years. 
 
Austerity Measures 
------------------ 
 
6.  (SBU) Also on December 19, the Congress passed the Law of 
Rationalization of Public Finances, a new fiscal package of 
revenue and expenditure measures.  It was signed by President 
Maduro on December 31, 2003, and published in the official La 
Gazeta on January 12, 2004.  It includes steps that will 
reduce government spending and ensure better tax policy 
implementation.  It freezes the number of government 
positions, except in health, education and security.  It 
establishes a monthly salary cap of 60,000 lempiras (USD 
3,300) for all public sector employees, including their 
collateral benefits.  It freezes salaries in 2004 for 
employees with monthly salaries over 30,000 lempiras (USD 
1,650).  It directs government reorganization and cutbacks, 
including in the Honduran Foreign Service.  Mining royalties 
and lottery proceeds will go directly to the government 
treasury. 
 
7. (SBU) In early December, the government decided not to 
include in this law an increase in the tax on fuels in the 
fiscal package, but instead to reimpose a customs duty 
(between 10 and 12.5 percent, depending on the product) on 
fuel products by executive decree.  This decree was put into 
place on December 31. 
 
8. (SBU) The revised 2004 budget was adopted by the Congress 
on December 30 and published on December 31.  It stayed 
within the expenditure constraints agreed upon by the IMF 
staff and GOH in late November.  The fourth prior action, the 
revision of the poverty reduction plan and adoption of a 
monitoring process, was also completed in December.  The IMF 
agreed to allow funds spent for salaries of public sector 
teachers and doctors to be counted in the tallying of the 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) spending, which 
brings government spending on these essential social services 
in alignment with the PRSP targets.  The GOH also published, 
in December, the electricity commission\'s increase in 
electricity rates (as promised to the IMF). 
 
------------------------ 
The Fuel Tax Controversy 
------------------------ 
 
9. (SBU) The IMF has had strong reservations about the GOH\'s 
decision to raise the fuel tax instead of other broader 
revenue measures, primarily because of the impact on Honduran 
competitiveness and probable public outcry for this 
regressive tax.  And, in fact, in an ill-advised attempt to 
avoid putting all the pressure on consumers and to avoid 
public criticism, close advisors to the President decided at 
the last minute to include in the fuel tax executive decree 
some unilateral changes to the formula used to determine the 
price of a gallon of fuel at the pump.  The reference price 
used to estimate product cost was summarily changed from the 
Caribbean posting to the Gulf posting plus two cents.  This 
simplistic move had been previously urged in August 2003 by 
former Minister of Industry and Trade Juliet Handal. 
Chevron-Texaco and Exxon reps told EconOffs that the Gulf 
posting price underestimates their costs by six cents, and 
thus this change pretty much wiped out the long-standing 4.7 
cent per gallon margin that has been used in the formula for 
years.  The companies were willing to reduce their margin 
somewhat, but were not able to accept an imposed arrangement 
that implied they would work for close to breakeven. 
 
10. (C) Intense negotiations over the first two weeks of 
January resulted in a deal between the GOH and the oil 
companies in which a new decree was issued on January 23 that 
puts the reference price back to the Caribbean posting for 
three months while the GOH and oil companies negotiate a 
final settlement.  In the meantime, Handal has been attacking 
the GOH in the press for leaving the impression in the press 
that the change in the pump price formula she had proposed 
was the cause of the jump in gas prices (covering up the 
import duty).  The GOH, after some obfuscation, has now 
satisfied the IMF staff that the revenue targets from the oil 
tax will meet revenue projections.  The oil companies have 
purportedly agreed to absorb half of any price increase that 
may be required by the new formula during the first month. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
A Problematic Price Control Decree Rolled Back Substantially 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Another complication developed on December 19, when 
the Honduran Congress decided to soften the blow of the 
fiscal measures by enacting a price freeze for six months on 
about 180 products (mostly foodstuffs).  The Congress did not 
consult with the responsible Ministry, the Ministry of 
Industry and Trade, prior to the enactment of the measure. 
The Ministry currently monitors the prices of only 40 
products and, with only twelve consumer protection 
inspectors, has little capacity to implement a price control 
system throughout the country.  However, the IMF staff (and 
other economists) were concerned about the poor precedent set 
by this measure.  Newspapers carried daily reports of price 
increases in the covered products and government\'s inability 
to curb them, putting the GOH under constant attack.  The IMF 
immediately responded that a price control program was 
contrary to the letter and the spirit of the program, and 
insisted upon a rescinding of the law or drastic cutback in 
the number of products.  Finally, on January 20, the Congress 
cut back the number of products covered to about 38, and the 
GOH agreed to a provision in the Letter of Intent agreeing to 
refrain from any further price controls for the life of the 
PRGF program. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Other Key Elements of the Program 
--------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) The GOH committed to enactment of a Financial Sector 
reform by June 2004 that will include a series of vital 
reforms for this very fragile banking system.  The GOH will 
implement consolidated supervision of all financial 
intermediaries.  Banks will be required to increase 
capitalization and provisioning for bad debts.  There will be 
reforms to the Central Bank\'s role as a lender of last 
resort.  This ambitious set of reforms is key to financial 
sector stability in October 2004, when the 100 percent 
government guarantee of bank deposits ends.  The World Bank 
is implementing a financial-strengthening project to achieve 
these recommended reforms. 
 
13. (C) The LOI includes mention of enactment of overall 
civil service reform in 2004.  This is a key measure that was 
also included in Honduras\' last PRGF program, and is a prior 
action for World Bank program loans.  The IMF staff will be 
working closely with the World Bank to ensure the requirement 
is handled in a way that doesn\'t conflict with rules on 
cross-conditionality. 
 
14. (C) The program requires enactment of a new tax code in 
2004 that, among other things, provides harsher sanctions for 
tax evasion.  The GOH has been working on the text of this 
law for some time.  The GOH is also working with the Supreme 
Court to establish two special tax courts by the end of 2004. 
 
15. (C) The IMF has also included a provision requiring the 
GOH to add more flexibility to its foreign exchange price 
band system, so that it could be used to cushion the economy 
from unanticipated shocks in the future if necessary.  In 
recent years, the Central Bank has consistently bought and 
sold foreign exchange at a previously announced crawling peg 
rate, instead of letting the rate vary within its band. 
 
16. (C) The final significant program requirement is a 
prohibition on new bailouts for agricultural loans and a 
limitation on expenditures to implement the 2003 Agricultural 
Credit law.  The law authorized expenditures of up to two 
billion lempiras for agricultural debt forgiveness, but the 
GOH has committed to limiting the cost to 1.2 billion 
lempiras (USD 66 million) (shared between the GOH and the 
banks) and paying the smaller farmers first. 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
17. (C) Final evaluation of the program will have to await a 
review of the actual text of the Letter of Intent. However, 
it appears that after two long years, the Government has 
finally put together a credible macroeconomic program and the 
IMF has provided as much flexibility as is prudent and 
responsible.  President Maduro, Congress President Pepe Lobo 
and the macroeconomic team can be justifiably proud of the 
work on reestablishing control over public sector salaries, 
increasing government revenues and making progress toward the 
goal of having the Honduran government live within its means. 
 The program will help avoid further ill-advised 
Congressional mandates, such as price controls and massive 
debt forgiveness for large agricultural interests, that have 
plagued government finances up to now.  Protests resulting 
from congressional passage of these controversial measures 
have, to date, been muted (although a sizable demonstration 
on these issues is planned for February 5 (septel)).  While 
not perfect (the heavy reliance on fuel taxes is one 
example), this program puts Honduras well on the way toward a 
period of stability, growth and investment in poverty 
reduction.  Embassy recommends USG support at the February 18 
board meeting.  End Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13656","1/30/2004 22:53","04TEGUCIGALPA234","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04REF:TEGUCIGALPA1724","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000234 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PREL, PGOV, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: TASK FORCE XATRUCH UPDATE: MADURO RESOLUTE IN 
CONTINUING SUPPORT FOR OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM 
 
REF: A. REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1724 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2846 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (A), (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  In face of overwhelming domestic opposition 
and high costs to his own political popularity, President 
Maduro reaffirmed Honduras\' commitment to send the next 
contingent of troops to Iraq and indicated those troops are 
likely to be deployed there beyond the initial one-year 
period.  In fact, the second contingent departs Honduras 
early next week.  Maduro\'s decisive public comments were made 
immediately in the face of local media coverage of 
Nicaragua\'s reported decision not to send its second 
contingent to Iraq because of financial difficulties.  Recent 
polls show that between 67 to 80 per cent of the Honduran 
public is opposed to the presence of Honduran troops in Iraq. 
 Minister of Defense Federico Breve has repeatedly 
highlighted the desire for the USG to provide concrete 
assistance to the Honduran Armed Forces in response to strong 
Honduran support for Operation Iraqi Freedom.  In particular, 
Breve is seeking parity for FMF with other Central American 
countries.  President of Congress Pepe Lobo told the 
Ambassador he believes he can win Congressional approval for 
an extension of the Honduran deployment for another year. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) On January 22, when much of the local media gave 
prominent coverage to reports that Nicaragua would not be 
sending its second contingent to Iraq because of financial 
difficulties, President Ricardo Maduro declared that \"there 
would be no change of policy.\"  \"Honduras,\" he reaffirmed, 
\"is planning to rotate its first battalion for a second one.\" 
 He indicated that the rotation would take place in 
mid-February.  Maduro also reiterated that Honduras would 
continue to support international efforts aimed at the 
pacification, reconstruction, and democratization of Iraq. 
 
3. (C) A clear sign of the political price to President 
Maduro is reflected in comments made by his Nationalist Party 
Deputy, Pompeyo Bonilla, who chairs the Congress\'s Defense 
Committee.  Separately the same day, Bonilla, who is 
generally pro-U.S. and supportive of our interests, told 
reporters that it would not be convenient to extend the 
presence of Honduran troops in Iraq.  Bonilla stressed that 
the Congress had approved a one-year deployment to Iraq which 
had always indicated a rotation of a second battalion to 
replace the first.  However, Bonilla made clear the Executive 
Branch would have to seek congressional approval to prolong 
Honduras\' military participation in Iraq.  With a clear eye 
on recent public opinion polls, Bonilla then added that he 
\"did not believe it would be most convenient (for Honduras) 
and did not believe that extending (the Honduran presence) 
was a policy shared by the United Nations and other involved 
countries.\"  (COMMENT: President of Congress Pepe Lobo told 
the Ambassador he believes he can win Congressional approval 
for an extension of the Honduran deployment for another year. 
END COMMENT.) 
 
4. (U) A recent poll published on January 13 in El Heraldo 
newspaper showed that 77.8 percent of the residents of 
Tegucigalpa opposed the deployment of Honduran troops to 
Iraq, while only 22.2 percent of Tegucigalpa residents 
supported the deployment.  The poll had a margin of error of 
five percent. 
 
5. (C) Ambassador and EmbOffs met January 27 with the new 
commander and deputy commander of Task Force Xatruch. 
Ambassador thanked the Task Force for its bravery and 
dedication and wished them a safe deployment in Iraq.  The 
second contingent departs Honduras for Iraq early next week. 
The Commander remains very concerned about the security at 
the base housing the Honduran deployment, in particular the 
problem of having the troops\' meals picked up and delivered 
on a regularly scheduled basis three times a day. 
 
6. (SBU) At a January 27 luncheon at the Ambassador\'s 
residence and in other recent discussions with EmbOffs, 
Defense Minister Federico Breve and Chief of the Joint Staff 
Isaias Barahona underscored Honduran resolve in support of 
reconstruction efforts in Iraq.  They especially noted the 
positive impact the deployment was having on the troops in 
Iraq.  The troops strongly support their mission and the 
public comments of those soldiers who have returned early due 
to injuries have been unequivocally positive about the role 
and conditions in Iraq.  Breve and Barahona expressed 
satisfaction that there had been no serious injuries or 
fatalities involving Honduran troops, despite the two mortar 
attacks on their compound.  Barahona believes the troops are 
well trained, noting a recent joint Honduran/Iraqi capture of 
a suspected Iraqi terrorist outside the base.  Breve, 
however, also highlighted the budgetary impact the deployment 
is having on the Armed Forces budget given the increased 
costs of salaries and benefits. 
 
7. (C) Breve also echoed security concerns due to the fact 
that the Hondurans must make three food runs a day to pick up 
their food.  While the time of each pickup could be varied 
somewhat, this was still an unnecessary risk in Breve\'s eyes. 
 This concern has also been reported in military channels. 
 
8. (C) Breve has also repeatedly highlighted the desire for 
the USG to provide concrete assistance to the Honduran Armed 
Forces in response to strong Honduran support for Operation 
Iraqi Freedom.  In particular, Breve is seeking parity for 
FMF with other Central American countries.  Honduras wants 
financial assistance for such priorities as airplane fuel for 
intercepting narcotrafficking planes, helicopters to support 
counternarcotics efforts, vehicles and spare parts for their 
aging fleet, and other key needs. 
 
9. (C) Comment.  It is ironic that a task force providing 
support to a key U.S. foreign policy objective is named after 
the leader of the Honduran effort to defeat the American 
filibuster William Walker in Central America in 1856-7. 
Honduras has not wavered in having Task Force Xatruch fulfill 
its commitment to Operation Iraqi Freedom, despite political 
and budgetary costs.  However, Honduran officials are 
cognizant of the disparity in FMF assistance in the region, 
and are seeking to end this imbalance as a stalwart ally of 
the U.S. in Iraq.  End Comment. 
 
10. (U) Minimize considered. 
PALMER 
"
"13657","1/30/2004 23:45","04TEGUCIGALPA236","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000236 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB, DS, AND INR 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, SOCI, ETRD, PREL, ECON, ASEC, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: TEGUCIGALPA PROTEST PLANNED FOR FEBRUARY 5: IMF 
DEAL, CAFTA/FTAA, IRAQ, AND MINIMUM WAGE LIKELY THEMES 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Plamieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The leftist organization Popular Block is 
planning a large protest march for February 5 in Tegucigalpa. 
 The protest, which may include over a thousand 
demonstrators, will focus on controversial domestic 
legislation linked to the recent IMF agreement and various 
U.S. foreign policy issues, such as Iraq, CAFTA, and the 
FTAA.  According to congressional and Presidential House 
insiders, President Maduro\'s decision not to dismiss some key 
ministers, such as Education Minister Carlos Avila and Health 
Minister Elias Lizardo, is also exacerbating the situation. 
The Popular Block may be joined by all three labor 
confederations who are demanding a 30 percent increase in the 
minimum wage, vice the seven percent offered by private 
business.  The march is planned to end at the Presidential 
Palace, but may also include a demonstration outside the 
Embassy.  Post does not expect the protest to be 
destabilizing for the GOH.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The leftist organization Popular Block is planning a 
large protest march for February 5 in Tegucigalpa.  The 
Popular Block is led by Carlos H. Reyes, leader of the union 
at the beer company and a galvanizing force in Honduran 
protests.  The protest is likely to focus on the following 
issues: recent controversial actions by Congress to meet 
stringent IMF terms for a letter of intent, including 
reductions in pay and benefits for public sector teachers and 
doctors and an increase in gas prices; the recently 
negotiated U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA); the planned Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA); 
Iraq and the unpopular deployment of Honduran Task Force 
Xatruch to Iraq; Plan Pueblo Panama; and other globalization 
issues. 
 
3. (C) According to congressional and Presidential House 
insiders, President Ricardo Maduro\'s decision not to dismiss 
some key, but controversial, ministers, such as Education 
Minister Carlos Avila and Health Minister Elias Lizardo, is 
also exacerbating the situation.  Apparently President Maduro 
or his negotiators agreed to the dismissal of the Education 
and Health Ministers as part of the deal to win congressional 
approval in late December 2003 of legislation that was a 
precursor to an IMF letter of intent. 
 
4. (U) The three labor confederations, CGT, CTH, and CUTH, 
may join the protest to voice their demand for a 30 percent 
raise in the minimum wage for 2004.  Tripartite negotiations 
(GOH, private sector (COHEP), and the three union 
confederations) have failed thus far, with business offering 
only a 7 percent raise.  (Note:  Inflation in 2003 was 
approximately 7.7 percent.  In 2003, the minimum wage was 
raised 12 percent for workers in small agriculture, but only 
nine percent for most other workers.  Inflation in 2002 was 
approximately 8.1 percent.  End Note.)  Minister of Labor 
German Leitzelar has called for another tripartite meeting 
February 5, which may not happen if the union confederations 
take to the streets instead. 
 
5. (SBU) The latest information the Embassy has is that the 
protest march will start in the old section of Tegucigalpa 
known as Comayaguela and end at the Presidential Palace. 
However, it is possible that demonstrations may occur at the 
Congress and even outside the Embassy. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  While most protests in Tegucigalpa are 
peaceful and number no more than a few hundred protesters, 
some protests lately have involved over a thousand 
protesters, and have had a tendency to lurch out of control 
at the end, with vandalism, Molotov cocktails, and clashes 
with police.  Nevertheless, it is unlikely that the protest 
will be destabilizing for the GOH.  Nor is it likely that it 
will have any effect on GOH policy.  According to his private 
secretary, President Maduro appears to have dug in his heels 
 
SIPDIS 
and is loath to fire ministers whom he believes have done a 
good job implementing his reform program.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"13667","2/2/2004 14:29","04TEGUCIGALPA238","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000238 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, EB/TPP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR AUSTR RVARGO AND WCLATANOFF 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, ECON, PGOV, KJUS, PINR, HO, ILO 
SUBJECT:  Honduras and CAFTA Labor Track II: Ministry of 
Labor Seeks to Enforce Labor Law But Lacks Resources 
 
Ref: (A) Olsen/Wilson e-mail 01/16/04 
 
     (B) State 6145 
     (C) 03 Tegucigalpa 2283 
     (D) 03 State 257469 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary:  In Honduras, there is good will in the 
Ministry of Labor (MOL) in general and Minister of Labor 
German Leitzelar in particular to protect core labor rights. 
Honduran labor law, while deficient in some areas with 
respect to ILO core conventions, is not the main issue for 
the protection of labor rights.  The enforcement of existing 
labor laws is key.  However, the overall budget crunch in 
the GOH severely hampers the MOL\'s ability to do just that. 
Nevertheless, the MOL does aggressively investigate 
prominent cases brought to its attention by labor unions and 
has improved significantly under Leitzelar\'s leadership. 
End Summary. 
 
Tight GOH Budget Means Decline in MOL Budget 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) LabAtt met January 15 with the new Vice Minister of 
Labor for the GOH, Ada Gabriela Mejia Mejia, a psychologist 
and previously a National Party (ruling party) congresswoman 
with whom LabAtt previously worked on TIP/child labor 
issues.  LabAtt emphasized the importance of GOH\'s 
aggressive enforcement of labor law and briefed her on DOL\'s 
ongoing support for the MOL.  She seemed to understand the 
importance of this issue, especially as it relates to 
approval of CAFTA by the U.S. Congress, but she noted the 
MOL\'s relatively paltry budget limits what the MOL can do. 
 
3. (U) Below is a chart of the MOL\'s budget for the last 
several years, minus money that passes through the ministry 
for budgetary/organizational reasons but that does not fund 
MOL activities.  The lempira data comes from the MOL.  The 
dollar conversion and comparisons with previous years\' 
figures are Post\'s calculations using exchange rates 
(lempiras/USD) as of January 1 of each calendar year. 
 
CYear     Budget (lempiras)   Budget (USD)   Exchange rate 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
2001      56,059,600          3,732.330      15.02 
2002      61,033,900          3,849,748      15.854 
2003      75,657,360          4,481,540      16.882 
2004      72,110,700          4,051,743      17.957 
 
4. (U) As one can see, after shooting up an impressive USD 
631,792 (16.4 percent) from CY2002 to CY2003, which was the 
first budget under the Maduro Administration, the budget was 
cut by USD 429,797 for CY2004, wiping out 68 percent of the 
CY2003 budget boost.  The cuts were part of an across-the- 
board reduction in government expenditures needed to reduce 
the budget deficit to a manageable level (and obtain an IMF 
program).  Post estimates the GOH allocated only 0.2 percent 
of its total expenditures (including foreign assistance) to 
the Ministry of Labor in 2002, including salaries of MOL 
employees. 
 
GOH Aggressive on Inspections But Needs Help 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) The MOL inspection record has improved under the 
Maduro Administration and Leitzelar\'s leadership.  The MOL 
is quick to inspect companies when allegations are made 
public.  In the recent highly publicized case of NGO/union 
allegations of labor law violations by the SETISA maquila 
that makes t-shirts for the Sean John label, Leitzelar 
himself inspected the factory with several inspectors right 
after the allegations hit the press.  The MOL\'s quick 
action, combined with SETISA\'s openness to the MOL and 
press, has helped defuse a war of words over the alleged 
violations. 
 
6. (U) The MOL benefits from several DOL-funded technical 
assistance programs that enhance the inspectors\' ability to 
enforce the law.  The number of inspectors, after dropping 
in the recent past, went up in the last few years, and has 
now leveled off (figures from the MOL).  Of the 2003 figure 
of 115 inspectors, 101 are general labor inspectors and 14 
are occupational safety and health inspectors. 
 
CYear     Inspectors 
-------------------- 
1998      107 
1999      102 
2000      104 
2001      110 
2002      114 
2003      115 
 
7. (U) Unfortunately, the MOL\'s relatively limited number of 
inspectors means that the MOL is often unable to inspect 
work sites for routine violations of the law.  Budget 
constraints also mean that inspectors often lack vehicles 
and/or fuel to drive to work sites to conduct inspections. 
 
Potential Changes to Labor Law Unlikely 
--------------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) Minister Leitzelar\'s assistant Jackie Cruz told 
LabAtt on January 15 that there is not a specific tripartite 
commission to follow-up on shortcomings in Honduran labor 
law identified by the ILO study of Honduran labor law in 
comparison to core ILO conventions.  However, the Council on 
Economic and Social Issues, a tripartite body, is studying 
possible labor law reform.  Post notes, however, that this 
has been on the table for quite some time, is a political 
football, and reform is not likely to happen in the near 
future.  This is despite the fact that the recent ILO study 
comparing Honduran labor law to the ILO core conventions 
noted that Honduran law was not in accordance with the ILO 
core conventions in several areas. 
 
9. (U) One area in which changes to the labor law have been 
suggested concerns the requirements for collective 
bargaining.  Current law only requires there be more than 30 
workers to constitute a trade union (a requirement that has 
been criticized by the ILO as detrimental to the formation 
of unions in small and medium businesses), but has no 
further requirements for collective bargaining rights. 
Companies are bound by current law to negotiate a collective 
bargaining agreement once a union has been legally 
established and requests that negotiations begin.  However, 
as stated in the Human Rights Report, employers often refuse 
to bargain with a union.  The Ministry of Labor can and has 
administratively sanctioned an employer for failing to 
negotiate a collective bargaining agreement, or for 
violating a collective bargaining agreement.  However, 
employer intransigence often remains undeterred. 
 
10. (U) Honduran Apparel Manufacturers Association President 
Jesus Canahuati has suggested that the GOH propose 
legislation that would require unions to have more than 50 
percent worker representation in order to have collective 
bargaining rights.  He thinks that will clear the way for 
Honduras to have a better record on negotiating collective 
bargaining agreements, because employers will be less likely 
to resist bargaining when the unions represent a sizable 
amount of the workforce.  (Under the current law, employers 
point out, a union of only 30 members in a maquila of 500 
workers has the right to collectively bargain on behalf of 
all 500 workers.)  However, unions will surely oppose adding 
such a requirement to the law and it is unlikely to be 
proposed by the GOH to Congress absent a tripartite 
consensus on reforming the labor law. 
 
Doing More With Less 
-------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Comment:  The bottom line is that there has been 
definite improvement in the Ministry of Labor under the 
Maduro Administration, mainly thanks to the leadership of 
Minister Leitzelar.  The MOL and Minister Leitzelar are 
seeking to enforce Honduran labor law, but the overall 
budget crunch in the GOH severely hampers the MOL\'s ability 
to do more.  Despite the fact that he is considered by many 
observers as one of the best ministers in President Maduro\'s 
cabinet, Minister Leitzelar and the MOL do not have much 
political clout either within the GOH or in Congress.  For 
example, Minister Leitzelar is not a member of the ruling 
National Party.  This makes boosting the MOL\'s budget in an 
extremely tight fiscal environment all the more difficult. 
Nevertheless, the MOL is aggressive when prominent cases 
come to light and seeks to use international technical 
assistance, such as that funded by DOL, to improve its 
capacity to better enforce the law.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"13671","2/2/2004 17:14","04TEGUCIGALPA239","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021714Z Feb 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000239 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
 
DEPT FOR AID/W, PASS COPY TO FREDERICK RUDOLPH VIGIL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID 
SUBJECT:  USAID/HONDURAS\' RECOMMENDED PL 480, TITLE II 
FUNDING LEVELS FOR FY 2005. 
 
 
1.  Concurrence.  As requested in DCHA/FFP\'s PL 480 
Title II guidelines for Cooperating Sponsor Results 
Reports and Resource Requests (CSR4), this is to 
provide recommended funding levels, Bellmon 
certification, certification of financial capabilities 
of the cooperating sponsor, and environmental 
compliance certification for CARE Honduras\' FY 2005 
Development Activity Program (DAP). 
 
2.  Annual Implementation Plan.  CARE\'s FY 2005 
Resource Request includes all the elements required in 
DCHA/FFP guidelines for CSR4 reports.  A Detailed 
implementation Plan (DIP) for each program component 
has been included in the CSR4.  The annual estimate of 
requirements (AER) was checked for completeness and 
accuracy. 
 
3.  Funding Levels Recommendation.  USAID/Honduras 
recommends that the FY 2001-2005 CARE Title II DAP be 
funded in FY 2005 as follows (tonnage and section 
202(E) levels): 
 
Commodities are in metric tons as requested in lines 8 
and 17 of the FY 2005 Annual Estimate of Requirements 
(AER). 
 
COMMODITY                        Line 8            Line 
17 
 
Small Red Beans Dry Edible       1,064 
1,060 
Non Parboiled Milled Rice        1,764 
1,760 
Vegetable Oil 4Lt. Tin             340 
340 
Corn Soy Blend (CSB)             1,012 
1,010 
Cornmeal                           363 
363 
Wheat NS                        12,500 
12,500 
 
Total Metric Tons               17,043 
17,030 
 
Section 202(E) level recommended for FY 2005: US DOLS. 
185,000. 
 
4.  Financial capabilities of CARE/H to manage 
monetization proceeds.  Based on audits of CARE\'s 
financial and management systems conducted by U.S. 
affiliated CPA firms, USAID/H states that: A) CARE/H 
has in place a financial accounting system and internal 
control structure that comply with generally accepted 
accounting principles and USAID regulations and 
financial requirements for grantees, B) the accounting 
system reviewed can adequately control, account for and 
report on the use of funds generated under the Title II 
Monetization Program; and C) CARE/H has in place an 
internal control structure that reasonably ensures 
proper financial management of activities funded by 
monetization proceeds.  CARE\'s procedure manuals cover 
all major aspects of operations, are distributed to all 
relevant parties and are periodically reviewed for 
improvement in light of changes in the organization and 
its operating environment. 
 
5. Bellmon Certification. The Mission Director has 
determined that there will be adequate storage and 
transportation available in Honduras at the time of 
arrival of Title II commodities to prevent their 
spoilage or waste.  The Mission Director has also 
determined that the distribution or sale of commodities 
will not result in a substantial disincentive to, or 
interfere with, domestic production or marketing. 
 
CARE Honduras has its main warehouse in San Pedro Sula, 
with a storage capacity of 6,500 MT, and it can 
accommodate up to as 85 containers in its yard.  The 
warehouse has adequate ventilation, forklifts, 
fumigation capabilities and other equipment for the 
safe handling and storing of Title II commodities.  The 
12,500 MT of wheat to be monetized will be sold C.I.F. 
Puerto Cortes, based on a previously signed contract ad 
do not present any storage problems to CARE. 
 
CARE targets the food aid to the poorest rural areas of 
western Honduras where production is very low and 
access to food at commercial prices is very limited. 
Furthermore, the recent droughts and coffee crisis 
affecting the region have negatively impacted the 
income of these poor families and further undermined 
their food security.  Beneficiaries often do not have 
the resources to procure food, and the Title II food 
aid will not adversely impact local markets.  Regarding 
commodities for monetization, wheat is not produced 
locally. 
 
6. Environmental Review. The environmental status 
report has been reviewed and approved by the Mission\'s 
Environmental Officer. 
 
7. Host Country Food for Peace Agreement.  The Honduras 
Food for Peace Agreement, signed on March 21, 2001, 
incorporates by reference AID regulation 11, in clause 
7.1.  A copy of this document has been provided to 
DCHA/FFP/DP. 
Please advise if further information is required. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13680","2/2/2004 23:54","04TEGUCIGALPA250","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000250 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PDA, AND DRL/PHD 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, OIIP, PREL, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CONGRESS PASSES NEW LAW OF HABEAS DATA 
COVERING ACCESS TO PUBLIC INFORMATION 
 
 
1. SUMMARY:  On January 20, the Honduran Congress passed a 
series of proposed changes to the Constitution to improve 
the mechanisms of civic participation and governmental 
accountability through the introduction of new democratic 
measures such as plebiscites and referenda.  At the eleventh 
hour, a new measure was added protecting public and private 
institutions and figures from certain disclosures.  A close 
reading of the law reveals a number of ambiguous and 
contradictory points.  Media, civil society groups and 
Congressional deputies from the smaller parties reacted with 
caution.  However, all measures will require approval during 
the subsequent session of Congress.  END SUMMARY 
 
LAW OF HABEAS DATA (FREEDOM OF INFORMATION) 
------------------ 
 
2. The law consists of a modification of Article 182 of the 
Constitution and introduces the concept of Habeas Data.  It 
is a mechanism to be used \"to obtain access to information, 
to impede its transmission or disclosure, to rectify 
inaccurate or erroneous data, to update information, to 
demand confidentiality, and to eliminate false information, 
in regard to any public or private archive or registry that 
is disclosed through a conventional, electronic or 
informative outlet, which may harm the honor, personal, 
family, or institutional privacy of any person.  It will not 
affect the secrecy of the sources of information to the 
media\". 
 
DISAGREEMENT ON WHAT IT MEANS 
----------------------------- 
 
3. According to several Congressmen, including the bill\'s 
sponsor, National Party deputy Oswaldo Ramos Soto, \"Habeas 
Data is oriented to the free access of information.  It 
provides a right to access information that will benefit all 
journalists and doesn\'t adversely affect the freedom of the 
press.\"  However, others in Congress expressed disagreement 
with this view.  Congressman Toribio Aguilera from the 
Innovation and Unity Party (PINU) said, \"Habeas Data 
endangers freedom of the press in our country.  Congress has 
been irresponsible by approving these important reforms 
without undertaking appropriate consultations or discussing 
them in a proper manner.\" 
 
4. The President of the Honduran College of Journalists 
(CPH) Juan Ramon Mairena, said, \"We are on guard.  After a 
careful analysis, we\'ve concluded that this reform does 
violate our freedom to inform the Honduran people.  Freedom 
of the press and expression shouldn\'t be censored.\"  In 
addition, other journalists have protested against the 
reform, calling it a \"gag law\" (ley mordaza). 
 
5. Reaction from other journalists opposed to the 
Constitutional reform law expressed the view that it is 
another attempt by the political elites to hinder the work 
and independence of the Honduran media at the start of an 
election year. 
 
6. COMMENT:  Since there has been no final draft text of the 
reform of Article 182 as Congress approved it, and the text 
is being changed on almost a daily basis by the 
Congressional Style Committee (which reviews the language of 
legislation before making it final) there remains a lot of 
uncertainty about the intent and final structure of Habeas 
Data.  The text of the article as initially passed is also 
ambiguous, but could seemingly be used to prevent the press 
from disclosing information or public records that may be of 
general public interest, but that some groups or persons 
could find harmful to their own interests or object to on 
privacy grounds. 
 
7. It also remains unclear what the legal meaning of \"honor\" 
is in the context of the law.  The package of legal reforms 
was supposed to provide greater access to public information 
by civil society and encourage citizen participation, making 
administrative processes more transparent.  At the last 
minute, the Congress appears instead to have voted to set up 
rules to hinder media and citizen groups from bringing 
charges of public corruption. 
 
8. If the original interpretation holds, the law also may 
create a broad category of \"state secrets\", far beyond 
matters related to national security.  The legislation also 
appears to permit government officials to hide suspect 
activities from public scrutiny.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"13699","2/3/2004 14:38","04TEGUCIGALPA251","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, FEBRUARY 2, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 1/31 entitled \"The big lie\".  \"At this point in 
time, it\'s just intolerable the attempt to justify the 
invasion and aggression to Iraq under the false pretense of 
the existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. 
Besides, the theory of Saddam Hussein\'s participation in the 
attacks of 9/11, in an alliance with Al Qaeda, has also 
proven to be false.\" 
 
\"Bush lied and keeps lying to the American public and the 
international community.  However, the truth is gradually 
emerging, and the American electorate will come to the 
realization that it\'s been a victim of a colossal lie that 
has provoked the destruction of Iraq, and the death and 
mutilation of thousands of people, including its own troops, 
while the transnational corporations tied to the highest 
imperial bureaucratic elites are collecting the profits of 
huge contracts in Iraq.\" 
 
\"Under the notion of pre-emptive war, Bush has allowed 
himself to intervene anywhere in the world, whenever the 
fundamentalist right-wing politicians who are now part of 
the American political elite feel that their country\'s 
national security is being threatened.\" 
 
\"There\'s no doubt that truth and honesty have also been 
victims of this terrible and dramatic expansionist 
adventure.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"13710","2/3/2004 21:17","04TEGUCIGALPA258","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","03TEGUCIGALPA2301","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, INR, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/03/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SNAR, ASEC, PHUM, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: GUNMEN SHOOT CAR OF PRESIDENT OF HONDURAN CONGRESS 
PEPE LOBO; ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OR ROBBERY? 
 
REF: A. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2301 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1904 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 882 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) Summary: Unknown gunmen shot at the car of Porfirio 
\"Pepe\" Lobo, President of Congress, February 1.  Lobo was not 
in the car at the time, and his driver, two aides, a 
bodyguard, and an army officer in the car were unhurt. 
Police believe that the attack was either (a) linked to 
threats (made public January 24) targeting Lobo for 
assassination by gang members due to his strong support for a 
controversial anti-gang law, or (b) an attempted robbery and 
not a targeted attack.  Whether or not this attack was an 
attempt to assassinate Lobo, the GOH is prudently taking 
seriously threats of violence by gangs/narcotraffickers 
toward senior GOH officials.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU/NOFORN) Unknown gunmen using AK-47s shot at the car 
of Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo, President of Congress, the morning 
of February 1 on Highway 15, the road from Tegucigalpa to 
Juticalpa, near kilometer 93 on the border of the Departments 
of Francisco Morazan and Olancho.  Unlike Highways 39 and 41 
in Olancho that are subject to highway robbery (as mentioned 
in the Consular Information Sheet), this stretch of Highway 
15 is heavily traveled and not known for banditry.  Police 
reportedly found four AK-47 shell casings at the crime scene. 
 Lobo was not in the Chevrolet Suburban at the time, and his 
driver, two aides, a bodyguard, and an army second lieutenant 
in the car were unhurt.  Lobo is entitled to security as 
president of Congress, but it is unclear why an army officer 
was in the car.  There are conflicting reports, some of which 
indicate that Lobo had planned to make the trip by road but 
at the last minute went by helicopter instead, thus avoiding 
the attack. 
 
3. (U) Police believe that the attack may be linked to 
threats, made public January 24, that Lobo had been targeted 
for assassination by gang members due to his strong support 
for a controversial anti-gang law.  On August 8, the Honduran 
National Congress approved a bill banning membership in 
street gangs and other groups that associate for the purpose 
of committing crimes.  The bill prescribed prison terms for 
those convicted of being gang members, with sentences ranging 
from three to 12 years depending on the individual\'s level of 
involvement and seniority (ref B).  Press reports indicated 
that the Ministry of Public Security and the Ministry of 
Defense believed the threats to be credible. 
 
4. (S) However, Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez 
told Law Enforcement Assistance Coordinator at the time that, 
while Lobo had been advised to take the threats seriously, 
Alvarez did not believe the threats were credible.  (Note: 
It would be unusual for a politician to receive credible 
deaths threats linked to a general political action, as 
opposed to personal involvement in a controversial private 
issue.  It is worth noting that over the last six months 
there have been several allegations and/or incidents 
involving members of Lobo\'s extended family involving 
narco-related crime.  While Lobo himself has not been 
implicated in these allegations/incidents, they could 
potentially put him at risk for a targeted killing.  End 
Note.) 
 
5. (U) An alternate theory that police are investigating is 
that his car was targeted by bandits, similar to the April 
10, 2003, attack on the advance car of First Lady Aguas Ocana 
de Maduro (ref C), and that Lobo himself was not a target. 
Police are investigating both theories. 
 
6. (U) The anti-gang law has been popular with the public, 
but has been criticized by human rights organizations and 
challenged as unconstitutional (so far unsuccessfully, with 
two separate cases being dismissed).  The Maduro 
Administration has trumpeted the law as being key to recent 
successes in reducing the number of violent crimes, including 
murder (ref A).  Observers have estimated there are upwards 
of 100,000 gang members and associates, with two main gangs 
being Mara Salvatrucha and 18 (diez y ocho), and have pinned 
much of the blame for the country\'s astronomical murder rates 
and violent narcotrafficking on gangs. 
 
7. (U) Lobo himself has used the law\'s popularity as a 
launching pad for his nascent presidential campaign.  He is 
considered by most observers and polls to be running second 
to Tegucigalpa Mayor Miguel Pastor for the National Party 
presidential slot for the election in 2005.  President 
Ricardo Maduro, a Nationalist Party member, cannot run for 
reelection. 
 
8. (C) Comment:  Whether or not this attack was an attempt to 
assassinate Pepe Lobo, the GOH is right to take threats of 
violence by gangs/narcotraffickers toward Lobo (and senior 
Ministry of Public Security officials) seriously, even if 
this specific threat may not have been credible.  A culture 
of impunity fueled by a weak rule of law, gang violence, and 
the pervasive influence of narco-corruption helps make 
Honduras a very violent country.  Meanwhile, the anti-gang 
law has become a cornerstone of the Maduro Administration\'s 
war on crime.  It remains to be seen, however, if short-term 
gains against gangs will mean a long-term improvement in 
reducing the level of violence.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"13734","2/4/2004 21:00","04TEGUCIGALPA265","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA209","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SEIZES 90 MORE KILOS OF COCAINE; 2004 
TOTAL IS UP TO 1,117.5 KILOS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 209 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 203 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 193 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 179 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 80 
 
1. On January 31 Honduran police seized 15 kilos of cocaine 
in Bonito Oriental, and on February 1 the police seized 
another 75 kilos in Balfate.  Both towns are on the Caribbean 
coast of Honduras near Trujillo.  In addition, in the 
February 1 action police arrested five suspects, and seized 
cash and weapons. 
 
2.  These seizures, combined with previous seizures of 
approximately 25 kilos from an aircraft on January 20 (refs 
A-D) and approximately 1,000 kilos from an aircraft January 
10 (ref E), and a small seizure of 2.5 kilos January 8 from a 
bus in Choluteca make a total of approximately 1,117.5 kilos 
seized in 2004.  (Note:  Honduran authorities believe the 
plane that crashed January 20 was carrying approximately 
1,000 kilos, but most of it was either dropped from the plane 
prior to the crash or burned in the crash.  End Note.) 
 
3. The January 31/February 1 seizures represent more 
successfully coordinated efforts between the military and the 
INL-funded Frontier Police (as well as the Preventative 
Police), who have been working jointly in an unprecedented 
capacity recently. 
PALMER 
"
"13785","2/6/2004 17:21","04TEGUCIGALPA279","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE568|04TEGUCIGALPA154","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000279 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR CA/OCS/CI - KATHLEEN BRESNAHAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOCI, CASC, HO 
SUBJECT: RATIFICATION OF HAGUE CONVENTION ON 
INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: (A) TEGUCIGALPA 00154, (B) SECSTATE 00568 
 
1. On February 5, 2004, Post visited IHNFA to submit the 
latest Hague application and learned from IHNFA\'s 
Secretary General Fanny Flores, that the Hague Convention 
 
SIPDIS 
on International Child Abduction was ratified by the 
Honduran Congress and published in the official GOH 
newspaper La Gaceta on January 22, 2004.  A copy of La 
Gaceta was provided to consular reps. 
 
2. During our meeting with Ms. Flores, we were also 
informed that IHNFA would be meeting on February 6, 2004 
to establish mechanisms for implementation of the 
Convention in Honduras.  Ms. Flores was optimistic that 
the procedures for processing the pending Hague 
applications will be in place within a few weeks. 
 
3. Post will keep the Department apprised of developments 
as they arise. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13791","2/7/2004 0:45","04TEGUCIGALPA289","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA209","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000289 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL, L/LEI, WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
SOUTHCOM FOR GENERAL HILL AND GENERAL BISHOP 
JIATF-S FOR RADM SIROIS 
SECDEF FOR EFROTHINGHAM 
NSC FOR JBJOSTAD 
DOJ FOR MLWARREN AND DKOFFSKY 
ONDCP FOR BCRANE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, PINS, PREL, MCAP, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN AIR INTERDICTION PROCEDURES, U.S. 
INFORMATION SHARING, AND RISKS TO U.S. SECURITY RELATIONS 
WITH HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 209 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 203 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 193 
     D. STATE 15961 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 179 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C)  SUMMARY:  The policy statements and standard 
operating procedures outlined below are keyed to questions 
posed in ref D and based on discussion with the joint 
State/DOD team that visited Honduras on February 2-4.  Post 
wishes to underscore that U.S. information sharing with 
Honduras has proven to be a critical element in the enormous 
increase in Honduras interdiction efforts. In 2003, Honduras 
seized over 5,700 kilos of cocaine and 13 kilos of heroin, 
representing more than all combined cocaine/heroin seizures 
during the previous five years.  During the first month of 
2004, Honduras seized 1,128 kilos of cocaine and 13 kilos of 
heroin, putting the country on track to exceed last year\'s 
record seizures.  Any interruption in U.S. information 
sharing would most certainly result in significantly reduced 
Honduran interdiction capabilities.  In addition, there are 
important bilateral military-to-military interests that could 
be put at risk, including continued Honduran willingness to 
support U.S. initiatives to promote increased regional 
military cooperation by hosting combined exercises with other 
Central American countries and, even, to extend the Honduran 
troop deployment in Iraq for a second year.  Honduras has 
been a strong supporter of U.S. foreign policy goals in the 
UN, Summit of the Americas, and CAFTA negotiations. Post 
recommends that Washington policymakers adopt a uniform 
approach to information sharing with all countries in the 
region.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
WRITTEN ASSURANCE OF NO SHOOT-DOWN POLICY 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C)  As reported in ref D, post received written assurance 
from General Jose Isaias Barahona, the Chief of the Joint 
Staff of the Armed Forces, that Honduras does not have a 
policy of shooting down civil aircraft.  The Government of 
Honduras does reserve the right to defend itself from any 
threat from any unlawful civil air flight linked to 
international terrorism. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES FOR AIR INTERCEPTION/USE OF 
WARNING SHOTS 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
3. (C)  During its visit, the INL/DOD team only partially 
received requested documentation.  The Honduran Air Force 
(HAF) did not provide copies of the HAF standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) for air interception and firing of warning 
shots.  The HAF Commander, Col Manuel Enrique Caceres Diaz, 
maintained that such air order of battle documents are 
classified.  They referred the team to General Barahona\'s 
January 26 letter as illustrative of the SOPs used by the 
HAF.  However, HAF officials did provide ICAO procedures that 
they use to intercept unidentified aircraft. (COMMENT: 
Mission elements question whether HAF has comprehensive, 
fully articulated, and widely distributed SOPs. END COMMENT.) 
 
--------------- 
INCIDENT REPORT 
--------------- 
 
4. (C)  HAF Commander faxed copies of this report on January 
26.  Mission is seeking original copies. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
CIRCUMSTANCES FOR FIRING WARNING SHOTS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C)  HAF Commander told the INL/DOD team that the air 
defense crews only consider, in consultation with the HAF 
operations center, the option of firing warning shots after 
completing all of the required ICAO signals and procedures. 
Such warning shots are then only fired from along side of 
(parallel to) the intruding aircraft.  They execute such 
warning shots without putting at risk either the life or 
safety of the occupants of the intruding aircraft.  They also 
avoid shooting over populated areas in order to protect the 
safety of people on the ground. 
 
-------------------------------- 
REASONS FOR FIRING WARNING SHOTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
6. (C)  The goal of warning shots is to establish 
communication with the flight crew of the intruding aircraft 
after all other ICAO methods have been exhausted.  According 
to the HAF Commander, the HAF interceptors must be able to 
communicate with intruding aircraft in order to identify 
positively the aircraft and to give them directions for 
landing their aircraft at a Honduran air field. 
 
---------------------------------- 
AUTHORITY FOR FIRING WARNING SHOTS 
---------------------------------- 
 
7. (C)  The air defense pilots must seek authorization for 
firing warning shots from the Commander of the Air Force, who 
in turn is authorized to issue such an order only by the 
Chief of the Joint Staff of the Armed Forces. Each and every 
individual volley of warning shots must be authorized through 
this chain of command. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
CIRCUMSTANCES FOR SHOOTING DOWN CIVIL AIRCRAFT 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
8. (C)  According to the HAF Commander, only the President of 
Honduras can give the order to shoot down a civil aircraft, 
which would only be undertaken if the aircraft posed a threat 
of terrorism to the civilian population. 
 
------------------------------- 
PUBLIC NOTICE TO CIVIL AVIATION 
------------------------------- 
 
9. (C)  The Government of Honduras does not provide any 
notice to airmen of its air intercept guidelines and expects 
all airmen to follow ICAO procedures. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
10. (C)  COMMENT:  Post wishes to underscore that U.S. 
information sharing with Honduras has proven to be a critical 
element in the enormous increase in Honduras interdiction 
efforts. In 2003, Honduras seized over 5,700 kilos of cocaine 
and 13 kilos of heroin, representing more than all combined 
cocaine/heroin seizures during the previous five years. 
During the first month of 2004, Honduras seized 1,128 kilos 
of cocaine and 13 kilos of heroin, putting the country on 
track to exceed last year\'s record seizures.  Any 
interruption in U.S. information sharing would most certainly 
result in significantly reduced Honduran interdiction 
capabilities.  In addition, there are important bilateral 
military-to-military interests that could be put at risk, 
including continued Honduran willingness to support U.S. 
initiative to promote increased regional military cooperation 
by hosting combined exercises and, even, to extend the 
Honduran troop deployment in Iraq for a second year. 
Honduras has been a strong supporter of U.S. foreign policy 
goals in the UN, Summit of the Americas, and CAFTA 
negotiations. Post recommends that Washington policymakers 
adopt a uniform approach to information sharing with all 
countries in the region.  END COMMENT. 
PALMER 
"
"13820","2/9/2004 18:53","04TEGUCIGALPA291","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA2824","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000291 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO DOJ - GREGORY STEVENS 
DEPT FOR: L/LEI, DOJ/OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, CASC, HO (MORRIS ARNOLD FREDERICK) 
SUBJECT: EXTRADITION OF ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 02824 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: ARNOLD FREDERICK MORRIS HAS AN ARREST 
WARRANT OUTSTANDING IN THE U.S. FOR CONSPIRACY, 
ILLEGAL CONCEALMENT OF ASSETS, MAKING FRAUDULENT AND 
FALSE STATEMENTS, AND CONSPIRACY TO LAUNDER MONEY. ON 
MARCH 18, 1992, MR. MORRIS FRAUDULENTLY OBTAINED 
HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP BY CONCEALING HIS U.S. CRIMINAL 
HISTORY IN AN EFFORT TO AVOID EXTRADITION, SINCE THE 
HONDURAN CONSTITUTION FORBIDS EXTRADITION OF HONDURAN 
NATIONALS. NEVERTHELESS, ON MARCH 7, 1995, THE USG 
OFFICIALLY REQUESTED THE EXTRADITION OF ARNOLD 
FREDERICK MORRIS.  ON AUGUST 16, 1996, THE HONDURAN 
ATTORNEY GENERAL REQUESTED REVOCATION OF MR. MORRIS\' 
HONDURAN CITIZENSHIP. SUBSEQUENTLY, MORRIS APPEALED 
THIS DECISION THROUGH THE HONDURAN COURT SYSTEM. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) On February 9, 2004, Post received Official 
Note number 060-2004-PGR from the Honduran Solicitor 
General stating that the Court of Appeals of the 
Administrative Court revoked the ruling of the 
Administrative Court in San Pedro Sula, reaffirming 
the resolution made by the Ministry of Government and 
Justice, which cancelled Mr. Arnold Federick Morris\' 
Honduran naturalization.  At the same time, orders 
were issued to maintain immigration stops, the 
Chancery was ordered to abstain from issuing a 
passport and the Civil Registry was also ordered to 
abstain from issuing a Honduran identification card to 
Mr. Morris. 
 
3.  (SBU) The Solicitor General also informed that 
they had received information that Mr. Morris was 
preparing to flee that same weekend to Belize. 
 
4.  (U) POST WILL CONTINUE TO ADVISE THE DEPARTMENT OF 
DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS CASE AS THEY ARISE. 
 
PALMER 
"
"13824","2/9/2004 22:28","04TEGUCIGALPA293","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE19332","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000293 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND PRM/PRP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREF, PREL, SMIG, HO 
SUBJECT: TPS FOR HONDURAS - UPDATE ON ECONOMY AND 
RECONSTRUCTION EFFORTS 
 
REF: A. STATE 19332 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 442 AND PREVIOUS 
 
 1. (U) Summary:  While most USG-funded post-Mitch 
reconstruction efforts are complete, and much physical 
infrastructure has been rebuilt, the stagnant Honduran 
economy and the continued crisis situation in Honduran 
government finances make it unlikely the country could 
provide the jobs, health care, housing, and schooling for the 
approximately 87,000 people that might return if Temporary 
Protected Status (TPS) is ended.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Hurricane Reconstruction - Infrastructure Rebuilding Largely 
Complete 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
2. (U) With the help of the international donor community (of 
which USAID is the largest bilateral contributor), Honduras 
has largely recovered from the physical devastation of 
Hurricane Mitch.  USAID\'s USD 300 million recovery program 
focused on a wide variety of reconstruction interventions in 
the areas of education, housing, water and sanitation, rural 
roads and bridges, disaster mitigation, health, agriculture 
reactivation, credit, accountability, and transparency.  The 
majority of this program was completed by the end of 2001. 
The reconstruction of damaged urban water and sanitation 
systems is scheduled to be fully completed by the end of 
FY04. 
 
3. (SBU) The one area of shortfall is housing.  Post 
estimates that 33,000 homes were destroyed and another 50,000 
homes damaged during the hurricane.  An estimated 25,000 have 
been rebuilt, leaving many families to make do with temporary 
solutions.  USAID financed the delivery of 6,100 permanent 
units, making it the largest single donor in this area. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Economic Conditions - Recovery Still Elusive 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) In contrast to infrastructure reconstruction, the 
Honduran economy has never regained sufficient growth to 
generate much needed employment and sufficient financial 
resources for adequate public services.  Depressed economic 
growth of about 2.5 percent per year, over the 2001-2003 
period, has not kept up with the annual population growth of 
3 percent.  The GOH estimates that true unemployment is 
hovering around 34 percent.   Commodity prices, including 
coffee, are starting to rise, and the light assembly sector 
(especially textiles) is starting to recover, but job growth 
in 2004 will not be sufficient to accommodate anticipated 
population growth, much less the potential 87,000 TPS 
returnees. 
 
5. (SBU) Poverty is still widespread, with about 64 percent 
of the households living on $2 a day or less.  Because of the 
continued economic decline, remittances from Hondurans living 
overseas continue to grow rapidly, reaching USD 800 million 
in 2003 and becoming the country\'s largest source of foreign 
exchange. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
And Government Ability to Provide Needed Services Is Also 
Weak 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
6. (SBU) President Ricardo Maduro, upon assuming office in 
January 2002, inherited seriously deteriorated government 
finances and has spent the first two years of his 
administration trying to remedy the structurally-caused 
imbalances.  Honduras continued to run budget deficits of 5.5 
percent of GDP in 2002 and 2003, totally unsustainable for a 
deeply indebted country with no recourse to international 
capital markets.  The austerity measures put in place in 2002 
and 2003 in order to regain macroeconomic balance and reach 
an agreement with the IMF mean that the government is 
hard-pressed to expand health care, housing, schooling and 
other social services just to accommodate the current 
population, much less an additional 87,000 people.  Most 
ministries have seen their 2004 budgets cut, in real terms, 
by ten percent; some key ministries doing work in the rural 
areas are receiving cuts of almost 50 percent.  The Honduran 
government continues to struggle to find the funds to hire 
additional teachers, doctors, and police to meet current 
needs; significant funds are still needed to repair and 
expand existing roads, water and sanitation systems, 
electricity distribution systems, schools and health clinics, 
especially in the rural areas. 
PALMER 
"
"13859","2/10/2004 21:35","04TEGUCIGALPA298","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA236","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000298 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB, DS, AND INR 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, SOCI, ETRD, PREL, ECON, ASEC, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: LARGE BUT PEACEFUL TEGUCIGALPA PROTEST COMES OFF 
AS EXPECTED: ANTI-GOH, ANTI-FREE TRADE 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 236 (NOTAL) 
 
1. As promised, the leftist organization Popular Block held a 
large protest march February 5 in Tegucigalpa, and a smaller 
protest in San Pedro Sula.  The protest also included 
temporary morning road blocks on main highways near major 
cities in several parts of the country.  The largely peaceful 
protests (some graffiti and minor property damage) included 
approximately 3-5,000 demonstrators total (most in 
Tegucigalpa).  The mood was anti-GOH and focused on 
controversial domestic issues linked to the recent IMF 
agreement, as well CAFTA and FTAA.  The march ended at the 
Presidential Palace; there was no demonstration outside the 
Embassy. 
 
2.  In a new twist, some journalists joined the protests to 
decry a recent guilty verdict in a defamation/slander case 
against a prominent journalist.  A dispute over what 
percentage to increase the minimum wage is still outstanding, 
and was only a minor issue for protesters. 
PALMER 
"
"13893","2/11/2004 20:57","04TEGUCIGALPA315","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000315 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/PHD, DRL/IL, INL/LP, AND G/TIP 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
GUATEMALA FOR AID/G-CAP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, ELAB, PGOV, PREL, SMIG, EAID, KDEM, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT:  Honduras: Supporting Human Rights and Democracy 
 
REF: 03 STATE 333935 
 
1.  The following is Post\'s submission for the \"Supporting 
Human Rights and Democracy: The U.S. Record 2003-4\" for 
Honduras. 
 
2. Begin Text 
 
Honduras\' constitutional government is headed by President 
Ricardo Maduro, elected in November 2001 in elections that 
domestic and international observers judged to be free and 
fair.  Since its inauguration in 2002, the Government 
generally respected the human rights of its citizens; 
however, there are serious problems in some areas.  Members 
of the police were accused of committing extrajudicial 
killings.  Organized private and vigilante security forces 
were believed to have committed a number of arbitrary and 
summary executions.  Human rights groups accused former 
security force officials and the business community of 
colluding to organize \"death squads\" to commit extrajudicial, 
summary, and arbitrary executions, particularly of youth. 
Prison conditions remained harsh, and detainees often did not 
receive due process.  The administration of justice was 
problematic due to inefficient, understaffed, and underfunded 
police, Public Ministry (prosecutors), and judiciary, all of 
which were subject to corruption and political influence. 
There was considerable impunity for members of the economic, 
military, and official elite.  Other human rights problems 
included violence and discrimination against women and 
discrimination against indigenous people.  The Government did 
not effectively enforce all labor laws and child labor 
remained a serious problem.  Honduras is a source and transit 
country for trafficking in persons, including commercial 
sexual exploitation. 
 
U.S. officials highlight publicly the need for improvements 
in human rights conditions, particularly the rule of law and 
administration of justice.  The Mission uses speaker programs 
to bolster this effort.  The Ambassador and other officers of 
the U.S. Mission also work privately with Honduran government 
officials, NGOs, labor unions, and other organizations to 
discuss areas of particular concern and to encourage reforms. 
The Secretary of State discussed human rights and democracy 
issues in Honduras during November 4, 2003, meetings with 
senior Honduran government officials in Tegucigalpa.  The 
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, 
Human Rights, and Labor discussed the problems of 
extrajudicial killings and trafficking in persons during 
November 19-20, 2003, meetings with senior Honduran 
government officials in Tegucigalpa. 
 
The Embassy, using INL counternarcotics assistance, is 
spending $100,000 in 2003-2004 for \"Si Se Puede\", a 
government program coordinated by the Vice President\'s office 
that seeks to prevent drug use and gang membership among 
vulnerable sectors, such as youth at risk.  Many of these 
youth are at risk of being victims of violence, including 
extrajudicial killings, if they join gangs.  The projects are 
carried out with the assistance of NGOs, police, community 
leaders, and teachers to allow wide participation. 
 
The Embassy focused most of its human rights and democracy 
promotion effort on the rule of law and administration of 
justice.  To foster more professional police and reduce human 
rights abuses, the Embassy is spending $200,000 in 2003-2005 
in INL Police Assistance Funds for the Police Internal 
Affairs Office to investigate complaints, including those 
from private citizens, and make recommendations for 
substantiated complaints, ranging from administrative 
disciplinary action to criminal charges. 
 
USAID is spending $3,100,000 in Fiscal Year 2003 funds on 
administration of justice measures.  Significant USAID 
assistance over the last several years has been spent in the 
development and implementation of a new Criminal Procedure 
Code, which introduced oral, adversarial trials, more 
effective and transparent procedures, and greater protections 
for individual rights.  USAID funded the training and 
distribution of materials for judges, prosecutors, public 
defenders, and forensics experts.  The USAID-designated pilot 
courts in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula concluded an 
impressive total of 373 trials and another 4,905 cases were 
closed through non-trial procedures.  The Supreme Court 
created a USAID-funded \"purging unit\" to clear backlogged 
cases from prior to the implementation of the new code. 
There are only approximately 49,000 pending cases now out of 
over 125,000 cases originally.  The Honduran Federation of 
NGOs (FOPRIDEH), with USAID assistance, has been dynamic in 
promoting broader and more effective civil society 
participation in justice sector reforms and monitoring, and 
in exercising oversight of the public policy process. 
 
In compliance with the Leahy amendment, the U.S. Military 
Group worked closely with the Ministry of Defense to vet 
military units for U.S. training. 
To improve the country\'s fight against corruption, the 
mission is investing $600,000 of USAID money from September 
2003 - September 2004, on Transparency and Anti-Corruption 
efforts.  Activities under these programs include: improving 
the capacity of the Government\'s Superior Audit Institution, 
developing and implementing a Transparency and Anti- 
Corruption Public Awareness Campaign, strengthening 
independent national and local anti-corruption institutions, 
and supporting civil society social auditing efforts to 
provide oversight and monitoring of the use of public funds. 
The mission has encouraged the government and the Attorney 
General\'s office to vigorously pursue cases that involve 
corruption, particularly cases involving government 
officials. 
 
The Department of Treasury, using State/INL funding, is 
executing a $227,000 project beginning in 2003 to assist the 
government in addressing financial crimes and money 
laundering in the country.  The project includes technical 
assistance in the establishment and operation of a newly- 
created Financial Information Unit, technical assistance to 
the investigative and prosecutorial agencies that have 
responsibility for the cases of money laundering and 
financial crimes, and training of judges, bank officials, and 
other entities involved in the fight against financial 
crimes. 
 
With national and municipal elections set for 2005, U.S. 
government efforts in promoting democracy through the 
development of transparent and accountable democratic 
institutions continued to be quite strong.  USAID is spending 
$3,000,000 in Fiscal Year 2003 funds on municipal development 
to increase the capacity for basic service delivery by 
municipalities and promote decentralization, including 
technical assistance to the Honduran Association of 
Municipalities (AMHON).  USAID supported its partner, the 
Foundation for Municipal Development (FUNDEMUN), in the 
capacity building of 46 municipal governments.  In many 
cases, these projects demonstrated a positive correlation 
between the transparency and accountability with which 
municipal governments are being administered and the growing 
confidence that citizens have for the work being performed by 
their local governments, and thereby faith in their 
democratic governance. 
 
Particularly important given the recently signed U.S-Central 
America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), U.S. officials 
repeatedly engaged government, private sector, and labor 
union officials on the importance of enforcing labor law and 
ensuring that core labor rights are protected.  The U.S. 
Department of Labor (DOL) funded the following projects: 
Strengthening Labor Systems in Central America (Cumple y 
Gana) from 2003-2007 for $6,750,000; Freedom of Association, 
Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations in Central 
America Project (RELACENTRO) from 2001-2004 for $1,870,000; 
and a Regional Occupational Safety and Health Project 
(CERSSO) from August 2000 - March 2004 for $6,600,000. 
USAID\'s $6,300,000 PROALCA II regional Labor Component from 
2002-2007 supports efforts to improve the functioning of 
regional labor markets while strengthening the protection of 
core labor standards through the Secretariat for Central 
American Economic Integration (SIECA). 
 
Child labor is a significant problem in Honduras.  From 1995 
to 2003, DOL grants provided more than $37 million in Central 
America and the Dominican Republic to the International Labor 
Organization\'s International Program for the Eradication of 
Child Labor (ILO/IPEC) and other organizations for projects 
aimed at combating and gathering information on the worst 
forms of child labor, including in melon and coffee 
production and the commercial sexual exploitation of 
children. 
 
Honduras is a source and transit country for trafficking in 
persons (TIP) for sexual and labor exploitation.  Most 
victims are young women and girls, who are trafficked to 
Guatemala, Belize, El Salvador, Mexico, the United States, 
and Canada.  Women and children are also trafficked 
internally, most often from rural to urban settings.  The 
Embassy brought in first a U.S. NGO expert and then a State 
Department official to be keynote speakers at seminars 
organized by the Honduran government on the prevention and 
eradication of the commercial sexual exploitation of children 
and trafficking in women and children in Tegucigalpa and La 
Ceiba in 2003, and in San Pedro Sula and Santa Rosa de Copan 
in January 2004.  The Embassy is spending $350,000 in 2003- 
2005 in INL Police Assistance Funds to support the Frontier 
Police to, among other goals, prevent and interdict the 
transportation of illegal immigrants, including TIP.  The 
State Department\'s Office to Monitor and Combat TIP is 
spending $29,400 to fund Department of Justice Office of 
Prosecutorial Development and Training (OPDAT) classes in 
2004 for Honduran police and prosecutors on investigating and 
prosecuting TIP. 
 
The mission is also sending various civil society leaders and 
government officials on international visitor programs in 
2003-2004, on topics such as the administration of justice 
and the rule of law, anti-corruption, civil society and 
democracy, and journalism. 
 
3. End Text. 
 
4. Post will send to DRL/PHD by e-mail the following: an 
addendum of USG-funded human rights and democracy programs of 
USD 100,000 or more, success stories, and photographs. 
 
Palmer 
"
"13917","2/12/2004 15:28","04TEGUCIGALPA325","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa232","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB, DRL/IL, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT SHUETE 
SAN SALVADOR FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAGR, EFIN, ETRD, ELAB, EINV, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduran Econ Highlights: December 2003 - January 
2004 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 232 
 
Contents 
-------- 
Macroeconomics: 
 - 2004 Budget 
 - Controversy over Price Freeze 
 - Fuel Tax Increase 
 - Remittances on the Rise 
Tourism: 
 - GOH to Develop Tela Bay 
Business: 
 - Banking: Cuscatlan Buys Out Lloyds 
 - Colonel Sanders Arrives in Honduras 
 
----------- 
2004 Budget 
----------- 
 
1. (U) On December 30, 2003, Congress passed the 2004 
federal budget.  The consideration of the budget, 
traditionally undertaken in a special December session of 
Congress, took on particular importance this year, as the 
government of Honduras worked under the constraint of 
meeting the prior conditions listed in the preliminary 
Letter of Intent agreed to with the IMF. 
 
2. (U) The total size of the national budget is 34.5 billion 
lempiras, up 5.6 percent from the 2003 total of 32.7 billion 
lempiras.  However, taking into account the 6 percent 
devaluation of the lempira over the course of 2003, the 
budget actually shrank slightly in dollar terms, from USD 
1.935 billion to USD 1.922 billion, a 0.7 percent decrease. 
 
3. (U) As always, the Ministries of Education and Health 
make up the largest share of the federal budget, comprising 
42 percent of the total, down slightly from 43.1 percent in 
2003.  The Ministry of Education\'s budget increased by 
nearly 10 percent, despite the previously determined 
decreases in salary and benefit hikes imposed by the public 
salary restructuring law passed on December 19, 2003 (see 
reftel).  The budget for the Ministry of Health decreased by 
8.4 percent, a partial result of the salary caps established 
by the Public Finance law, also passed on December 19. 
 
4. (U) The biggest gainers in the budget are the Ministry of 
Tourism, which had its budget more than doubled to 201 
million lempiras (USD 11.2 million), and the Ministry of 
Environment and Natural Resources, whose budget increased by 
nearly 30 percent to 729 million lempiras (USD 10.6 
million).  The Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of 
the Presidency suffered the largest budget cuts in 
percentage terms, although certain functions performed by 
these ministries have been categorized differently in 2004 
than in 2003, making a straight year-to-year comparison more 
difficult.  The Ministries of Transport and Finance also 
experienced sizable budget cuts, of roughly 20 percent. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Price Freeze: Good Intentions, Poor Implementation 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
5. (SBU) Along with the fiscal measures passed on December 
19, Congress simultaneously enacted a price freeze, to be 
effective for six months, on an extensive list of 159 
products (mostly foodstuffs).  The intent was to soften the 
economic blow (and political cost) of the spending and 
salary measures being passed at the same time, but the 
effect was to generate confusion. 
 
6. (SBU) Congress apparently adopted the measure without 
prior consultation with the Ministry of Industry and Trade, 
which would have the responsibility of enforcing the freeze. 
The Ministry monitors the prices of only about 40 products 
and, with only twelve consumer protection inspectors, lacked 
the capacity to implement such an elaborate price control 
system throughout the country. 
 
7. (SBU) IMF officials privately pushed for repeal, given 
the inevitable distortions the measures would cause. 
Private sector groups criticized the plan as being 
impractical and damaging to businesses.  Newspapers carried 
daily reports of price increases in the covered products and 
the government\'s inability to curb them, putting the GOH 
under constant attack.  On January 20, Congress cut back the 
number of products covered to 38, roughly matching products 
the GOH already monitored. 
 
----------------- 
Fuel tax increase 
----------------- 
 
8. (U) As part of the government\'s attempts to raise 
additional revenue, the GOH started the year with an 
increase in the fuel tax.  A decree that went into effect on 
January 1 raised the per gallon price of gasoline and diesel 
by 3.7 lempiras (20 U.S. cents), and a second decree in late 
January raised the price an additional 1.5 lempiras (8 U.S. 
cents).  There have been angry reactions from the 
transportation sector, which has threatened to increase the 
price of public transportation, though they have not done so 
yet. 
 
9. (U) According to GOH officials, the level of the fuel tax 
will keep changing on a regular basis so that the government 
can maintain a balanced budget and meet IMF requirements. 
These changes in the price of fuel will happen on a regular 
basis, probably once or twice a month.  The GOH currently 
estimates that it will receive around 4 billion lempiras 
(USD 222 million) in revenue from oil taxes this year. 
 
10. (U) As shown in the table below, Honduras now has the 
most expensive prices for gasoline and other kinds of fuel 
in the region. 
 
Country     Premium Gasoline   Regular Gasoline     Diesel 
-------     ----------------   ----------------     ------ 
Guatemala        2.02                1.97            1.45 
El Salvador      2.08                1.98            1.69 
Costa Rica       2.39                2.34            1.73 
Nicaragua        2.42                2.32            1.97 
Honduras         2.80                2.72            1.95 
 
Price of one gallon, in USD.  Source: Honduran Press 
accounts, quoting the Ministry of Commerce, Guatemala 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Remittances and Migration Continue to Rise 
------------------------------------------ 
 
11. (U) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the National 
Statistics Institute estimate that Honduras received USD 800 
million in family remittances in 2003, a figure which 
represents approximately 13 percent of the country\'s GDP. 
Remittances have increased by USD 96 million (14 percent) 
over the figure for 2002.  Family remittances are currently 
the second largest source of foreign currency, after the 
maquila industry. 
 
12. (U) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs estimates that every 
year around 35,000 Hondurans migrate to other countries, 
predominantly the U.S., looking for job opportunities.  The 
majority of these immigrants are men between 19 and 29 years 
old.  According to statistics, there is only one woman for 
every nine men that immigrate, which explains why the 
majority of those who receive family remittances are women. 
 
13. (U) The Consular Section witnessed a sudden surge in the 
number of NIV applicants immediately following the 
announcement of President Bush\'s immigration reform plan. 
The announcement of the plan seems to have created the 
perception among the Honduran public that those who enter 
the U.S. now, before the plan goes into effect, will be in a 
better position to gain legal status if the plan is approved 
by Congress. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Tela Bay - The Next Cancun?  GOH Hopes So 
----------------------------------------- 
 
14. (U) In early January, Congress approved new legislation 
that permits the GOH, through the Ministry of Tourism, to 
develop 312 hectares of prime tourism land, along 2 miles of 
coastline, in the area of Tela Bay on the north coast.  The 
land, which is owned by the GOH, will be passed to the 
control of a newly-created consortium, the Tela Bay Tourism 
Investment and Development company, which will include both 
private investors and the Ministry of Tourism as members. 
The hope is that this new legislation will permit investment 
that the GOH has been unable to undertake on its own. 
 
15. (U) Initial plans for the project were developed in the 
early 1990\'s, but there has been little progress until now. 
The GOH is planning the construction of seven major resorts, 
including four and five-star hotels, with a total capacity 
of 1,920 rooms.  A residential area will also be 
constructed, with a capacity for 168 villas, one mall, a 
convention center, and a golf course.  During 2004, the GOH 
is investing USD 12 million to provide infrastructure and 
basic services for the project, while raising money for the 
additional investments. 
 
16. (SBU) One AmCit, Miguel Garciga, has claimed to own land 
in the project area and requested Embassy advocacy. 
Preliminary investigations and discussion with the Tourism 
Ministry indicate that the AmCit\'s claim to ownership is 
unfounded. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Cuscatlan Buys Operations of Lloyds TSB in Central America 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
17. (U) At the beginning of December of 2003, Cuscatlan Bank 
from El Salvador bought all the assets of Lloyds TSB Bank in 
Honduras, Guatemala, and Panama for USD 80 million.  The 
reasons for the sale, according to the Lloyds Bank 
representative for Latin America, Tim Bower, are that the 
Salvadoran bank has better conditions to get more out of the 
Central American market.  The sale leaves Citibank as the 
only U.S. or European bank operating in Honduras, but brings 
the total number of Central American banks operating in the 
country to two. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Kentucky Fried Chicken Opens First Restaurant in Honduras 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
18. (U) In early January, Kentucky Fried Chicken opened its 
first restaurant in Honduras, located in the northern city 
of San Pedro Sula.  Kentucky Fried Chicken is owned by Yum! 
Brands, which also operates the Pizza Hut franchise, which 
is already very successful in Honduras, with 26 restaurants. 
The President of Yum! Brands International, Graham Allan, 
attended the opening and declared that further KFC openings 
are planned.  U.S. fast food franchises are well represented 
in Honduras, and KFC will have to compete for market share 
against such established fried chicken brands as Church\'s, 
Popeye\'s, and Central American favorite, Pollo Campero. 
 
Palmer 
"
"13987","2/13/2004 23:13","04TEGUCIGALPA344","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR IO/SHA (LLUM) PASS TO AMB SAUERBREY 
STATE FOR WHA AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OVIP, PREL, PGOV, PHUM, ECON, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR AMBASSADOR SAUERBREY\'S VISIT TO 
HONDURAS, FEBRUARY 19-20 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Post welcomes the visit of Ambassador 
Sauerbrey to Honduras February 19-20.  Honduran President 
Ricardo Maduro, half way through his constitutionally 
mandated single four-year term, faces difficult task leading 
a highly indebted poor country with numerous challenges. 
Bilateral relations between the U.S. and Honduras are 
excellent; Honduras was the first country in the Western 
Hemisphere to sign and ratify an ICC Article 98 Agreement 
with the United States.  Honduras\' support for the 
international counterterrorism effort is steadfast and the 
Government of Honduras (GOH) has sent troops to Iraq in 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Maduro is a good and reliable friend of the U.S. on 
counterterrorism.  The GOH has responded quickly to all USG 
requests regarding terrorist threats and financing, and to 
date no terrorist assets have been found in Honduran 
financial institutions.  The Congress has recently approved 
two international counterterrorism (CT) conventions/protocols 
and two OAS CT conventions (1971 and 2002).  Once the 
president signs the decrees and they are published in La 
Gaceta (akin to the Federal Register), Honduras will have 
become party to all 12 international and two OAS CT 
conventions. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Iraq and Other Key Foreign Policy Goals 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) The GOH is very supportive of USG foreign policy 
goals, including Iraq.  In support of Operation Iraqi Freedom 
(OIF), the GOH deployed some 370 troops to the vicinity of An 
Najaf as part of the Spanish Brigade operating under the 
Polish Division.  The troops are being rotated with a second 
contingent this month.  Central American units from El 
Salvador, Nicaragua, and the Dominican Republic are also 
serving under Spanish command.  In August 2003, CJCS GEN 
Myers and Secretary Rumsfeld visited Honduras, and in 
November 2003, Secretary Powell visited Honduras, to thank 
the GOH for its support of OIF.  Their visits were well 
received and provided important political support for 
Maduro\'s Iraq policy.  Honduras is also very supportive at 
the UN, sharing our views on resolutions covering such key 
issues as human rights, human cloning, and the Middle East. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Bilateral Political/Military Issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Honduras was the first country in all the Western 
Hemisphere to sign and ratify an Article 98 Agreement with 
the United States.  In January of 1999, the constitution was 
amended to abolish the position of military commander in 
chief of the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF), thus codifying 
civilian authority over the military.  Honduras now has a 
civilian Minister of Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint 
Staff who heads the HOAF.  Civilian control over the HOAF is 
complete.  This transition has resulted in greater 
transparency and fiscal accountability. The HOAF has a new 
focus on trans-national threats, including counterterrorism, 
narcotrafficking, and combating international criminal 
organizations.  The HOAF is also interested in establishing 
an ability to participate in international peacekeeping 
operations. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Soto Cano Air Base - Joint Task Force Bravo 
------------------------------------------- 
5. (SBU) Five hundred sixty-five U.S. service men and women 
and eleven civilian DOD employees are currently stationed at 
Honduras\' Soto Cano Air Base under the auspices of SOUTHCOM 
as Joint Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment and will enable our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster relief, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
 
---------------- 
Counternarcotics 
---------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Honduras\' geography places it squarely in the middle 
of a major illegal drug trans-shipment zone.  Honduras\' 
airspace is regularly violated by drug traffickers, who also 
use go-fast boats to transit their cocaine through the 
Western Caribbean region.  In 2003, Honduras seized 
approximately 5,700 kilos of cocaine.  This is significantly 
more than had been seized in the last seven years combined. 
 
---------------- 
Border Relations 
------------------ 
7. (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three Central 
American land neighbors and its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  Its land and maritime 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast has been a 
particularly difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) ruling laid out shared areas of control in the 
Gulf of Fonseca and established the land border between 
Honduras and El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow 
to implement the ruling.  In September 2002, El Salvador 
requested a revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling.  In December 
2003, the ICJ ruled against the Salvadoran appeal, bringing 
an end to the case.  The Organization of American States (as 
a neutral third party) is providing both nations technical 
assistance to help them implement the non-disputed elements 
of the ICJ\'s ruling. 
 
8. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.  In the past, the dispute has threatened to derail 
trilateral counternarcotics operations.  Honduras provoked 
Nicaraguan retaliation when it signed a maritime treaty with 
Colombia recognizing the 15th parallel as its maritime border 
in 1999.  Nicaragua filed an ICJ case over the maritime 
border and more importantly in 1999 slapped a punitive 35 per 
cent tariff on Honduran goods.  This tariff remained in place 
until April 2003 despite a Central American Court of Justice 
ruling that it was illegal.  Only after Honduras responded 
with a retaliatory tariff, threatening Nicaraguan exports, 
did Managua rescind the tax. 
 
----------------- 
Economic Overview 
----------------- 
 
9. (SBU)  Honduras, with a per capita income of USD 950, is 
the third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere ahead of 
only Nicaragua and Haiti.  The economy is still growing 
(about 2.5 percent per year) but slower than the population 
growth rate of 3.5 percent per year.  Social indicators are 
improving, but two-thirds of all Hondurans live in poverty 
and average education levels are very low.  Historically low 
world coffee prices have hit rural areas particularly hard 
(although they are now rising somewhat) forcing major 
cutbacks in planting, fertilizing, harvesting and investment. 
 The economy continues to be dominated by agriculture, 
particularly the production of bananas, coffee, cultivated 
shrimp, melons and other fruits, vegetables and grains. 
 
10. (SBU) The apparel assembly (maquila) sector grew 
dramatically in the 1990s reaching peak employment in 2000 of 
about 120,000 people.  Activity slowed after 2001 because of 
the U.S. economic slowdown in 2001-2002 and increased 
competition from Asia, but the sector appears to be 
rebounding this year.  While there has been some economic 
diversification (melons, cultivated shrimp, palm oil), there 
continues to be a large subsistence farmer population with 
few opportunities other than illegal immigration to the U.S. 
The Honduran government\'s desire to attract new types of 
foreign investment has been hindered by the stagnant economy 
and a wide range of investment climate/competitiveness 
problems. 
 
11. (SBU) Remittances from Hondurans abroad, particularly the 
U.S., continue to grow rapidly and have become the most 
important source of foreign exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras, 
largest trading partner.  The roughly 150 U.S. companies that 
do business in Honduras constitute the largest block of 
foreign direct investors. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
IMF Letter of Intent and CAFTA Positive Steps Forward 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
12. (SBU) After almost two years of negotiations, the Maduro 
Administration recently signed a Letter of Intent with the 
International Monetary Fund for a three-year Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility Program (expected to be 
approved on February 18).  The GOH, along with its four 
Central American neighbors (Costa Rica, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, and Nicaragua) also recently signed the 
U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA). Maduro\'s 
team is hoping that CAFTA can serve as a catalyst to spur 
regional economic cooperation and integration. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) The current Supreme Court is developing into an 
independent branch of power, unlike any of its predecessor 
courts since democracy was restored in 1982.  It is 
pro-reform in orientation and fighting for its prerogatives. 
A key emerging issue is whether it can become a fully 
independent and co-equal branch of political power, 
consistent with the separation of powers provision in the 
Honduran Constitution.  The established political order is 
fighting that prospect with vigor.  In fact, the Congress 
seized the political opportunity to introduce legislation 
that would amend the constitution to give itself the power to 
interpret the constitutionality of the laws it passes.  The 
Supreme Court ruled in May 2003 that the proposed amendment 
was unconstitutional, which sparked a tense confrontation 
between the Supreme Court and Congress.  The issue receded 
until recently when Congress passed a new amendment to the 
Constitution again granting Congress the right to interpret 
the constitutionality of laws it passes.  A legal challenge 
to this amendment is expected in the near future. 
 
---------------------------- 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
14. (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27, 2002, President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
out-of-control crime situation.  He deployed more than 5,000 
soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The public 
responded enthusiastically.  However, after initial success 
of establishing a visible police presence, violent crime, 
particularly homicides, continued at a high rate, although 
there is evidence that the murder rate has fallen in the last 
several months.  The USG is helping the Maduro government 
establish an anti-kidnapping unit, increase intake/training 
of police recruits, create a model tourist police force, 
boost its counternarcotics efforts, and expand the frontier 
police.  The country\'s geographic position makes it an 
obvious strategic transit point for narcotics trafficking, 
alien smuggling operations, trafficking in persons, and other 
organized crime activities. 
 
15. (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults since 1998, have been a source of 
serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to take 
steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases.  Human 
rights groups regularly accuse former security force 
officials and the business community of colluding to organize 
\"death squads\" to commit these summary, and arbitrary 
executions.  There are also serious problems with child labor 
in several industries, particularly melon, coffee, and sugar 
cane (but not the maquila) sectors, and trafficking in 
persons of women/children for commercial sexual exploitation 
in the U.S., Central America, and Mexico.  USAID and Peace 
Corps have both been involved in HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
16. (SBU) Approximately 800,000 Hondurans, both legal and 
illegal, live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration 
issues high on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of 
Honduras is 6.5 million.)  There is deep appreciation for the 
USG\'s extension of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) in the 
U.S. and interest in possible congressional action on the 
proposed Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief 
Act (NACARA), which would give immigration parity for 
Hondurans.  With approximately 11,000 American citizens 
residing in Honduras and many thousands visiting Honduras 
annually for tourism and business, American Citizen Services 
are a key part of the Embassy\'s work.  Since 1995, 35 
American Citizens have been murdered in Honduras.  There was 
not much progress on most of these cases until 2003, but 
there have now been 15 convictions in eight cases.  Some 
progress has been made on extradition cases involving 
American Citizens residing in Honduras who are wanted for 
felonies in the United States. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
17. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  The Peace Corps program, with more than 245 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY03 budget of USD 45 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula. 
PALMER 
"
"14066","2/19/2004 1:49","04TEGUCIGALPA365","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA307","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/AN/IAA, IO, AND USUN 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL AND DRL/MLA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PINR, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS UNWILLING TO TAKE LEAD IN DRAFTING UNCHR 
CUBA RESOLUTION; LIKELY TO REPLACE CURRENT CHARGE IN HAVANA 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 307 
 
     B. STATE 20401 
     C. STATE 13279 
     D. 03 STATE 313469 
     E. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2866 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
1. (U) Deputy Chief of Mission and Political Counselor met 
with Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Anibel Quinones and 
Senior Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Foreign Policy 
Advisor Policarpo Callejas on February 18 to further discuss 
GOH willingness to draft this year\'s Cuba human right 
resolution at the UN Commission on Human Rights session (Ref 
B.)  Quinones repeated earlier MFA position that Honduras was 
not ready to take the lead in drafting the resolution but 
left open the door to the possibility of co-sponsoring a 
resolution drafted by fellow Latin Americans.  He stated that 
Honduras was prepared to press Cuba at the UNCHR on its human 
rights record.  He also made clear that the GOH felt no 
pressure from Cuba over the issue of the two countries\' 
pending bilateral maritime treaty.  However, he demurred when 
pressed to become one of the principal drafters of a 
resolution. 
 
2. (C) Quinones asked for Washington\'s view on his earlier 
proposal to strengthen Honduran diplomatic representation in 
Havana without upgrading its relations (Ref E.)  When we 
passed guidance in Ref D, Quinones indicated that the MFA may 
move soon (no specific timetable was outlined) to name a 
senior career Honduran diplomat to the Charge post in Havana. 
 He added that the current Honduran Charge was simply not 
producing enough information about the situation in Cuba.  He 
repeated earlier comments that the GOH is concerned about the 
more than 700 Honduran nationals who are studying there. 
 
3. (C) Quinones confirmed Foreign Minister (FM) Leonidas Rosa 
Bautista\'s desire to visit Washington during March 5 through 
8 timeframe after the FM\'s March 1-5 trip to Madrid with 
President Maduro (Ref A.)  DCM told Quinones that the Cuba 
UNCHR resolution would figure prominently on the agenda of 
any visit to Washington by the FM.  Quinones took the point. 
 
4. (C) COMMENT: DCM pressed Quinones on need for GOH to draft 
this year\'s resolution.  However, while Quinones is generally 
very pro-U.S. and friendly to U.S. interests (he played a key 
role in moving the ICC Article 98 agreement through the GOH 
bureaucracy), he did not move much on the issue.  Quinones 
also quipped that Rosa Bautista would need to be accompanied 
to DC, if the Cuba issue was to be raised, suggesting that 
Rosa Bautista would need more seasoned MFA advice on how to 
deal with the issue.  END COMMENT. 
PALMER 
"
"14104","2/19/2004 21:49","04TEGUCIGALPA371","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA291","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR: L/LEI-DSULLIVAN, DOJ/OIA 
FBI PLEASE PASS TO MIAMI LIAISON OFFICER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, CASC, CPAS, CVIS, HO (MORRIS ARNOLDFREDERICK) 
SUBJECT: EXTRADITION/DEPORTATION OF ARNOLD FREDERICK 
MORRIS 
 
REF:  TEGUCIGALPA 0291 
 
1.  On Wednesday February 18, 2004, Honduran Police 
arrested U.S. fugitive Arnold Frederick Morris.  On 
Thursday February 19, 2004 he was deported back to the 
U.S. through coordinated efforts of U.S. and Honduran 
law enforcement agencies.  Mr. Morris is currently the 
subject of several Federal warrants in the U.S. 
 
2. In light of the arrest and deportation, Post 
considers this case closed. 
 
PALMER 
"
"14150","2/20/2004 20:24","04TEGUCIGALPA381","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, INL/LP, DRL/PHD, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, CVIS, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CONGRESSMAN ARMANDO AVILA PANCHAME 
SENTENCED TO 20 YEARS FOR DRUG TRAFFICKING 
 
REF: 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1622 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco L. Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) National Party Deputy, Armando Avila Panchame, who was 
convicted February 12th for drug trafficking, was sentenced 
February 19th to 20 years in prison.  His sentence stemmed 
from his arrest July 6, 2003, while attempting to flee the 
scene of a drug trafficking airplane crash in the eastern 
department of Olancho (reftel).  He subsequently requested 
that his congressional immunity be waived to stand trial. 
Avila Panchame\'s conviction marks the first time a Honduran 
court has convicted a legislator for drug trafficking. 
 
2. (U) The presiding judge on the case, Ramon Ovidio Navarro, 
is the newly selected Honduran Attorney General (AG), 
replacing outgoing AG Roy Edmundo Medina (septel).  Navarro 
is expected to assume his new position on March 12.  The 
verdict was rendered, however, prior to his selection as AG. 
 
3. (SBU) Avila Panchame\'s conviction and accompanying heavy 
sentence is a major step forward in the Government of 
Honduras\' (GOH) effort to stem the rampant corruption and 
sense of impunity that permeates the Honduran Congress.  His 
case received considerable media coverage and generated much 
public interest.  This conviction and sentencing is the first 
one in some time that will result in a high level GOH 
official doing considerable jail time for involvement in 
narcotics trafficking. 
 
4. (C) Comment: Post has heard persistent rumors, emanating 
from high levels within the GOH, that Avila Panchame\'s 
conviction and sentence were intended to \"offer him up\" as a 
sacrificial lamb, in an effort to demonstrate to the U.S. the 
GOH\'s commitment to combating drug trafficking and corruption 
at the highest levels.  Also, it was a showcase for the new 
AG candidate to demonstrate his judicial toughness on 
impunity by corrupt Honduran officials.  It remains to been 
seen, however, what kind of zeal the Public Ministry will 
exhibit under Navarro\'s leadership in pursuing other high 
level cases.  Reports on his background raise serious 
questions about his ability to pursue such cases. 
Nonetheless, the Avila Panchame conviction is a watershed in 
Honduras.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"14151","2/20/2004 20:50","04TEGUCIGALPA382","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa116","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, DRL/IL, DRL/PHD, AND INL/LP 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
DOJ FOR OPDAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, SMIG, KWMN, ELAB, PGOV, PREL, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT:  Honduras TIP Update: GOH Active in Preventing and 
Combating TIP 
 
REF: (A) Tegucigalpa 116 
 
     (B) Tegucigalpa 70 
     (C) 03 Tegucigalpa 2965 
     (D) 03 Tegucigalpa 2825 
     (E) 03 Tegucigalpa 2350 
 
1.  Summary: Honduras has been active in recent months on a 
number of trafficking in persons (TIP) fronts.  This cable 
provides an update on these efforts.  End Summary. 
 
TIP Seminars - Prevention and Eradication of TIP 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. The Embassy brought in first a U.S. NGO expert (ref E) and 
then invited G/TIP Senior Reporting Officer Phil Linderman to 
be keynote speakers at seminars organized by the Honduran 
government on the prevention and eradication of the 
commercial sexual exploitation of children and trafficking in 
women and children in Tegucigalpa and La Ceiba in 2003, and 
in San Pedro Sula and Santa Rosa de Copan in January 22-23, 
2004.  On the margins of the seminars in January, Linderman 
and LabAtt held various meetings on TIP issues with GOH and 
NGO officials.  Linderman also did extensive press interviews 
on TIP. 
 
Recent GOH Efforts to Prevent/Combat TIP 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3. At the January seminars, Honduran Delegate to the OAS 
Women\'s Commission Ambassador Soledad de Ramirez Soto 
highlighted several recent advances in combating TIP: 
- police are training school children to prevent commercial 
sexual exploitation; 
- the GOH has established a toll-free number to report 
commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC)/TIP 
-- the GOH worked with ILO/IPEC and NGOs to provide training 
to the press on TIP; 
-- the GOH, in conjunction with UNICEF, has begun a public 
information campaign against trafficking and commercial 
sexual exploitation, and it has tried to raise awareness of 
children and women\'s rights and risks associated with illegal 
migration.  The NGO Casa Alianza has also launched a public 
information campaign against commercial sexual exploitation 
of children. 
 
Casa Alianza CSEC Study Leads to GOH Action 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4. The commercial sexual exploitation of children is a 
continuing problem in Honduras, but getting an estimate of 
the magnitude of the problem has been difficult.  ILO/IPEC, 
in conjunction with the NGO Center for the Study of Women- 
Honduras (CEM-H), and Save the Children UK, have both worked 
on studies in the past.  Casa Alianza released a study in 
December 2003 estimating that there are approximately 8,335 
children who are victims of some form of commercial sexual 
exploitation.  The report also identified 1,019 children (979 
of whom were female) who are being commercially sexually 
exploited.  According to a February 12 Casa Alianza press 
release that praised the GOH, following the issuance of the 
study, Honduran authorities conducted operations in late 
January and early February in which \"30 girls, victims of 
CSEC, have been rescued from taverns and brothels in 
Honduras.\"  The GOH also conducted operations December 16, 
2003 in Tegucigalpa, raiding four establishments with CSEC 
victims, and also in late 2003 conducted raids, freed CSEC 
victims, and arrested two people in the Honduran/Nicaraguan 
border towns of Guasaule and El Triunfo.  Please see: 
http://www.casa-alianza.org/ES/human-rights/s exual- 
exploit/docs/16122003.phtml for more information on the 
study. 
 
Ringleader in Texas TIP Case Arrested 
------------------------------------- 
 
5. In May 2002, federal agents raided six bars and seven 
homes in Forth Worth, Texas and detained 88 people, many on 
suspicion of immigration violations.  Members of a family 
from Choluteca, Honduras, were ringleaders of the scheme that 
trafficked 29 Honduran women and five Honduran girls to work 
at the bars.  The victims were subject to sexual exploitation 
and debt bondage.  Honduran authorities participated in law 
enforcement investigations that led to several convictions in 
the U.S.  Honduran police, working closely with the 
Department of Homeland Security, recently arrested alleged 
ringleader Roger Galindo in San Lorenzo, Honduras on February 
5.  Also arrested February 5 were Marlene de Jesus Aguilar 
Galindo and Sabina Cepeda; Maria Isabel Cruz Zamora is still 
a fugitive with a pending Honduran arrest warrant.  Roger 
Galindo and the others had been fugitives since the original 
arrests in 2002. 
Arrests in Chinese Alien Smuggling 
---------------------------------- 
 
6. Honduran police arrested two Taiwanese citizens in 2003 on 
charges of alien smuggling in cases that could have some TIP 
elements, as it is possible that the Chinese would have been 
subject to debt bondage to pay off their smuggling fees.  The 
Taiwanese were caught trying to smuggle PRC nationals to the 
U.S. via San Pedro Sula, Honduras using fraudulent documents. 
Chen Ke Jung, arrested in San Pedro Sula on October 12, 2003, 
has since violated probation status and is currently a 
fugitive.  Len Wei-Chung, arrested December 26, 2003, is 
still in jail.  (See ref A for more information on these 
cases.) 
 
7. Honduran police also arrested Chinese naturalized 
Hondurans Hu Weng Rong (December 9, 2003) and He Jia Bin 
(December 11, 2003) in San Pedro Sula for involvement in an 
alien smuggling ring for PRC nationals using fraudulent 
documents.  Both are still in jail.  (See refs B-C for more 
information on these cases.) 
 
USG Assistance to Combat TIP 
---------------------------- 
 
8. The Embassy is spending $350,000 in 2003-2005 in INL 
Police Assistance Funds to support the Frontier Police to, 
among other goals, prevent and interdict the transportation 
of illegal immigrants, including TIP.  This is in addition to 
the $29,400 G/TIP is spending to fund Department of Justice 
Office of Prosecutorial Development and Training (OPDAT) 
classes in 2004 for Honduran police and prosecutors on 
investigating and prosecuting TIP. 
 
Palmer 
"
"14200","2/23/2004 23:31","04TEGUCIGALPA400","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1615|03TEGUCIGALPA2844|04TEGUCIGALPA381","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000400 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/B, INL/LP, DRL/PHD, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, SNAR, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: NEW HONDURAN ATTORNEY GENERAL: THE LAW IS GOOD, IF 
A MAN USES IT LAWFULLY 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 381 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2844 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1615 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  On February 17 Ramon Ovidio Navarro Duarte 
was sworn in as Honduras\' next Attorney General (AG), 
replacing outgoing AG Roy Edmundo Medina Nolasco.  Navarro, a 
Honduran Supreme Court Justice, is expected to assume his new 
responsibilities on March 12.  Navarro is a Nationalist Party 
(PN) member and long-time associate of ex-president Rafael 
Callejas.  Navarro maintains close contact with other members 
of the Honduran political/economic elite who are committed to 
maintaining the status quo.  As such, it remains to be seen 
what type of zeal he will demonstrate at the Public Ministry 
(PM) to aggressively pursue criminal and corruption cases 
against high level individuals.  Post believes, however, that 
he will improve the PM\'s performance in prosecuting low-level 
street crime and in working more collaboratively with the 
other judicial and law enforcement entities in Honduras.  End 
Summary 
 
2. (C) On February 17 Ramon Ovidio Navarro Duarte was sworn 
in as Honduras\' new Attorney General (AG), replacing outgoing 
AG Roy Edmundo Medina.  Navarro, a Honduran Supreme Court 
Justice, is expected to assume his new responsibilities on 
March 12 (ref A).  Navarro is linked to the \"Dark Side\" of 
the Nationalist Party (PN) and is a long-time associate of 
ex-president Rafael Callejas, who himself has been accused of 
corrupt practices.  Navarro was, in fact, an integral member 
of Callejas\' legal defense team during his mid-1990\'s 
corruption scandals.  Callejas, who still exerts enormous 
influence within the PN, was instrumental in orchestrating 
Navarro\'s selection as AG and Navarro, despite being a 
sitting Supreme Court Judge, is still a member of Callejas\' 
legal team.  Navarro is also a close friend of Honduran 
Supreme Court President Vilma Cecilia Morales, and maintains 
strong personal relationships with Honduran National 
University Rector Guillermo Arias Perez Cadalso and Honduran 
Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista, all Nationalists who 
supported his candidacy. 
 
3. (C) Navarro\'s selection as the new AG was guided by high 
ranking Nationalist Dark Side members of congress, including 
the President of Congress, Porfirio (Pepe) Lobo, Gilberto 
(Picho) Goldstein, Rodolfo Irias Navas, and Oswaldo Ramos 
Soto, all of whom might have something to fear from an AG 
with the political will to aggressively pursue high level 
corruption cases.  Not necessarily the most qualified for the 
job, his selection and nomination moved forward without a 
concerted effort by either the Liberal Party or the 
non-Callejas faction of the PN to derail it.  Although 
Honduran law requires the selection of the AG to be an open 
and transparent process, the rapidity of the congressional 
vote limited the coordination of any of the other candidates 
and their supporters, reminding one of fixed deals in smoke 
filled rooms. 
 
4. (U) Other candidates who had made the AG short-list were: 
Lidia Estella Cardona Padilla (Supreme Court Judge); Carlos 
Africo Madrid (Supreme Court Representative on the National 
Election Tribunal); Luis Enrique Galeano Milla (private 
attorney); and Roberto Lagos Banegas (private attorney).  All 
AG candidates were PN members.  The new Deputy Attorney 
General is Yuri Fernando Melara Berlios, a Liberal Party 
member, in keeping with tradition that the second in command 
at the PM represent the main opposition party. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  After current AG Medina\'s dismal 
performance, many civil society and justice sector actors 
hoped that a new more aggressive, crusading, and ethical AG 
might usher in a new mind-set at the PM.  Such a lead 
prosecutor might have been able to dent the pervasive 
corruption and sense of impunity that permeates Honduran 
society.  However, Navarro\'s selection as the new AG signals 
that probably little will change at the PM.  This is a 
disappointing development, particularly after the 
international community\'s and Honduran civil society\'s 
concerted efforts to promote the rule of law in Honduras and 
the significance of choosing a highly qualified AG.  While 
Navarro was the presiding judge in the recent conviction and 
sentencing of PN deputy Armando Avila Panchame, persistent 
rumors emanating from high levels within the Government of 
Honduras (GOH) indicate that Avila Panchame was \"sacrificed\" 
in an effort to demonstrate to the U.S. Navarro\'s commitment 
to combating drug trafficking and corruption at the highest 
levels (ref A).  Post believes that Navarro will improve the 
PM\'s performance in prosecuting low-level crime and in 
working more collaboratively with the other judicial and law 
enforcement entities in Honduras.  Despite Medina\'s poor 
leadership and the overall problems with the PM, there are 
many strong individual prosecutors untainted by allegations 
of corruption or incompetence that mar many in the PM. 
 
6. (C) Comment Continued:  It appears that Navarro is not 
likely to improve the rule of law in Honduras or lead an 
effort for needed reforms.  Thus, his selection will likely 
not change a legal system which is desperately in need of 
improvement.  End Comment. 
 
---------------------- 
Biographic Information 
---------------------- 
 
7. (C)  Ramon Ovidio NAVARRO Duarte was born in Trujillo, 
Honduras, on September 17, 1938.  He was selected as a member 
of the newly reformed Honduran Supreme Court of Justice in 
2002 and continued in that capacity prior to being selected 
as the new AG.  Navarro remains an active Nationalist Party 
member and is clearly identified with the Dark Side of the 
party.  Prior to joining the Supreme Court Navarro was a 
professor of labor law at the Honduran National Autonomous 
University (UNAH).  At one point, Navarro served as Vice 
Minister at the Honduran Ministry of Government and Justice 
and was head of, and legal advisor to, the Honduran Institute 
of Social Security. 
 
8. (U) Navarro has considerable judicial experience and is 
known as an able litigator.  He was a judge in the Court of 
Appeals in San Pedro Sula, an appellate level Administrative 
Law Judge, and an interim judge for the Honduran Registry of 
Property.  Navarro holds a 1965 degree in law from UNAH and 
his Bachelors degree is from a local university in San Pedro 
Sula.  Navarro is married to Ingrid E. Vasquez.  He does not 
speak English. 
 
PALMER 
"
"14219","2/24/2004 14:06","04TEGUCIGALPA1173","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","04USDAOTEGUCIGALPA242238ZSEP2","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL DAS MCCARTHY AND INL/LP 
STATE FOR WHA DAS FISK AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/21/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, EAIR, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: POST RESPONSE TO INQUIRY INTO APRIL 14, 2003 
DOWNING OF DRUG TRAFFICKING PLANE BY HONDURAN AIR FORCE 
 
REF: A. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 242238Z SEP 02 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 913 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 924 
     D. CDR USSOUTHCOM 1723949Z APR 03 
     E. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 211321Z APR 03 
     F. 03 STATE 101059 
     G. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 986 
     H. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1173 
     I. 03 STATE 144757 
     J. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1499 
     K. CDR USSOUTHCOM 182214Z JUL 03 
     L. TEGUCIGALPA 80 
     M. DIRJIATFSO 201408Z JAN 04 
     N. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 211619Z JAN 04 
     O. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 222221Z JAN 04 
     P. TEGUCIGALPA 179 
     Q. STATE 15961 
     R. TEGUCIGALPA 193 
     S. TEGUCIGALPA 203 
     T. TEGUCIGALPA 209 
     U. TEGUCIGALPA 289 
     V. STATE 35227 
     W. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 241406Z FEB 04 
     X. TEGUCIGALPA 672 
     Y. STATE 98251 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U)  Post appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
time-line set forth in ref Y.  Answers keyed to ref Y are 
provided in paragraph 4. 
 
2. (S) Post believes the time-line included in ref Y is 
largely accurate but not complete.  Post has conducted an 
exhaustive search of its files in order to provide the 
Department other relevant information that might assist INL 
in formulating a response to the NSC\'s April 14, 2004 letter. 
 The inclusion of reftels D, E, J, K, N, 0, V, and W are 
intended for that purpose (the additional reftels will mean a 
revision in the cables referenced in the INL timeline). 
 
3. (S) For inclusion to, and modification of, INL time-line: 
 
-- April 17, 2003:  CMDR USSOUTHCOM formally notifies AMB 
that CNIES information sharing with the GOH had been 
suspended pending an investigation into the April 14 downing 
of a narcotrafficking aircraft.  CMDR USSOUTHCOM indicates 
what steps must be taken before information sharing with the 
GOH can resume (ref D). 
 
-- June 25, 2003:  Ambassador responds to CMDR USSOUTHCOM 
regarding substantive actions taken by the Honduran Air Force 
(HAF) to prevent a similar incident from reoccurring (ref J). 
 
-- July 18, 2003:  CMDR USSOUTHCOM informs Post that he has 
accepted the verbal assurances of the President of Honduras, 
based on ref I, that the GOH has a \"no shoot down\" policy and 
that CNIES information sharing with the GOH would resume July 
18, 2003 (ref K).  CMDR USSOUTHCOM refers to a USSOUTHCOM 
initiative to work toward a Memorandum of Understanding with 
the GOH regarding the sharing of U.S. radar information. 
 
-- February 18, 2004:  INL thanks Post for the hospitality 
shown to the joint Department of State/Department of Defense 
team during the February 2-4 visit to look at the HAF\'s 
procedures for air interdiction.  INL indicates that it is in 
the early stages of preparing a briefing for Department of 
State principals and the interagency community on a region- 
wide course of action regarding procedures for air 
interdiction operations initiated using information provided 
by the USG (ref V). 
 
-- February 24, 2004:  USDAO Tegucigalpa reports the 
Commander of the HAF expressed his annoyance with the 
State-DOD team\'s request for a written document outlining 
Honduras\' intercept procedures, indicating that the document 
could not be shared with the State-DOD team because it was 
classified secret.  Embassy comments in this report that: \"It 
is not clear how widely the HAF has distributed 
comprehensive, fully articulated standard operating 
procedures regarding Honduran intercept procedures\" (ref W). 
 
-- March 14, 2004:  Post suggests rewording entry to read: 
\"Burned aircraft found on the property of a leading local 
industrialist; no evidence of HAF involvement in this 
incident\" (ref Y). 
 
4. (S) The following answers are keyed to ref Y and reflect 
Post\'s best information. 
 
a. Yes.  The report the Government of Honduras (GOH) provided 
was intended to satisfy the GOH\'s commitment to conduct an 
investigation into the April 14, 2003 incident.  The GOH does 
not/not intend to conduct any further investigation into that 
incident. 
 
b. Post is unaware of any other GOH investigation into the 
April 14, 2003 incident apart from the one report already 
provided. 
 
c. TAT received a copy of the April 14, 2003 P-3 video.  TAT 
reports that it is in possession of the long and short 
versions of the P-3 video. 
 
d. No. 
 
e. Post notes ref K indicating that on July 18, 2003 General 
James Hill, Commander USSOUTHCOM, accepted the verbal 
assurances of the President of Honduras, based on Post\'s 
reporting in ref H, that the GOH has a \"no shoot down\" policy 
and subsequently ordered a resumption of radar sharing with 
the GOH based on that assurance. 
 
f. No.  TAT reports that the GOH told them they did not 
consider the January 10, 2004 event an \"incident\" and 
therefore no report was ever drafted. 
 
g. It is possible that the GOH has a written policy or other 
operational documents governing intercept procedures and 
sorting criteria that it has not shared with the USG.  GOH 
officials told the interagency fact finding team in February 
that such documents cannot be shared with the USG because 
they are secret. 
 
h. No. Post is not in possession of any GOH documents 
concerning GOH procedures and sorting criteria governing air 
interceptions and the use of warning shots that have not 
already been provided to the Department. 
Palmer 
"
"14221","2/24/2004 15:23","04TEGUCIGALPA401","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 000401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
FOR EB/CBA AND EB/TRA 
FOR INL/LP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, BEXP, ECON, ETRD, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Port Security: Honduras on Track to Meet U.S. and IMO 
Requirements 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The Government of Honduras (GOH) is well 
positioned to be in compliance with MTSA and IMO requirements by 
the July 1, 2004 deadline.  The country\'s chief challenges in 
meeting the requirements set out in the Maritime Transportation 
Security Act of 2002 (MTSA) and in the International Maritime 
Organization (IMO) codes are obtaining the necessary financial 
resources and battling the ingrained ambiance of corruption that 
permeates the country.  With continual Embassy engagement, the GOH 
has come to understand the importance of maritime security and its 
possible economic ramifications, including refusal of entry into 
U.S. waters, if Honduras fails to meet heightened port security 
standards.  A U.S. consulting firm completed a port facility 
security assessment of all Honduran ports late January 2004, and 
the GOH is currently in the process of drafting the port facility 
security plan.  GOH Presidential, political and financial support 
were critical for the expeditious contracting of the assessment 
team and purchase of recommended security equipment.  End summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
U.S. Law and International Codes 
-------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Puerto Cortes handled over 1,000 vessels traveling to or 
from the U.S. in 2002.  When the news came out that, following the 
events of September 11, 2001, the U.S. was focusing on the need 
for improvement in maritime security, it became clear that port 
security would be a critical issue for Honduras.  However, meeting 
the steep requirements set out in the Maritime Transportation 
Security Act (MTSA) and International Ship and Port Facility 
Security (ISPS) codes pose a very large challenge.  All major 
ports in Honduras are owned and operated by the state-owned 
National Port Authority (ENP).  First, meeting the codes requires 
physical changes, including fences, camera equipment, and 
increased security devices standard at any U.S. port facility, but 
lacking in Honduras because of financial and political 
constraints.  Secondly, the codes require administrative changes 
in the way business is done and the manner in which emergency 
response practices are implemented.  Though the U.S. consultants 
conducting the assessment discovered that the ENP already 
maintained volumes of information on port procedures and 
contingency plans for emergency response, little of this 
information was common knowledge to port security personnel.  Even 
more worrisome, the consultants discovered that many dock 
employees and security personnel have little to no education; some 
were even reading manifests presented to them upside-down, 
pretending to read the inverted document, and confirming that 
everything was acceptable.  Thirdly and perhaps the most difficult 
to overcome is the need to change the culture that allows 
corruption at the ports to flourish. 
 
3. (SBU) Puerto Cortes and San Lorenzo have been centers of 
corruption, pilferage, drug trafficking and alien smuggling for 
years.  While the Embassy and private sector have attempted to 
work with port authorities in the recent past to change these 
endemic problems, little progress was made due to a lack of 
political will and great financial incentive not to change the 
environment.  However, with the imminent onset of the IMO and MTSA 
requirements and repeated Embassy advocacy, GOH and port officials 
finally committed to taking action to address the underlying 
issues related to security at Honduran ports.  This political will 
was driven by the understanding that Honduras\' economic stability 
depended on change. 
 
-------------------------- 
What Are The Requirements? 
-------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) The IMO, within the framework of the SOLAS convention, 
established the ISPS codes.  These codes are very detailed and lay 
out specifically what every signatory country must do.  Basically, 
there are two parts to the code - vessel security and port 
facility security.  Each of these two requires an assessment and a 
plan.  The assessment is essentially a risk analysis, an 
evaluation of the perceived threat to installations and 
infrastructure, identifying potential vulnerabilities and laying 
out the consequences of the potential incidents calculated, such 
as chemical spills or a perimeter breach.  While this may seem 
simple, an assessment requires a very in-depth analysis, including 
detailing everything from port facilities, cargo facilities, power 
plants, water supplies, bridges, railways, and roadways and how to 
protect them from threats such as vandalism, arson, hijacking, 
tampering and pilferage, stowaways, smuggling of weapons, using 
vessels themselves as a weapon, blockages of entrances, and 
threats of nuclear, biological and chemical attacks.  Once the 
assessment is completed, host government officials are then 
responsible for drafting and certification of a port facility 
security plan.  The plan should indicate operation and physical 
security measures to ensure that the port is always able to 
operate at the minimum security standards required (MARSEC 1). 
The plan must also indicate additional, intensified measures the 
port facility can take to move to and operate at heightened 
security levels 2 and 3, if required by a security incident or 
threat. 
 
5. (SBU) Post understands that U.S. inspections of foreign ports 
and shipping lines will be modeled on the Transportation Security 
Administration\'s (TSA) periodic security reviews of foreign 
airports and airlines.  If a port fails to be certified by the 
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), no ships originating from or 
transshipping through that port will be allowed to enter U.S. 
waters until the vessel has been secured at a certified port 
facility.  For Honduras, temporary decertification of a principal 
port such as Puerto Cortes would mean massive economic costs, 
particularly for textile, fruit and non-traditional agricultural 
product exporters.  Long-term decertification would be disastrous 
to Honduras\' economy, as it would eliminate any incentives for 
additional foreign investment in Honduras.  Decertification would 
also negatively affect El Salvadoran and Nicaraguan exports 
transported through Honduras. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Encouraging Compliance and GOH Political Will 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU) In order to learn as much as possible about new port 
security requirements both for entry into the US and international 
standards, country team members attended port security training 
sessions in San Pedro Sula in April 2003, researched International 
Maritime Organization (IMO) ISPS codes on vessel and port security 
and studied the US Congress\' Maritime Transportation Security Act 
(MTSA).  Embassy Officers then provided a presentation to key 
advisors of President Maduro in June 2003 to brief GOH officials 
on the importance of acting quickly in order to meet MTSA and IMO 
requirements by July 1, 2004.  At the presentation were members 
from President Maduro\'s team on State Modernization, Port 
Authority representatives, private sector representatives, members 
of the shipping lines\' association (AHCORENA) and a representative 
from the Chamber of Commerce of Cortes.  Copies of this briefing 
were passed to the WHA/CEN desk as well as to Pol and Econoffs 
throughout the region via email for their information / use. 
Please contact post Econoff Nicholle Urdaneta at 
urdanetanm@state.gov if additional copies are desired. 
 
7. (SBU) The GOH immediately realized how important it would be 
for Honduran ports, and Puerto Cortes especially, to comply with 
IMO and MTSA port security requirements before the July 1 
deadline.  The GOH requested a World Bank-funded project to draft 
the terms of reference to contract a recognized security 
organization (RSO) to perform a diagnostic port security 
assessment.  Because of the tight deadline, in August 2003, 
President Maduro declared a national emergency on the state of 
security at Honduran ports.  By doing so, the port authority could 
then put the assessment out for bid using a short list of 
recognized port security companies.  In the same manner, until the 
emergency ends (the July 1, 2004 deadline), the port authority may 
use streamlined procurement procedures to purchase equipment, 
contract out bids for smaller projects, and do whatever is 
necessary to bring Honduras\' ports into compliance. 
 
8. (SBU) Working under a tight deadline and demanding schedule 
imposed by the ENP, the selected U.S. consultants (U.S. Protection 
Services and American Defense Services) completed the evaluation 
of Honduras\' ports and provided the GOH with the IMO required port 
facility assessment by the end of January 2004.  The company also 
provided a detailed set of recommendations for meeting port 
certification requirements.  As the team provided initial 
recommendations during the assessment phase, the port authority 
acted proactively to immediately purchase items such as patrol 
vehicles, ATV 4-wheelers, and alarm systems.  It also moved 
forward on installation of camera and X-ray equipment as well as 
improved infrastructure such as fencing, lighting systems, and new 
roadways instead of waiting for the final report and losing 
valuable time.  The National Congress approved the port 
authority\'s budget in early December, allowing the port to spend 
up to 56 million Lempira (USD 3.1 million) on port security 
projects.  The GOH understands that this amount may not be 
sufficient and is looking for additional means of funding. 
 
------------ 
CSI and BASC 
------------ 
 
9. (SBU) GOH officials and private sector companies also expressed 
significant interest in participating in the Container Security 
Initiative (CSI) program.  Initially, there was some confusion on 
the part of the Hondurans, who thought CSI meant port 
certification, but now understand that CSI may play an important 
role in the overall security program but is not, in itself, port 
security.  Though Honduras\' Puerto Cortes was not included on the 
U.S.\' initial list of ports for the CSI program, Minister of 
Industry and Trade, Norman Garcia, continues to advocate heavily 
for inclusion.  Post understands that Honduras does not yet meet 
the basic security requirements to be considered for the program, 
but requests Washington agencies consider Puerto Cortes in its 
next CSI phase because of its significant port security progress. 
The GOH is taking port security very seriously and is dedicated to 
improving security standards along with modernization efforts. 
 
10. (SBU) Since the beginning, private sector companies such as 
Sarah Lee and Seaboard Marine approached the Embassy with concerns 
that Honduras would not meet heightened security standards.  These 
companies were watching the MTSA legislation move through the U.S. 
Congress and signed by the President.  The companies began to work 
together to advocate for improvements in port security at 
Honduras\' ports and requested the Embassy take a more proactive 
role with the GOH to assure the government\'s awareness of the 
possible consequences.  Likewise, private sector representatives 
have expressed interest in participating in public/private 
organizations such as the Customs-Trade Partnership 
Against Terrorism (C-TPAT) and the Business Anti-Smuggling 
Coalition (BASC).  EmbOffs provided some general information on 
the BASC program, but would welcome any additional guidance and 
contact information the department may have available on either 
program as well as the new Operation Safe Commerce program. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Key Findings of the Port Assessment 
----------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Not surprisingly, security force competency and 
compliance was one of the main concerns identified in the 
evaluation process.  Honduran ports are currently protected by a 
unionized security guard force whose members are largely 
uneducated (only 18 percent can read and write), unmotivated and 
physically unfit (over 50 percent of the security workforce is 
over the age of 52).  Security guards have been observed sitting 
at entrance gates and politely opening the fence so pedestrians 
and vehicles may enter and exit the port, but without checking 
identification, doing any sort of vehicle search, or asking any 
questions.  Some guards, possibly many, are involved in illegal 
smuggling and pilferage activities.  Port officials are working 
closely with the Office of the Presidency, the Ministry of Labor, 
the Ministry of Security and the Armed Forces to find a solution 
to this weakness.  It will most likely include a transition phase, 
including a severance pay buy-out of many of the guards.  The 
assessment revealed that the port authority already housed most of 
the needed security policies, day-to-day procedures and emergency 
response plans Honduras needs to be in compliance with ISPS codes. 
According to the U.S. consultants, the problem is that the 
workforce and security personnel are either unaware of these 
documents, disregard them, or simply cannot read them. 
 
12. (SBU) Other key problem areas included a wall-high stack of 
ammonium nitrate of unknown origin, barrels leaking chemicals, 
dockworkers reading and clearing manifests upside-down, ships 
arriving without manifests or manifests missing cargo, and 
hazardous material arriving unbeknownst to the port captain. 
 
------------------------- 
Next Steps and Challenges 
------------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) Now that the assessment of Honduran ports is complete, 
the ENP is moving forward to execute its plan for procurement, 
procedure changes, and workforce issues.  The port authority 
reports it has only spent 8-10 million lempira (USD 562,000) of 
the 56 million authorized by Congress.  Port officials also noted 
they believe they will have enough money to complete the 
recommended upgrades.  The only high dollar ticket items left to 
purchase are four airport-style x-ray machines, 8 cameras and the 
construction of a new entry / exit building.  The GOH selected 
Dennis Chinchilla to be Honduras\' official Port Security Officer, 
overseeing Honduras\' port security program for all ports.  Mr. 
Chinchilla is a well-known and respected member of the Merchant 
Marine and is well qualified for the position. 
 
14. (SBU) Mr. Chinchilla\'s office will also be responsible for 
certifying all vessel security plans. Note: Honduras is a country 
of open registry and has a flagship fleet of over 1,600 vessels. 
This number was well over 3,000 vessels, but in recent years more 
than 1,500 were removed from the register for failure to pay 
taxes. End note.  The GOH is planning to allow ship classification 
societies such as the American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) to perform 
the individual vessel assessments and draft vessel security plans. 
The Merchant Marines will then certify the plans presented.  For 
registering ships, only those vessels falling within the size 
range of ISPS codes (over 500 tons) are working on preparing the 
registry information for the continuous synopsis record.  Merchant 
Marine officials did state, however, that the GOH is working on 
updating Honduran Maritime Law to require all flagship vessels, 
regardless of size, to present the same in-depth registry 
information. 
 
--------------------------- 
Background on Puerto Cortes 
--------------------------- 
 
15. (SBU) Puerto Cortes is both the largest port in Honduras and 
the largest port on the Caribbean coast of Central America.  It 
provides port services to companies from Honduras, Guatemala, El 
Salvador, and Nicaragua.  It serves as a distribution and 
manufacturing site for the surrounding agricultural regions from 
which more than 1,800,000 containers on more than 1,700 ships in 
2002 were transported.  Puerto Cortes can currently dock up to ten 
ocean-going vessels at a time with three cranes available. 
Expansion, modernization, and privatization projects for Puerto 
Cortes are currently being studied.  Implementation of the 
privatization plan is expected in 2004 - 2005.  Although more than 
1,000 ships traveled to or from the United States, Puerto Cortes 
also services vessels going to or from Europe, Africa, and South 
America.  Puerto Cortes handled approximately 5 million metric 
tons of cargo in 2002.  Projections for 2004 reach over 7 million 
metric tons for Puerto Cortes alone and 8 million in the other 
ports combined (San Lorenzo, Castillo, and Lempira).  Puerto 
Cortes reported revenues of approximately USD 81.4 million in 
2002.  The destination of 98 percent of its exports, almost 1.4 
metric tons, was to the U.S., including Florida, Louisiana, Texas, 
Mississippi and Delaware.  Almost 63 percent of Puerto Cortes\' 
imports, 3.6 million metric tons, originated from the U.S. 
 
--------------------------- 
Background on MTSA and ISPS 
--------------------------- 
 
16. (U) The U.S. Congress passed the Maritime Transportation 
Security Act of 2002 (MTSA), which the President signed into law 
November 25, 2002.  In it, the MTSA established requirements for 
U.S. ports and security agencies such as the US Coast Guard and 
the Secretary of Transportation.  In section 70108 of the MTSA, 
the U.S. Congress addressed foreign ports, requiring that the 
Secretary of Transportation assess the effectiveness of 
 
SIPDIS 
antiterrorism measures maintained at any foreign port from which 
foreign vessels depart on a voyage to the United States.  In 
December 2002, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
established a new International Ship and Port Facility Security 
code (ISPS code) that identifies measures to which every signatory 
country of the Safety of Life at Seas (SOLAS) convention, 
including Honduras, pledges to adhere.  The MTSA required all U.S. 
ports be certified by the USCG no later than December 31, 2003 and 
grandfathered international ports\' readiness date to match that 
determined by the IMO standard of July 1, 2004.  If a foreign port 
does not meet these requirements, the Secretary of Transportation 
may prescribe specific conditions of entry into the United States, 
may deny entry into the U.S., and is required to provide public 
notice to passengers of the ineffective counter-terrorism measures 
of that country. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
17. (SBU) The Embassy considers port security in Honduras to be a 
top U.S. national security priority for counter-terrorism, anti- 
trafficking, anti-smuggling, and counter-narcotics efforts.  As 
noted, it is also a Honduran national and economic security issue. 
Embassy advocacy and IMO and MTSA requirements appear to have 
succeeded in helping the GOH understand the urgency and gravity of 
port security to its national well-being.  With the President\'s 
declaration of a national emergency on the state of port security, 
the support of the National Congress allocating the funding, the 
willingness and dedication of National Port Authority officials, 
and the interest of the private sector, Honduras is definitely on 
the right path to being able to certify its ports as required by 
U.S. laws and IMO code.  End Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"14233","2/24/2004 18:02","04TEGUCIGALPA405","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE29551|04STATE38126","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000405 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IPC:SWilson 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR BPeck 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO DOC FOR KSchlegelmilch 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USPTO FOR JUrban/DLashley-Johnson 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO LOC FOR STepp 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, KIPR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: INPUT FOR 2004 SPECIAL 301 REVIEW 
 
REF: A) STATE 29551  B) STATE 38126 
 
1. (SBU) Summary and Comment: Honduran legislation regarding 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) is largely in compliance with 
the WTO Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPs).  However, Honduran authorities lack the 
personnel and expertise necessary to wage a truly effective 
campaign against copyright or other IPR violations.  There have 
been no significant moves in the past year by the Government of 
Honduras (GOH) to either strengthen or weaken the protection of 
IPR in Honduras.  Embassy therefore recommends that Honduras 
remain off the Special 301 watch list.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
2. (U) The responses below are keyed to paragraph 17 of Ref A. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
A) Optical Media Piracy (CDs, VCDs, DVDs) 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) Although Honduras has yet to experience large-scale in- 
country optical pirating, pirated goods are imported from 
neighboring countries, and the piracy of books, sound and video 
recordings, compact discs and computer software is still 
widespread.  Confiscation has been erratic, and usually involves 
minor seizures of compact discs.  Success in controlling optical 
piracy rests primarily on the GOH\'s ability to effectively 
implement its current laws, rather than a need for further 
legislation. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
B) Use/Procurement of Government Software 
----------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) The number of government agencies which are using legally 
licensed software increased during 2003, largely due to private 
sector efforts to persuade government entities to obtain legal 
license to the software that they were already using.  Several 
government agencies continue to use illegally-procured software, 
or to use multiple copies based on a single legal purchase, 
primarily due to stringent budget constraints.  U.S. software 
companies, working closely with Honduran authorities and the U.S. 
Embassy, hope to whittle down the number of non-compliant 
ministries in the coming months. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
C) TRIPs Compliance and Other IP-Related Issues 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
5. (U) No new TRIPs-related legislation was introduced or passed 
by the Honduran Congress in 2003, nor were any amendments to 
existing legislation introduced or passed. 
 
6. (U) Honduras largely complied with the WTO Agreement on Trade 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) by the 
January 1, 2000, deadline.  In 1999, the Honduran Congress passed 
two laws to correct deficiencies in previous legislation 
concerning copyrights, patents and trademarks.  The Copyright Law 
added more than 20 different criminal offenses related to 
copyright infringement and establishes fines and suspension of 
services that can be levied against offenders.  The Law of 
Industrial Property, Decree 12-99E, covers both trademarks and 
patents, and includes modifications on patent protection for 
pharmaceuticals, extending the term from seventeen to twenty 
years to meet international standards.  The term for cancellation 
of a trademark for lack of use was extended from one year to 
three years.  To be protected under Honduran law, patents and 
trademarks must be registered with the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade. 
 
7. (U) As soon as two new laws governing the designs of 
integrated circuits and plant variety protection are approved by 
the National Congress, Honduras will be in complete compliance 
with the TRIPs Agreement.  Post has emphasized the importance of 
adoption of these two laws to the Minister of Industry and Trade 
and the Director of the IPR Office within that Ministry.  GOH 
officials assert that the two laws will be passed during 2004. 
 
8. (U) Honduras became a member of the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) in 1983, ratified the Paris 
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property in 1994, and 
became party to both the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty in 2002.  Honduras and the 
U.S. initialed a Bilateral Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) 
Agreement in March 1999, but substantive issues arose during the 
language conformity process.  Instead, recent efforts to push the 
GOH for additional IPR commitments have been pursued as part of 
the negotiations for a U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA).  If ratified, CAFTA should significantly improve the 
level of IPR protection in the region.  Approval of CAFTA by the 
Honduran Congress in 2004 is considered very likely. 
 
-------------- 
D) Enforcement 
-------------- 
 
9. (U) Honduran Copyright Law specifies three different avenues 
in the prosecution of copyright infringement cases: 
administrative, civil and criminal.  After confiscating pirated 
goods, the GOH can file an administrative case that may result in 
a fine.  However, the law requires companies whose rights have 
been violated to file civil and criminal charges.  Few U.S. 
companies have asserted their right to file either a civil or 
criminal case, leaving the resource-strapped prosecutor\'s office 
(Ministerio Publico) responsible for the lawsuits.  As a result, 
many cases are not tried to the full extent of the law. 
 
10. (U) Enforcement of the copyright law relies largely on 
periodic sweeps in the market and on investigations carried out 
after an accusation has been made.  The GOH Customs and Tax 
Authority (DEI) is responsible for impeding the flow of illegal 
goods into Honduras.  IPR officials have commented in the past 
that police and DEI officials lack the skills and resources to 
identify and control the flow of pirated products. 
 
11. (U) The protection of data exclusivity by the GOH is an issue 
that has been raised by some U.S. companies.  In 2002, a U.S. 
pharmaceutical company complained that the Ministry of Health, in 
approving a competing company\'s pharmaceutical product, did not 
respect their data exclusivity rights as guaranteed under article 
39 of the WTO TRIPs agreement and article 77 of Honduras\' 
Industrial Property Law.  (Honduran law provides five-year 
exclusive use of data provided in support of registering 
pharmaceutical products.)  The Ministry of Health approved the 
competing pharmaceutical product despite communication from 
Honduras\' IPR Division that the U.S. company\'s research and data 
were protected under Honduran law.  The U.S. company argues that 
in order for the competing product to be legally registered with 
the Ministry of Health, the company needs to provide the research 
and data to support their application.  When a similar situation 
arose with a separate application in 2003, the Ministry of Health 
recognized that the competing company\'s product was a copy of the 
U.S. company\'s protected product, and did not approve the 
competing company\'s application. 
 
12. (U) Some U.S. companies have expressed concern that attempts 
to prosecute computer software infringement cases have been met 
with inadequate support by officials in the Ministry of Industry 
and Trade\'s IPR Division and the Attorney General\'s office. 
 
13. (U) The Ministry of Industry and Trade makes good faith 
efforts to respond to complaints about satellite piracy, and the 
telecom regulatory agency, CONATEL, checks closely on compliance 
with anti-piracy rules before extending cable TV licenses. 
However, the ministries need more staff to ensure full 
enforcement.  In 2003, the Embassy received a complaint from one 
U.S. company which argued that the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade\'s IPR Division appeared to be singling out the U.S. company 
for investigations of satellite piracy, while ignoring alleged 
violations on the part of the U.S. company\'s Honduran rival. 
Embassy officials have discussed the issue with appropriate 
Ministry and IPR officials, urging a strong and balanced approach 
to investigations of all IPR violations. 
 
Palmer 
"
"14374","2/27/2004 18:00","04TEGUCIGALPA457","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE14281","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000457 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR TERRORIST FINANCING TASK FORCE 
FOR EB/ESC/ESP 
FOR S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC, EFIN, PTER, PREL, KVPR, CVIS, KSEP, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTI-TERRORIST FINANCING: NEW ALIAS TO PKK, AND 
LISTS 50 AND 51 DELIVERED 
 
REF: (A) STATE 6143; (B) STATE 11985; (C) STATE 14281 
 
1. As instructed in reftels (A) and (B), Post delivered the 
notice of an addition of new aliases to the PKK designation 
and List 50, and the respective talking points, to the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs on January 21, 2004.  On 
February 12, we received confirmation that the Ministry had 
forwarded the list to the National Banking and Securities 
Commission, and that the Commission had issued a resolution 
calling for the freeze of any assets found in the names of 
the listed individuals or entities. 
 
2. As instructed in reftel (C), Post delivered List 51, and 
the respective talking points, to the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs on January 23, 2004.  On January 27, we received 
confirmation that the Ministry had forwarded the list to 
the National Banking and Securities Commission, and that 
the Commission had issued a resolution calling for the 
freeze of any assets found in the names of the listed 
individuals or entities. 
 
Palmer 
"
"14383","2/27/2004 22:33","04TEGUCIGALPA461","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

272233Z Feb 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
 
DEPT FOR AID/W, PASS COPY TO FREDERICK RUDOLPH VIGIL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID 
SUBJECT:  USAID/HONDURAS\' RECOMMENDED PL 480, TITLE II 
FUNDING LEVELS FOR FY 2005. 
 
 
1.  Concurrence.  As requested in DCHA/FFP\'s PL 480 
Title II guidelines for Cooperating Sponsor Results 
Reports and Resource Requests (CSR4), this is to 
provide recommended funding levels, Bellmon 
certification, certification of financial capabilities 
of the cooperating sponsor, and environmental 
compliance certification for CARE Honduras\' FY 2005 
Development Activity Program (DAP). 
 
2.  Annual Implementation Plan.  CARE\'s FY 2005 
Resource Request includes all the elements required in 
DCHA/FFP guidelines for CSR4 reports.  A Detailed 
implementation Plan (DIP) for each program component 
has been included in the CSR4.  The annual estimate of 
requirements (AER) was checked for completeness and 
accuracy. 
 
3.  Funding Levels Recommendation.  USAID/Honduras 
recommends that the FY 2001-2005 CARE Title II DAP be 
funded in FY 2005 as follows (tonnage and section 
202(E) levels): 
 
Commodities are in metric tons as requested in lines 8 
and 17 of the FY 2005 Annual Estimate of Requirements 
(AER). 
 
COMMODITY                        Line 8            Line 
17 
 
Small Red Beans Dry Edible       1,064 
1,060 
Non Parboiled Milled Rice        1,764 
1,760 
Vegetable Oil 4Lt. Tin             340 
340 
Corn Soy Blend (CSB)             1,012 
1,010 
Cornmeal                           363 
363 
Wheat NS                        12,500 
12,500 
 
Total Metric Tons               17,043 
17,030 
 
Section 202(E) level recommended for FY 2005: US DOLS. 
185,000. 
 
4.  Financial capabilities of CARE/H to manage 
monetization proceeds.  Based on audits of CARE\'s 
financial and management systems conducted by U.S. 
affiliated CPA firms, USAID/H states that: A) CARE/H 
has in place a financial accounting system and internal 
control structure that comply with generally accepted 
accounting principles and USAID regulations and 
financial requirements for grantees, B) the accounting 
system reviewed can adequately control, account for and 
report on the use of funds generated under the Title II 
Monetization Program; and C) CARE/H has in place an 
internal control structure that reasonably ensures 
proper financial management of activities funded by 
monetization proceeds.  CARE\'s procedure manuals cover 
all major aspects of operations, are distributed to all 
relevant parties and are periodically reviewed for 
improvement in light of changes in the organization and 
its operating environment. 
 
5. Bellmon Certification. The Mission Director has 
determined that there will be adequate storage and 
transportation available in Honduras at the time of 
arrival of Title II commodities to prevent their 
spoilage or waste.  The Mission Director has also 
determined that the distribution or sale of commodities 
will not result in a substantial disincentive to, or 
interfere with, domestic production or marketing. 
 
CARE Honduras has its main warehouse in San Pedro Sula, 
with a storage capacity of 6,500 MT, and it can 
accommodate up to as 85 containers in its yard.  The 
warehouse has adequate ventilation, forklifts, 
fumigation capabilities and other equipment for the 
safe handling and storing of Title II commodities.  The 
12,500 MT of wheat to be monetized will be sold C.I.F. 
Puerto Cortes, based on a previously signed contract ad 
do not present any storage problems to CARE. 
 
CARE targets the food aid to the poorest rural areas of 
western Honduras where production is very low and 
access to food at commercial prices is very limited. 
Furthermore, the recent droughts and coffee crisis 
affecting the region have negatively impacted the 
income of these poor families and further undermined 
their food security.  Beneficiaries often do not have 
the resources to procure food, and the Title II food 
aid will not adversely impact local markets.  Regarding 
commodities for monetization, wheat is not produced 
locally. 
 
6. Environmental Review. The environmental status 
report has been reviewed and approved by the Mission\'s 
Environmental Officer. 
 
7. Host Country Food for Peace Agreement.  The Honduras 
Food for Peace Agreement, signed on March 21, 2001, 
incorporates by reference AID regulation 11, in clause 
7.1.  A copy of this document has been provided to 
DCHA/FFP/DP. 
Please advise if further information is required. 
 
PALMER 
"
"14384","2/27/2004 23:07","04TEGUCIGALPA466","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA2249|04TEGUCIGALPA234","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PREL, PGOV, ASEC, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: TASK FORCE XATRUCH I RETURNS AS HONDURAN ARMED 
FORCES PROUDLY CELEBRATE THEIR ROLE IN OPERATION IRAQI 
FREEDOM 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 234 
     B. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 101921Z 04 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2249 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 1. (U)  Summary:  On February 20, the Government of Honduras 
(GOH) celebrated the return of Task Force Xatruch I (TFXI), 
the 370-man contingent the GOH deployed to Iraq in support of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), with full honors and a 
military parade.  Final elements of TFXI arrived in Honduras 
February 19, accompanied by TFXI commander Coronel Carlos 
Andino Cobos.  TFXI had been deployed to Iraq since August 
2003.  Task Force Xatruch II, commanded by Colonel Wilfredo 
Calderon Canales, arrived in Iraq in mid-February with a 
scheduled deployment of six months.  Per ref A, Post believes 
the GOH can be persuaded to authorize a second one-year 
deployment, barring any unforeseen major complications in 
Iraq.   End Summary 
 
2. (U) On February 20, the Government of Honduras (GOH) 
celebrated the return of TFXI, the 370-man contingent the GOH 
deployed to Iraq in support of OIF, with full honors and a 
military parade.  Final elements of TFXI arrived in Honduras 
February 19, accompanied by TFXI commander Coronel Carlos 
Andino Cobos.  TFXI had been deployed to Iraq since August 
2003.  Present for the ceremony were Honduran Minister of 
Defense (MOD) Federico Breve, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff General Jose Isaias Barahona (CJCS), AMB, Spanish 
Ambassador to Hondura, SOUTHCOM representative General 
Jelinski, and many other high level members of the GOH, the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HAF), and members of the diplomatic 
community.  Post assisted the GOH in organizing the event by 
providing part of the refreshments for the returning troops 
and their family members. 
 
3. (SBU) While the deployment remains controversial (ref A), 
Hondurans in general are very proud of their returning 
troops.  All members of TFXI were given medals, and many 
mentioned that they would be like to return to Iraq for a 
second tour.  The Honduran press fully covered the event, 
with the primary focus being on the reunification of families 
and the successful completion of the first deployment. 
TFXI\'s successful mission appears to have boosted the overall 
morale of the HAF as well as its standing in Honduran society. 
 
4. (U) In public remarks, MOD Breve praised the valor of 
Honduran troops, saying that \"all of Honduras was proud of 
their Armed Forces for being prepared, disciplined, and for 
successfully completing their mission to Iraq.\"  CJCS 
Barahona also congratulated the soldiers for a job well done, 
stating that Honduras and the world was grateful for their 
contribution toward peace and stability in Iraq. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  The HAF will likely extend its commitment in 
Iraq if called upon (ref A & B).  Recent visits by high level 
USG officials, coupled with expectations of significant 
increases in military and other assistance, have given the 
Maduro administration a needed political boost. Rhetorical 
commitments aside, however, Honduras\' dedication to support 
OIF is certainly contingent upon TFXII not sustaining 
casualties.  Any political capital the Maduro administration 
has accumulated regarding the deployment would likely vanish 
overnight, even if only a handful of soldiers were to lose 
their lives.  If casualties were to occur, the opposition 
Liberal Party (which has consistently opposed the deployment) 
would also paint Maduro as a \"dupe,\" of the USG, by 
needlessly putting Honduran troops in harms way.  Should this 
occur, it could also have serious repercussions for upcoming 
presidential elections in 2005.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"14385","2/27/2004 23:22","04TEGUCIGALPA467","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000467 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR INL, INL/LP, INR/B, AND INR/AN/IAA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG/ROL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, EFIN, PHUM, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION UPDATE: MADURO INVITES TRANSPARENCY 
INTERNATIONAL TO REVIEW HONDURAN EFFORTS 
 
REF: 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2844 
 
     03 TEGUCIGALPA 2938 
 
1. (U) Summary:  In a February 25 private briefing with 
international donors, the Transparency International (TI) 
delegation, led by TI Vice Chair of the Board of Directors 
Rosa Ines Ospina from Colombia, acknowledged positive anti- 
corruption efforts by President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
administration and also outlined necessary additional steps 
that Honduras must take to fully address the deep-rooted 
nature of corruption in the country.  Ospina praised the 
pending constitutional amendment to revoke immunity for 
legislators and public officials as a path-breaking 
development, which would make Honduras the first country in 
the world to subject legislators directly to the jurisdiction 
of the judicial system.  Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza highlighted the government\'s position that its anti- 
corruption efforts were not in response to the TI visit but 
part of an ongoing national commitment to combat corruption. 
He pledged that the Government of Honduras (GOH) would 
correct the error it had made in not signing the UN Anti- 
Corruption Convention last December in Merida, Mexico.  End 
Summary 
 
2. (U) A Transparency International (TI) delegation lead by 
Rosa Ines Ospina, a TI Chapter head from Colombia, visited 
Honduras on February 24 and 25.  The Maduro administration 
invited TI to Honduras last fall to review the new anti- 
corruption measures the GOH has put into place.   Minister of 
the Presidency Luis Cosenza highlighted the government\'s 
position that its anti-corruption efforts were not in 
response to the TI visit but part of an ongoing national 
commitment to combat corruption.  He declared that the 
government viewed TI as an ally in that battle.  Cosenza 
added that the GOH hoped that TI would help identify other 
measures and processes that would make the GOH\'s anti- 
corruption programs more effective. 
 
3. (U) In a February 25 private briefing with international 
donors as well as in public comments, Ospina acknowledged 
positive anti-corruption efforts by President Ricardo 
Maduro\'s administration, and then outlined necessary 
additional steps that Honduras must take to fully address the 
deep-rooted nature of its corruption problem (ref A).  She 
added that the government\'s job in this area was not just to 
eliminate corruption but to create public confidence that 
corruption would not be permitted.  Ospina singled out the 
pending constitutional amendment to revoke immunity for 
legislators and public officials as a path-breaking 
development which would make Honduras the first country in 
the world to subject legislators directly to the jurisdiction 
of the judicial system.  She added that the criminal 
procedures code reform that instituted oral public trials was 
an important improvement as was the GOH\'s use of the UN 
Development Program to award government contracts, commenting 
that this was a positive development but that she hoped this 
would only be a temporary solution. 
 
4. (U) Ospina also said that the challenge of reversing 
corrupt practices was not only the responsibility of the 
central government.  She suggested that the Honduran 
congress, political parties, judicial system, media, private 
sector, and civil society had to be engaged in the effort. 
Ospina lauded the work of the National Anti-Corruption 
Commission, but urged the GOH to follow through on more 
specific projects, such as ensuring that the general public 
has greater access to government records.  Ospina warned the 
Honduran public of the danger drug trafficking represents to 
anti-corruption programs.  She said that it is a grave and 
difficult problem that destroys human lives.  Finally, she 
flagged TI\'s concern about the problem of impunity and its 
widespread perception, which needed to be better addressed by 
the judicial system. 
 
5. (U) In separate public comments, Ospina criticized the 
Honduran private sector for not being committed to the fight 
against corruption.  She charged that the Honduran private 
sector \"is disposed to offer, disposed to pay, and willing to 
put its own particular interests above the common interest.\" 
She stressed that the private sector had a special 
responsibility to self-regulate its own practices and adopt 
ethical standards, which would prevent the acceptance of 
corrupt practices in private and public transactions. 
 
6. (SBU) Minister of the Presidency Cosenza, during his joint 
press conference with the TI representative, responded to 
Ospina\'s comment that Honduras had failed to sign the UN Anti- 
Corruption Convention last December in Merida, Mexico (ref 
B).  Cosenza explained that Honduras had made an involuntary 
omission in failing to sign.  He pledged that the GOH would 
soon correct the error it had made.  He privately told Ospina 
that the GOH, specifically Cosenza himself, had erred in 
circulating the UN Convention to the Supreme Court and 
Solicitor General for a full legal opinion on whether or not 
the GOH should ratify the convention rather than the more 
limited review as to whether or not the GOH could merely sign 
it.  (Comment:  According to MFA sources, the reason Honduras 
did not originally sign the convention was due to the belief 
that the convention contains wording to the effect that if 
one country cancels a person\'s visa because of corruption 
charges, allegations, etc., all signatory countries of the 
convention must also cancel their visas.  End Comment) 
 
7. (U) Comment: Ospina also explained that this visit by TI 
would not necessarily result in an improved ranking for 
Honduras in the next TI Index.  She said the Index is based 
on survey results from diverse business and government 
sources, not on the results of a TI visit.  Ospina also 
stated that there was not yet a TI chapter operating in 
Honduras because TI has not been able to identify an 
individual or group independent enough to fulfill the TI 
charter.  Ospina did, however, go out of her way to praise 
Cardinal Rodriguez\'s work on the National Anti-Corruption 
Commission as being a very valuable contribution to the anti- 
corruption effort. 
 
8. (U) Comment continued:  Interestingly, at least one 
newspaper account focused part of its coverage on hostile 
press questions about the damage TI had done to Honduras by 
placing it as the most corrupt country in Central America and 
among the worst in the Western Hemisphere.  After patiently 
explaining that the TI rankings were merely a reflection of 
evaluations provided by organizations and businesses 
operating in Honduras, Ospina became exasperated, according 
to one news account, and remarked that it appeared that she 
was having a conversation with the deaf.  This coverage 
reflects widespread confusion in Honduras about TI\'s role 
and, more troubling, denial in some Honduran quarters about 
the extent of the corruption problem.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"14386","2/27/2004 23:25","04TEGUCIGALPA468","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA365","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000468 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL AND DRL/MLA 
STATE FOR INR/AN/IAA, IO, AND USUN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PINR, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS STILL UNWILLING TO TAKE LEAD IN DRAFTING 
UNCHR CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 365 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 307 
     C. STATE 20401 
     D. STATE 13279 
     E. 03 STATE 313469 
     F. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2866 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C)  Ambassador and Political Counselor met with Minister 
of Presidency Luis Cosenza on the draft resolution (Ref C) on 
February 25 and 26. (Note: President Ricardo Maduro and 
Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista were in Guatemala at 
a Central American Summit on Feb. 25.)   Cosenza reviewed the 
resolution language and U.S. request to sponsor it.  He 
informed us that he could not recommend to President Maduro 
that Honduras take on the responsibility of being the lead 
sponsor. 
 
2. (C)  Cosenza outlined the following reasons and concerns 
that impede the Government of Honduras\'s (GOH) ability to 
take the lead on this issue.  They included:  (a) Honduras is 
not in Cuba\'s sights at the moment, but sponsoring the 
resolution would stir up possible Cuban troublemaking in 
Honduras; (b) Honduras has not named an ambassador to Cuba; 
(c) Cuba provides medical scholarships to 400 Honduran 
students and will be increasing that by another 100; (d) Cuba 
has 200 doctors serving in rural areas in Honduras; and (e) 
Cuba has not yet agreed to sign the pending maritime boundary 
accord with Honduras.  Cosenza then added that the GOH has a 
host of \"governability\" problems that are emerging in 
Honduras (e.g., an impending 10 cent per gallon gas price 
hike; labor unions clamoring for pay raises; troops deployed 
in Iraq which remains unpopular with the public and which 
makes the Maduro government feel very vulnerable if they 
should take any casualties.  He suggested that becoming 
involved in a diplomatic confrontation with Cuba at this 
moment would give another opening for the political 
opposition to exploit against the GOH. 
 
3. (C)  Cosenza suggested the Ambassador meet with Maduro and 
an appointment has been arranged for March 1 in the late 
afternoon just before Maduro departs for his visit to Spain. 
PALMER 
"
"14473","3/2/2004 18:26","04TEGUCIGALPA498","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE37211","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000498 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS, INL/LP, S/CT, DRL/PHD, AND WHA/CEN 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
PANAMA FOR CUSTOMS ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, EFIN, ETTC, KJUS, PREL, HO, UN 
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE: FOLLOWUP - HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. STATE 37211 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2939 
 
1. (SBU) Honduran cooperation on counter-terrorism finance 
continues to be strong.  As noted in ref B, the Honduran 
Banking and Insurance Commission promptly sends out freeze 
orders to the entire regulated financial sector each time the 
U.S. Executive Order lists are amended.  The financial 
sector, particularly the commercial banks, promptly undertake 
the requested searches for accounts by terrorist entities. 
To date, no terrorist funds have been found in the Honduran 
financial system, and Post believes this is the sole reason 
that the Government of Honduras has not yet frozen any funds. 
 
2. (SBU) This excellent cooperation has been ongoing in the 
context of the implementation of a much-improved Money 
Laundering law, approved in early 2002.  The GOH established 
a Financial Information Unit (FIU), rapidly following the 
entry of the law into effect.  A small U.S. Treasury 
Department money laundering technical assistance project is 
ongoing.  This work has already resulted in strengthened 
accountability by the banking sector in identifying and 
reporting suspicious transactions. 
 
3. (SBU) As part of its newly-approved IMF program, the 
Honduran government will be working closely with 
international experts during 2004 to upgrade regulations on 
confiscation, freezing, and seizure of assets and to start 
onsite verification of supervised entities\' policies 
regarding customer acceptance.  The government has also 
pledged to introduce amendments in the penal code to clarify 
that terrorist financing and money laundering are punishable 
crimes.  These amendments will ensure that, if any terrorist 
financing assets are found in Honduras, there would be no 
legal grounds for the involved entities to challenge the 
freezing of the funds. 
PALMER 
"
"14476","3/2/2004 20:34","04TEGUCIGALPA502","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CORRUPTION AND TRANSPARENCY, 
MARCH 1, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 2/27 entitled \"Transparency against corruption.\"  \"The 
visit of a delegation of Transparency International (TI) to 
Honduras, headed by its Vice-president, Ines Ospina, is an 
encouraging step in our fight against this threat, one of 
the main causes of our impoverishment.\" 
 
\"According to the latest evaluation on corruption of TI, 
Honduras occupies the last place in terms of corruption in 
Central America.  This fact negatively affects our country, 
because it closes our doors to external financing and 
foreign investment, which are mainly driven by the 
confidence in a country, its authorities and institutions.\" 
 
\"Anticorruption efforts in Honduras are still weak, because, 
as the Vice-president of TI said, the fight against 
corruption is a challenge not only for national governments, 
but also for the legislatures, the justice system, the 
media, the private sector, and society as a whole.\" 
 
\"It was interesting to see that the main focus of Ospina\'s 
speech in a meeting with the media was the belief that some 
governmental authorities have that the publication of 
corruption indicators in Honduras harms our international 
reputation.  It was reassuring to hear somebody actually 
saying that it\'s necessary to strengthen freedom of press 
and expression in Honduras, a human right that\'s been under 
serious attack recently.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 2/29 entitled \"Transparency\".  \"Recently, we 
have been visited by representatives of TI, who spoke to the 
top governmental authorities, among them the Supreme Court 
President and several Ministers.  This was a smart and 
positive attitude, which is clearly different from what has 
happened in the past, when these visits were seen as very 
unpleasant.\" 
 
\"TI could see that there\'s been some progress, and they 
acknowledged that there\'s been some work to regain the 
confidence of the Honduran citizenship.  However, there\'s 
still much to be done.  This fight must be continuous and 
determined, we should never back off from this difficult 
undertaking, because corruption has undoubtedly grown, and 
it\'s found new ways to spread out.\" 
 
\"The negative impact of corruption isn\'t just related to the 
loss of material resources, it also affects public trust, 
which debilitates the democratic system.  The ethical and 
moral grounds in which any society must be built upon are 
collapsing when justice is seen as selective and 
discriminatory.\" 
 
\"Evidently, there\'s a long way ahead: we have to bring to 
justice all those who have committed crimes against 
humanity, drug traffickers, money launderers, those who have 
caused the collapse of many private banks, and many other 
criminals.\" 
 
\"Without real civic participation, any efforts of this kind 
would just be futile.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"14481","3/2/2004 21:50","04TEGUCIGALPA503","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000503 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL AND DRL/MLA 
STATE FOR INR/AN/IAA, IO, AND USUN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/02/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PINR, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PRESIDENT MADURO LEAVES DOOR OPEN ON 
TAKING LEAD IN DRAFTING UNCHR CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. PALMER/FISK TELCON 03/01 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 468 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 365 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 307 
     E. STATE 20401 
     F. STATE 13279 
     G. 03 STATE 313469 
     H. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2866 
 
Classified By: DCM Roger Pierce, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador met March 1 with Honduran President Ricardo 
Maduro on the issue of the UN Commission on Human Rights 
(UNCHR) resolution on Cuba.  DCM, Minister of the Presidency 
Luis Cosenza, and Presidential Advisor Ramon Medina Luna were 
also present.  The meeting followed Ambassador and Political 
Counselor\'s February 25 and 26 meetings (respectively) with 
Cosenza on drafting the resolution (ref B).  Although Maduro 
expressed his support for the U.S. on Cuba and other issues, 
he reiterated Cosenza\'s concerns regarding why the GOH was 
not eager to be the lead sponsor.  Specifically, he noted 
that the GOH: wanted to avoid becoming a target of Cuba; 
wanted the GOC to continue its medical assistance to Honduras 
with Cuban doctors in rural areas (despite some concerns the 
GOH has about the doctors); wanted to conclude a pending 
convention on maritime borders with Cuba; and, was concerned 
about a number of social issues percolating which led him to 
believe that becoming involved in a diplomatic confrontation 
with Cuba at this moment would give another opening for the 
political opposition to criticize his administration. 
 
2. (C) However, Maduro did not rule out the GOH taking the 
lead in drafting a resolution, and said that he would be 
willing to talk to the Secretary about the issue.  He noted 
that if the GOH decided to take the lead in sponsoring the 
resolution, the GOH wondered whether there might be a 
possible tangible benefit (unspecified) in return from the 
USG.  Maduro noted that he would be passing through the U.S. 
on March 8 returning to Honduras from his trip to Spain (he 
departs Honduras March 2) and that he would be interested in 
meeting briefly with the President or the Secretary to 
discuss the UNCHR Cuba resolution and other issues. 
PALMER 
"
"14594","3/4/2004 19:44","04TEGUCIGALPA530","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000530 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INR, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, MASS, HO 
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING FOR HONDURAN CONTINGENT IN 
SUPPORT OF OIF 
 
 
1. Embassy requests the Department to perform a background 
check on the following Honduran Army officers who form the 
leadership of Task Force Xatruch II, the Honduran contingent 
in support of OIF. 
 
WILFREDO CALDERON CANALES  SANTA RITA, YORO  24 MAR 58 
ADAN DE JESUS PALAO AVILA  OLANCHITO, YORO  17 NOV 60 
JUAN CARLOS GOMEZ GARCIA  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  15 JAN 60 
PORFIRIO ANTONIO MORENO ZAVALA  SAN ANTONIO DEL NORTE, LA 
PAZ  15 FEB 62 
DENNY EDUARDO GIRON SANCHEZ  SAN PEDRO SULA, CORTES  9 FEB 
64 
JOSE RAMON MUNGUIA DIAZ  SONAGUERA, COLON  28 JAN 64 
SAUL ANTONIO ARDON CHAVEZ  DULCE NOMBRE, COPAN  13 JUN 59 
SELMAN DAVID ARRIAGA ORELLANA  MARCALA, LA PAZ  28 OCT 61 
OSCAR RENE CASTRO RIOS  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  25 OCT 64 
VICENTE ALBERTO GERMER SANCHEZ  LA CEIBA, ATL  11 JUN 62 
WILLY JOEL OSEGUERA RODAS  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  5 APR 69 
LUIS HENRIQUE MARADIAGA HERNANDEZ  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  17 FEB 
65 
FAUSTO AQUILES LAINEZ SANTOS  LANGUE, VALLE  23 APR 61 
WILFREDO CASTRO OYUELA  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  28 DEC 63 
RONY JAVIER PORTILLO SANDOVAL  SAN PEDRO SULA, CORTES  16 
OCT 65 
LUIS ALONSO REYES BAYDE  QUIMISTAN, SANTA BARBARA  10 SEP 60 
RAMIRO FERNANDO MUOZ BONILLA  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  13 MAY 70 
JOSE DONALDO REYES GARCIA  SAN PEDRO SULA, CORTES  6 JUN 70 
VICTOR MARIO AVILA GALEANO  CHOLUTECA, CHOLUTECA  13 OCT 70 
LISANDRO VALLE PEREZ  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  22 MAY 55 
CATALINO CRUZ PEREZ  OPATORO, LA PAZ  6 MAR 67 
NORMAN ORLANDO BUSTILLO LANZA  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  16 FEB 69 
NICOLAS EDULFO SERRANO BENITEZ  GUALCINCE, LEMPIRA  19 MAY 
72 
RAMON ANTONIO REYES PUERTO  YORO,YORO  28 SEP 73 
JORGE RENE FLORES FLORES  DANLI, EL PARAISO  10 AUG 76 
OSMAN FRANCISCO RODAS GARCIA  REITOCA, FM  10 SEP 75 
MAURICIO RENE CHACON ALVARENGA  TRINIDAD, COPAN  26 SEP 74 
MEDARDO ARQUIMIDES REYES PEGO  SAN PEDRO SULA, CORTES  29 
MAR 76 
VICTOR ENRIQUE MOYA HERNANDEZ  SAN PEDRO SULA, CORTES  29 
MAR 76 
OLMAN MEJIA MILLA  CONCEPCION, INTIBUCA  5 OCT 78 
MARCO ANTONIO CARRANZA BUSTILLO  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  13 SEP 78 
ALEX EDUARDO ZEPEDA AGUILAR  SANTA CRUZ DE YOJOA  19 JAN 77 
DORIAN GERARDO CRUZ GOMEZ  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  26 AUG 76 
CHARLES MENAJEN CALDERON HENLY  LEMPIRA, GRACIAS A DIOS  31 
MAR 79 
OSMER ANTONIO CARDONA MARTINEZ  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  10 FEB 80 
ALLAN ROBERTO DOMINGUEZ CASTRO  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  2 AUG 76 
ERIN MICHELLE TINOCO LOPEZ  TEGUCIGALPA, DC  23 JAN 80 
EDGARDO ENRIQUE RIVERA LARA  SIGUATEPEQUE, COMAYAGUA  27 MAR 
77 
DORA CELESTINA RUIZ RUIZ  OLANCHO, OLANCHO  11 OCT 80 
 
2. Embassy has performed a local background check and found 
no derogatory information on these individuals. 
 
PALMER 
"
"14597","3/4/2004 20:51","04TEGUCIGALPA531","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000531 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL AND DRL/MLA 
STATE FOR INR/AN/IAA, IO, AND USUN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/04/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PINR, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN VICE FM REITERATES CONCERNS ON TAKING 
LEAD IN DRAFTING UNCHR CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. WAGNER/PIERCE TELCON 03/04 
 
     B. MADRID 735 
     C. STATE 47065 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 503 
     E. PALMER/FISK TELCON 03/01 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 468 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 365 
     H. TEGUCIGALPA 307 
     I. STATE 20401 
     J. STATE 13279 
     K. 03 STATE 313469 
     L. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2866 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: DCM Roger Pierce, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) At the MFA\'s request, DCM and PolOff met March 3 with 
Vice Foreign Minister Anibal Quinonez, MFA Senior Advisor 
Policarpo Callejas, and MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario 
Fortin on the issue of the UN Commission on Human Rights 
(UNCHR) resolution on Cuba.  The meeting followed Ambassador 
and DCM\'s March 1 meeting with President Ricardo Maduro and 
Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza and Presidential 
Advisor Ramon Medina Luna (ref D) and Ambassador and 
Political Counselor\'s February 25 and 26 meetings 
(respectively) with Cosenza on drafting the resolution (ref 
F).  Quinonez said he had requested the meeting to discuss 
the status of the USG\'s request for Honduras to take the lead 
on drafting the resolution.  DCM underlined that this 
resolution was a high priority for the USG and stated that 
the USG was still looking to the GOH to step up and take the 
lead on drafting the resolution.  DCM mentioned the call 
between WHA A/S Noriega and FM Leonidas Rosa Bautista on the 
issue and noted the probability of a call from the Secretary 
to President Maduro. 
 
2. (C) Quinonez said that the final decision on drafting the 
resolution was for Maduro to make and that the door was still 
open.  He said the MFA was preparing a list of the pros and 
cons of drafting the resolution for Maduro.  Quinonez then 
reiterated Maduro and Cosenza\'s concerns regarding why the 
GOH was not eager to be the lead sponsor.  Specifically, he 
noted that the GOH: wanted to avoid becoming a target of 
Cuba; wanted the GOC to continue its medical assistance to 
Honduras with Cuban doctors in rural areas (despite some 
concerns the GOH has about the doctors) and scholarships for 
Hondurans to study medicine in Cuba; wanted to conclude a 
pending convention on maritime borders with Cuba; and, was 
concerned about a number of percolating social issues which 
led the GOH to believe that becoming involved in a diplomatic 
confrontation with Cuba at this moment would give another 
opening for the political opposition to criticize his 
administration.  Key among these issues for the MFA appeared 
to be the maritime border issue, with Callejas specifically 
stating that the GOH wanted this agreement signed and 
ratified prior to Castro\'s death. 
 
3. (C) DCM emphasized that the USG was looking to have this 
issue resolved ASAP, so that a resolution would be ready to 
be introduced when the CHR opens March 15. 
 
4. (C) Post understands that the Secretary spoke to President 
Maduro on March 4 and that they agreed to meet in Washington 
on Maduro\'s return trip from Spain.  Post will work closely 
with WHA/CEN and the GOH on the details surrounding this 
planned meeting. 
PALMER 
"
"14650","3/5/2004 22:05","04TEGUCIGALPA538","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SECSTATE6760|03TEGUCIGALPA116|03TEGUCIGALPA583|04SECSTATE19776|04SECSTATE54094","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000538 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: MLARSEN 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, OES:DHOGAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS, SENV, ETRD, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH PROGRESS ON TEDS PROGRAM 
 
REF: (A) 03 SECSTATE 06760, (B) 03 TEGUCIGALPA 116, (C) 03 
SECSTATE 54094, (D) 03 TEGUCIGALPA 583, (E) SECSTATE 19776 
 
1. (SBU) Summary. Since the visit of the State / NOAA 
training team in December 2003, Honduras has been working to 
continue improving the turtle excluder device (TED) program 
and enforcement abilities of fisheries officials. 
Understanding that re-certification was premised upon 
training new inspectors and a strengthening of the overall 
program, GOH officials continue working on ensuring 
inspector continuity.  The Ministry is coordinating with the 
navy and fishing industry to receive monthly inspection 
reports including at-sea inspections, and preparing to 
present new fishing laws to congress that will give the GOH 
improved legal grounds for prosecution of boat owners found 
in violation.  Consistent USG monitoring is still necessary 
to ensure sustainability of the program.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Per ref E, EconOff notified GOH officials January 
29, 2004, that Honduras was re-certified under Section 609 
of P.L. 101-162 and that the shrimp embargo was lifted.  GOH 
officials were informed, and understand, that the GOH must 
take concrete steps to ensure a strengthened, continuing 
program, including inspector retention, regular inspections, 
and improved enforcement capability. 
 
3. (SBU) During a January 27 meeting with EconOffs, the 
Minister of Agriculture, Mariano Jimenez, consistently 
expressed his support and dedication, and the commitment of 
the Maduro administration, to the creation of a sustainable 
TEDs program.  In a February 6 letter to the Minister of 
Finance, Jimenez requested that 70 percent of the 5 million 
lempira collected by DIGEPESCA last year be returned to the 
department, specifically to fund the TEDs program.  That 3.5 
million lempira (USD 195,500) would compensate for the 1.3 
million lempira budget cut mandated by the National 
Congress, plus allow for additional spending on increased 
inspectors\' salaries as indicated by Agricultural Vice 
Minister Perez. 
 
4. (SBU) In a 26 February letter to the Embassy, Perez noted 
that inspectors performed an at-sea inspection during the 
period February 16-20, boarding 10 vessels.  From this 
inspection, only one ship, the Whirl Wind, had one net at 60 
degrees but the vessel was not fishing due to lack of fuel. 
Eight dockside inspections were completed February 10-17 by 
the newly appointed and trained inspectors. The results of 
those inspections indicated 3 vessels not in compliance: the 
Capt. Iran, the Capt. Norman and the Morning Star.  Each had 
1 net with a 60-degree angle (the Capt. Iran net in 
violation was noted as a reserve net).  The inspectors also 
noted that the Capt. Iran is utilizing the new double 
curtain system and has reported good results.  Copies of 
those inspections were forwarded to the Economic section. 
According to Perez, the captains of the vessels in violation 
were given a warning since it was considered a first 
offense.  Any subsequent, repeat violations by these vessels 
or their captains will result in fines. 
 
5. (SBU) On updating the fisheries law, last year the GOH 
contracted a consultant from the Central American 
independent fishing organization \"OPESCA\" to draft a new 
fisheries law, which the Ministry plans to finalize with 
industry input by June or July of 2004 and present to the 
Honduran National Congress.  This new law is expected to 
strengthen fishing laws, update harvesting seasons, and 
increase fines for infractions or violations. 
 
6. (SBU) Inspector turnover remains a possibility, but the 
Ministry is working to retain institutional knowledge. 
Since the replacement of all inspectors and subsequent lack 
of training or knowledge was a decisive factor in the last 
de-certification in January 2003, GOH officials are 
negotiating with the international Pan-American Agricultural 
School at Zamorano to move the inspectors out of the 
Ministry and place them under the administrative authority 
of Zamorano.  This will create a stable, continuing civil 
society position instead of a rotating political position. 
 
7. (SBU) Comment: Embassy monitoring of the program is 
continuing in order to ensure that the GOH fulfills its 
commitment to environmental protection under the TEDs 
program.  End note. 
 
PALMER 
"
"14702","3/8/2004 15:31","04TEGUCIGALPA542","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04STATE28688","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000542 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/OP/WHA, S/CT, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/08/2014 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: SECURITY ENVIRONMENT PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE (SEPQ) 
FOR HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. 04 STATE 28688 
 
     B. 03 TEGUC 02231 
     C. 03 TEGUC 01144 
 
Classified By: DCM Roger Pierce, Reason 1.5 (C) and (D) 
 
1. (U) The following responses are keyed to the Security 
Environment Profile Questionnaire (ref A. 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
 
1. (SBU)  Demonstrations: 
 
(1-A.)  Yes.  Additionally, there are a number of 
organizations and groups under the loose collective 
leadership of (and affiliated with) the Bloque Popular that 
have been carrying out anti-American demonstrations, as well 
as demonstrations targeting local issues.  The following 
organizations have been involved in anti-American political 
activities to varying degrees.  They are listed in 
alphabetical order, utilizing Spanish acronyms where 
applicable. (List updated October 2003): 
 
- ARTISTAS DE LA UNAH 
Artists of the National Autonomous University of 
Honduras (UNAH) 
 
- BLOQUE POPULAR 
Popular Block 
 
- COCOH 
Farmers\' Cooperatives Union 
 
- CODECOH 
Honduran Consumer Protection Committee 
 
- CODEH 
Honduran Committee for Human Rights 
 
- COFADEH 
Honduran Committee of Family Members of the 
Detained and Disappeared 
 
- COHAPAZ 
Honduran Committee for Action for Peace 
 
- COLPROSUMAH 
Honduran Professional Teachers College 
 
- COMPA-H 
People of the Americas Convergence Movement 
(COMPA)- Honduras 
 
- COPEMH 
Honduran Association of Secondary School Teachers 
 
- COPINH 
Civic Council of Popular Organizations and 
Indigenous Groups of Honduras (also appears as COPIN) 
 
- COPRUMH 
Honduran Professional Association Teachers\' Union 
 
- CGT 
General Workers Central (the largest of Honduras\' three 
national labor confederations) 
 
- CTH 
Confederation of Honduran Workers (probably, the strongest of 
the three national labor confederations) 
 
- CUTH 
United Confederation of Honduran Workers (the most left    of 
the three national labor confederations) 
 
- FPR 
Popular Revolution Forces, A shadowy alleged revolutionary 
group.  See Reftel C for details. 
 
- FUTH 
United Federation of Honduran Workers (the largest component 
of CUTH, above) 
 
- FSM 
Feminist Movement (details needed) 
 
- FUR 
University Revolutionary Front 
- GRUPO LOS NECIOS DE LA UNAH 
UNAH Fools Group - Activist group in UNAH that \"cheerleads\" 
and motivates demos 
 
- MEH 
Honduran Student Movement 
- PARTIDO DE LOS TRABAJADORES DE LA FACULTAD DE PEDAGOGIA DE 
LA UNAH 
Teaching Faculty Workers\' Party of UNAH 
 
- RADIO GUALCHO 
Leftist/Activist radio station (1510Mhz) that works 
closely with Bloque Popular and is actively involved in 
most demonstrations 
 
- REPRESENTANTE DE FRENTE Y REFORMA DE LA UNAH 
Reform Front Representative of UNAH 
 
- SERUNAH 
New UNAH coalition group, like Bloque Popular 
 
- SETROINFOP 
Details Needed 
 
- SITRAINA 
National Agrarian Institute Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAIHSS 
Institute of Social Security Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAUNAH 
UNAH Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAUPEN 
A Workers\' Union (details needed) 
 
- STIBYS 
Beverage and Associated Industries Workers\' Union 
(plays a key organizing and logistics role for many 
demos)- Leader of STIBYS is also the leader of the Popular 
Block. 
 
- SITRAPANI 
Child Welfare Association Workers\' Union 
 
- UD 
Democratic Unification Party (remnants of the Communist Party 
of Honduras and other former Marxist parties; represented in 
the National Congress) 
 
- UNAH 
National Autonomous University of Honduras 
 
- URP 
Revolutionary People\'s Union 
 
NOTE: The most fervent anti-U.S. groups are: MEH, URP, UD, 
Bloque Popular, STIBYS, COPINH and COMPA-H.  The following 
groups have committed and participated in violent acts 
against the Honduran Government and other entities:  Bloque 
Popular, COPINH, Democratic Unification Party (UD) and The 
Revolutionary People\'s Union (URP). 
 
(1-B.) Yes.  There have been 29 demonstrations in Tegucigalpa 
since January 2003.  While not all demonstrations are 
directed against the U.S. Government, almost all 
demonstrations have some undertone of anti-U.S. sentiment. 
Demo dates:  01/25/03, 01/30/03, 02/15/03, 03/8/03 03/27/03, 
08/27/03, 09/04/03, 09/05/03, 09/11/03, 09/16/03, 09/17/03, 
09/19/03, 10/02/03, 10/09/03, 10/29/03, 11/05/03, 11/20/03, 
11/21/03, 11/26/03, 11/27/03, 11/28/03, 12/08/03, 12/11/03, 
12/17/03, 12/19/03, 01/22/04, 02/06/04, 02/18/04, 03/02/04. 
 
(1-C.)  About half of the demonstrations listed above have 
taken place at or near U.S. Mission facilities. 
 
(1-D.)  The size of anti-American demonstrations at the 
Embassy varies from twenty to over three hundred 
participants.  The larger demos usually consist of supporters 
from six to more than twelve different organizations, which 
operate as a loosely structured coalition under the guidance 
of Bloque Popular. 
 
(1-E.)  While there are demonstrations based on local issues, 
such as civil service salaries, privatization, IMF 
requirements, etc.  U.S. actions in Iraq and the Central 
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), and U.S. involvement 
in Venezuela and Haiti have become the current focus.  The 
following statements, demands and gestures have been made 
repeatedly during past demos at the Embassy:  No to war in 
Iraq, No to war, Stop Plan Colombia, Pro-Human rights, World 
Peace, Stop Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), 
U.S. Forces out of Honduras (Soto Cano AB), burning U.S. 
flags, U.S. Military out of Cuba, U.S. destroy your WMD, Stop 
intervention in Venezuela, Stop Standard Fruit exploiting the 
indigenous people, No to CAFTA, No to privatization, Stop 
intervention in Haiti. 
 
(1-F.)  Generally peaceful, but demonstrators have burned 
U.S. flags, painted slogans on Mission outer perimeter walls 
and utilized homemade mortars to detonate large fireworks 
charges that are propelled high into the air before exploding. 
 
(1-G.)  N/A. 
 
(1-H.)  N/A. 
 
(1-I.)  Yes. 
 
(1-J.)  Yes.  Occasionally they will pass by the Embassy. 
 
(1-K.)  The size varies from a few hundred to 5-10 thousand 
people. 
 
(1-L.)  Generally peaceful but fences, grillwork and windows 
have been destroyed near the National Congress and many tires 
burned.  At times, suspected plain-clothes police have been 
held and beaten by hard-core protesters within the 
demonstrations. 
 
On occassions, small groups of thug-like cadre have 
initiated/instigated violence against static police guards by 
attempting to strike them in the lower leg areas not 
protected by riot shields, with heavy placard poles with 
large nails embedded in the ends.  Several police officials 
have been injured in unsuccessful attempts to get the police 
to use force. 
 
(1-M.)  N/A. 
 
2. (SBU)  Macro Conflict Conditions: 
 
(2-A.)  NO. 
 
(2-B.)  N/A. 
 
(2-C.)  N/A. 
 
(2-D.)  N/A. 
 
3. (SBU)  Host Country Capabilities: 
 
(3-A.)  No. 
 
(3-B.)  Yes.  Training by US Border Patrol(BorTac) Teams 
good, but GOH security infrastructure needs major 
improvements. 
 
(3-C.)  Yes. 
 
(3-D.)  No.  However, GOH intelligence units have an 
institutional awareness of and a modest capability of 
penetrating indigenous radical groups. 
 
(3-E.)  Yes. 
 
(3-F.)  No. 
 
(3-G.)  Yes. 
 
(3-H.)  Average/Below Average. 
 
(3-I.)  Average/Ineffective. 
 
(3-J.)  Average/Ineffective.  A relatively new unit within 
the Ministry of Public Security called the Frontier Police 
has been established to handle border patrol duties.  The 
unit is making positive steps towards border control but lack 
of funding and manpower are limiting the effectiveness of the 
unit. 
 
4. (SBU) Indigenous Terrorism-Anti American Terrorist Groups: 
 
 
(4-A.)  No. 
 
(4-B.)  N/A. 
 
(4-C.)  N/A. 
 
(4-D.)  N/A. 
 
(4-E.)  N/A. 
 
(4-F.)  N/A. 
 
(4-G.)  N/A. 
 
(4-H.)  N/A. 
 
5. (SBU)  Other Indigenous Terrorist Groups: 
 
(5-A.)  No. 
 
(5-B.)  N/A. 
 
(5-C.)  N/A. 
 
(5-D.)  N/A. 
 
(5-E.)  N/A. 
 
6. (C/NF) Transnational Terrorism-Transnational Terrorist 
Indicators: 
 
(6-A.)  No.  However, there are rumors that there are Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty (ETA), IRA, and Chiapas (Zapatistas) 
sympathizers in Honduras who could be involved in advising 
indigenous groups.  Some Hondurans are studying in Cuba and 
also conceivably could be receiving training in subversion 
and terrorism, although it is more likely they are being 
indoctrinated as agents of influence.   As this Cuban program 
for Hondurans is in its infancy, there have been no 
indications that such training is taking place. 
 
(6-B.)  N/A. 
 
(6-C.)  N/A. 
 
(6-D.)  N/A and NO. 
 
(6-E.)  N/A. 
 
(6-F.)  The only known hostile intelligence presence of note 
is Cuban.  While the Cuban mission appears to have extensive 
contacts with leftists and indigenous groups, there is no 
indication they are planning or supporting terrorism. 
 
(6-H.)  There is no shortage of weapons in Honduras.  It 
would also not be difficult for hostile terrorist elements to 
import weapons and/or explosives from neighboring countries. 
 
 
PALMER 
"
"14703","3/8/2004 15:33","04TEGUCIGALPA543","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa232","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, EPET, EFIN, ECON, PGOV, PINR, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: High Gas Prices: First Test of Honduran IMF Program 
 
Ref: A) Tegucigalpa 232 
 
     B) Tegucigalpa 325 
     C) 03 Tegucigalpa 2385 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  A third price hike, in as many months, 
has brought gasoline and diesel prices in Honduras up to new 
highs of USD 2.94 and USD 2.02 per gallon, respectively. 
Gas prices are now 19 percent higher than at the end of 2003 
(diesel is up 17.6 percent) and are now clearly the highest 
in Central America.  Taxi, bus, and truck drivers have all 
been clamoring for relief, and the private sector is urging 
the legislature to cap prices.  Power generators are also 
trying to obtain an increase in electricity rates, although 
fuel purchases dedicated to the power sector are exempt from 
the new 12.5 percent import duty that has been the primary 
reason for the phased-in price hikes.  All of this 
represents a serious challenge for the GOH as it strives to 
get off to a good start with the new IMF program and spur 
economic growth.  So far, GOH officials are standing firm. 
End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
FUEL PRICES UP ALMOST 20 PERCENT SINCE BEGINNING OF YEAR 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
2. (U) On February 29, 2004, fuel prices in Honduras rose 
for the third time this year by more than three lempiras 
(16.7 cents) a gallon (see table below).  As of February 29, 
the price of regular and super gasoline had increased by 19 
percent and diesel fuel by 17.6 percent from December 31 of 
last year.  Regular gas increased by 8.5 lempiras to 52.1 
lempiras per gallon since the beginning of the year. Diesel 
fuel increased from 31.9 lempiras to 37.6 lempiras per 
gallon. 
 
          12/31/03  1/2/04  2/1/04  2/29/04  Pct Chg 
          --------  ------  ------  -------  ------- 
Super        44.75   44.46   49.98    53.22    18.90 
Regular      43.57   47.15   48.63    52.09    19.04 
Diesel       31.94   34.82   36.38    37.56    17.56 
Kerosene     27.65   31.65   31.36    31.32    13.27 
LPG         159.94  179.25  181.33   172.82     8.05 
 
3. (SBU) The GOH, in regulating the market, sets a maximum 
pump price for oil products, with calculations based on a 
complex formula first established in the early 1990s.  Most 
retailers use this maximum price as the pump price. 
 
4. (SBU) The key reason for the price hikes has been the new 
12.5 percent tariff on fuel products, enacted at the end of 
2003 as part of the GOH\'s efforts to raise government 
revenues and reach agreement on a three year Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).  As noted in ref A, 
the original executive decree included some unilateral 
changes to the formula intended to cushion the impact on the 
consumer by effectively cutting the profit margin allowed to 
the importers.  In the negotiation between the GOH and the 
oil companies that ensued, this change to the formula (and 
the reference price) was put on hold for three months, with 
an agreement that the price increase for consumers would be 
eased in over a two-month period.  At the same time, world 
oil prices have been rising, putting further pressure on 
gasoline prices (to the dismay of Honduran officials who had 
hoped for falling prices to cushion the blow). 
 
---------------------------------------- 
GAS PRICES NOW THE HIGHEST IN THE REGION 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) Fuel prices in Honduras thus remain extremely high 
compared to other countries in the region, with an expected 
negative impact on competitiveness and the cost of living. 
The new customs duty is in addition to the flat excise tax 
on oil products (USD 1.05 per gallon for gasoline).  The 
table below compares prices in Central America in February 
(i.e. before the latest increase). 
 
                Price Per Gallon, February 2004 
                          (in dollars) 
 
          Honduras  Salvador  C.R.   Nicar.  Guatemala 
          --------  ------  ------  -------  --------- 
Super        2.80    2.09     2.37    2.47     2.13 
Regular      2.72    2.00     2.26    2.35     2.08 
Diesel       2.04    1.70     1.67    2.01     1.52 
Kerosene     1.76     --      1.68    1.94     1.67 
LPG         10.81    3.67    10.08    7.15     7.54 
 
Source: El Heraldo, March 2, 2004 
 
6. (SBU) Some Honduran officials believe that there is room 
to force down the prices charged by oil importers at the 
border.  Some statistics appear to show that pre-tax prices 
of oil products are much higher for Honduras than 
neighboring countries.  Much of the discussion between the 
government and the oil companies in the next couple of 
months will focus on this issue. 
 
----------------------------- 
Public Outcry at Latest Hikes 
----------------------------- 
 
7. (U) With the latest gas hike, taxi and bus drivers 
successfully fought for an increase in the tariffs they are 
permitted to charge the public.  On March 2, the GOH 
authorized city bus rates to rise from 2.0 to 2.5 lempiras 
and for the price of a taxi collective ride to rise from 7.5 
lempiras to 8.5 lempiras.  Regulated intercity bus fares 
rose by 15 percent as well.  Truck drivers agreed to cease a 
strike and road block near Puerto Cortes on March 4, when 
the government arranged tri-partite negotiations with the 
private sector and Congress.  These talks are set to start 
on March 8. 
 
8. (U) The power sector, working through sympathetic 
legislators, also appears to be trying to obtain an increase 
in rates they can charge for electricity generation by 
pushing for increases in regulated electricity tariffs.  The 
general manager of the state-owned electricity company, 
ENEE, has discounted the proposal as unnecessary at this 
time, as fuel purchases used in the power sector are exempt 
from fuel taxes.  Members of the private sector also began a 
campaign to urge the National Congress to set price controls 
on fuel prices to stop the prices from rising further. 
Note: The IMF agreement requires the GOH to refrain from any 
further price control measures.  End Note. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Formation of a Commission to Study the Regulatory Regime 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
9. (SBU) On March 2, prior to leaving for a Central American 
Presidents summit in Spain, President Maduro announced the 
establishment of a commission to study possible ways to 
reduce fuel prices, including a full review of the formula 
used to set the maximum pump prices.  The Commission will be 
headed by Juan Ferrera, head of the National Convergence 
Forum, a state entity that attempts to fold the input of 
civil society into GOH policymaking.  Ferrera is a former 
Finance Minister and former head of the association of oil 
product distributors.  Presidential Advisor, Ramon Medina 
Luna (a former Minister of Economy), will serve on the 
Commission and act as the key interlocutor with the GOH on 
data requests and recommendations.  President Maduro also 
asked former Minister of Industry and Trade, Juliette 
Handal, to participate in the Commission.  Handal has been a 
key proponent of the change in the reference price used as a 
proxy for cost in the regulated gas price formula; she has 
raised serious concern about Medina Luna\'s participation in 
the Commission, since she believes that he is largely 
responsible for the government\'s policy on fuel prices. 
 
10. (SBU) Ferrera told EconCouns in a March 2 meeting that 
the Commission plans to complete its work within 60 days. 
He noted an understanding of the need to maintain budget 
revenues and to avoid price controls.  In recent days, 
several GOH officials, including Vice Minister of Finance, 
William Chong Wong, and Ferrera, have indicated privately 
and publicly the government\'s resolve to stand fast on the 
oil tax.  Oil company reps have told us that they will urge 
the government to look for ways to cut tax evasion by 
informal oil importers and retailers. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (SBU) All of this represents the first test of the new 
IMF program, approved by the IMF Board on February 18.  The 
GOH knew that the gas tax would be politically 
controversial, but had hoped that a phase-in of the hikes 
would give some breathing space and might be accompanied by 
a decline in world oil prices.  Instead, world prices have 
risen significantly in response to changes in OPEC policy 
and developments in other parts of the world, making the 
decisions in Honduras particularly difficult to defend to a 
weary public.  IMF officials will be watching carefully to 
ensure that the government continues to meet its fiscal 
targets and does not violate its commitment to refrain from 
further price controls.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"14757","3/9/2004 21:38","04TEGUCIGALPA560","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa232","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000560 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB, DRL/IL, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT SHUETE 
SAN SALVADOR FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAIR, EFIN, EINV, ELAB, ETRD, PGOV, TSPA, HO, IMF 
SUBJECT: Honduran Econ Highlights: February 2004 
 
REF: A) 04 Tegucigalpa 232 
 
     B) 04 Tegucigalpa 543 
     C) 03 Tegucigalpa 2432 
 
Contents 
-------- 
Macroeconomics: 
 - Finally, An IMF Agreement 
 - But Rising Fuel Costs Could Spark Discontent 
 - Minimum Wage Negotiations Underway 
 
Aviation: 
 - A New National Safety and Security Plan 
 - Runway Extension at Toncontin 
 - Work Stalled on Roatan Fence 
 - Governor Bush Unable to Land in Tegucigalpa 
 
Business: 
 - IDB Recommends Fewer Tax Exemptions 
 - DOC Under-Secretary Aldonas Visits San Pedro Sula 
 
Science: 
 - NASA Administrator O\'Keefe Returns Moon Rock to Honduras 
 
------------------------- 
Finally, an IMF Agreement 
------------------------- 
 
1. (U) On February 2, the GOH signed a Letter of Intent for 
a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), 
which was then approved by the IMF Board in Washington on 
February 18.  This marks the end of two long years of 
negotiations between the IMF and the Maduro government, but 
the result is a macroeconomic plan that establishes some 
control over public sector salaries and places the GOH on a 
more secure financial footing. 
 
2. (U) The program was premised on GOH completion of four 
\"prior actions\": the adoption of a law to control public 
sector salaries, a package of expenditure cuts and revenue 
enhancements, a 2004 budget consistent with expenditure 
targets, and an adjustment to the Poverty Reduction 
Strategy.  All four moves were completed by early January 
2004 (see Ref A for a complete account of these measures). 
 
3. (U) After one year of compliance with the program and 
commitments in the GOH\'s Poverty Reduction Strategy, 
Honduras will be eligible for reaching the completion point 
under the HIPC initiative.  This will provide debt relief of 
approximately $960 million over a period of fifteen years. 
This savings from debt forgiveness will be used for 
improvements in education, health care, and other aspects of 
the Poverty Reduction program. 
 
4. (U) Following the signing of the Letter of Intent, 
several multilateral and bilateral assistance packages were 
announced which will be worth $110 million over the next 
several years.  On February 10, the government of Sweden 
announced $31 million of assistance to be given to the GOH 
this year, for support of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
On February 11, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) 
announced approval of $55 million in soft loans: $30 million 
to support Honduras\' Poverty Reduction Strategy, and $25 
million for a program to support the stability of Honduras\' 
banking sector.  The loans are for a 40-year period, with a 
10-year grace period, and an annual interest rate of 1 
percent for the first decade and 2 percent thereafter.  In 
addition, on February 26, the World Bank approved a $25 
million credit for a Land Administration Program to help 
expand access to formal land titling and registration.  The 
credit is repayable over 40 years, with a 10-year grace 
period, at zero interest. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
But Rising Fuel Costs Could Spark Discontent 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) On February 29, fuel prices in Honduras rose for 
the third time this year, by more than three lempiras (16.7 
cents) a gallon.  As of the end of the month, the price of 
gasoline had increased by 19 percent, and that of diesel 
fuel by 17.6 percent, from December 31 of last year.  The 
price increases are largely due to the increase in the 
tariff on fuel, which the GOH applied at the end of 2003 to 
raise revenue and reach agreement with the IMF.  At the same 
time, the rising world price of oil, which was at a one-year 
high by the end of February, has put further pressure on 
gasoline prices, much to the dismay of Honduran officials 
who had hoped for falling prices to cushion the blow.  Taxi, 
bus, and truck drivers have all been clamoring for relief, 
and the private sector is urging the legislature to cap fuel 
prices.  So far, the government has remained firm in its 
intention to abide by the terms of the IMF program targets 
and avoid further price controls.  (See Ref B for a full 
account of this issue.) 
 
---------------------------------- 
Minimum Wage Negotiations Underway 
---------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) The Tripartite Commission on the minimum wage (with 
representatives of labor, business and the government) met 
twice during February to discuss the annual increase to the 
minimum wage.  Negotiations began with the two sides far 
apart, each accusing the other of making unreasonable 
offers.  The private sector organization COHEP (Honduran 
Private Enterprise Council) offered an increase of 7 percent 
(keeping up with inflation).  Israel Salinas, secretary 
general of the United Confederation of Honduran Workers 
(CUTH), called for an increase of 30 percent, and said that 
there seems to be no general agreement between labor and the 
private sector on the issue.  In 2003, the government 
approved a 12 percent increase in the minimum wage after 
business/labor negotiations stalled. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Aviation Security and Safety: A New National Plan 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
7. (U) The Honduran Civil Aviation authorities (DGAC) have 
produced a new National Plan for Aviation Safety and 
Security, which entered into force by means of a 
Presidential decree published on February 20.  The existing 
plan was badly out of date and in many ways obsolete, for 
example, tasking \"the airport police\" with certain airport 
security functions, when in fact no such group has existed 
since the police forces were re-organized in 1999.  The new 
plan was written by an IDB-funded consultant and should 
bring Honduras into compliance with ICAO standards on safety 
and security. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Work Begins to Make Room for Runway Extension 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) Also in February, the first stage of construction 
began on what will eventually be an extension to the runway 
at Toncontin International Airport in Tegucigalpa. 
Construction began to divert a major road which runs along 
the southern edge of the airport grounds.  Shifting the road 
will allow the airport to extend its runway to the south by 
an additional 300 meters, bringing the total length of the 
runway to 2,162 meters.  The road construction is being 
handled and paid for by the Ministry of Transportation and 
is expected to be completed by the end of March.  Once the 
road has been rerouted, InterAirports, the international 
consortium that manages Honduras\' four international 
airports, can begin work on the runway extension. 
 
----------------------------------- 
But Progress Stalls on Roatan Fence 
----------------------------------- 
 
9. (U) At the airport on the island of Roatan, however, the 
construction of an internal fence to protect the runway area 
came to an abrupt halt when an angry resident began 
threatening the workers with a gun.  As explained in Ref C, 
the fence is necessary due to the presence of fourteen 
families who actually live on the airport grounds and are 
currently prevented from walking onto the runway only by the 
presence of 24-hour guards, not by any physical structure. 
These families believe that they are owed compensation by 
the GOH and had long opposed the construction of the 
internal fence.  However, officials from InterAirports, the 
DGAC, and the local government secured written permission 
from the majority of the families in December 2003 and 
construction began.  Unfortunately, one resident who did not 
sign remains violently opposed to the fence, and has 
successfully brought its construction to a standstill with 
only 180 meters left to build.  Aviation officials are again 
planning to go to Roatan to work with local authorities to 
resolve the matter. 
 
------------------------------- 
Governor Bush\'s Visit Postponed 
------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Florida Governor Jeb Bush was forced to call off a 
planned visit to Honduras on February 19 when bad weather 
and malfunctioning equipment at the airport in Tegucigalpa 
threatened his landing.  Governor Bush was leading a 
delegation of Florida business leaders on a week-long visit 
through Central America, to promote regional trade and to 
generate support for Miami\'s bid to host the FTAA 
Secretariat.  However, bad weather and poor visibility at 
 
SIPDIS 
Toncontin Airport, coupled with the fact that the distance- 
measuring equipment (DME) transponder at the airport was 
temporarily out of order, forced the group to postpone the 
visit.  The Governor\'s office hopes to reschedule the visit 
for sometime in March. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
IDB Recommends Elimination of Tax Exemptions 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
11. (U) On February 10, two tax specialists from the IDB 
presented the results of a study they had conducted on the 
Honduran tax system.  The study emphasized the need to 
establish a more equitable tax system, since under the 
current system, according to the specialists, \"the people 
who earn the most are paying the least.\"  The study 
advocates neither higher tax rates nor the creation of new 
taxes, but rather the broadening of the tax base through the 
elimination of tax exemptions in industrial \"free zones,\" as 
well as more effective tax collection.  An improved tax 
system is especially important at this time, according to 
the authors, because of the expectation of lost tariff 
revenue which will result from the implementation of CAFTA 
and the FTAA. 
 
12. (SBU) Not surprisingly, the private sector responded 
negatively to the suggestion that the rules governing free 
zones should be changed, claiming that a revision of the 
benefits currently offered to industries operating in these 
zones would undermine the growth of the maquila sector, the 
strongest source of employment growth in the Honduran 
economy in recent years.  The Vice Minister of Finance, 
William Chong Wong, gave his assurance that tax exemptions 
currently enjoyed by the maquila industry will not be 
touched during the present government, as these benefits 
were granted in accordance with the law.  However, he did 
acknowledge that such exemptions might be eliminated \"in the 
long term.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Under-Secretary of Commerce Aldonas Visits San Pedro Sula 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
13. (U) On February 4 - 5, Commerce Under-Secretary Grant 
Aldonas visited the northern city of San Pedro Sula with 
other Commerce Department officials.  The visit focused on 
the maquila industry, its relation to the textile and 
apparel industry in the United States, and the prospects for 
approval of CAFTA by the U.S. Congress.  Under-Secretary 
Aldonas also visited the MHOTIVO foundation, a school for 
poor children which was founded and is financed by Honduran 
businesses, particularly in the maquila sector. 
----------------------------- 
Moon Rock Returns to Honduras 
----------------------------- 
 
14. (U) The Administrator of NASA, Sean O\'Keefe, visited 
Honduras and attended a ceremony at which a moon rock stolen 
from Honduras during the 1990s was officially returned to 
Honduras.  The rock, collected in 1972 by the crew of Apollo 
17, was originally given to the Honduran people by President 
Richard Nixon, but a Honduran official later sold the rock 
to a U.S. citizen.  It was recovered by U.S. federal agents 
in a sting operation in 1998, but a legal dispute delayed 
its return to Honduran officials until late 2003. 
 
15. (U) During the visit, NASA representatives also visited 
the NASA-supported astronomy department and observatory of 
the National University (UNAH), where O\'Keefe spoke about 
the history and the future of the U.S. space program.  The 
moon rock will remain on display in the Chiminike 
Interactive Center, a recently-inaugurated children\'s museum 
in Tegucigalpa. 
 
Palmer 
"
"14817","3/10/2004 22:53","04TEGUCIGALPA574","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000574 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL AND DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/04/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PINR, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN VICE FM GIVEN INPUT FOR DRAFTING UNCHR 
CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. WAGNER/PIERCE E-MAILS 03/09-10 
 
     B. FISK/PALMER TELCON AND FAX 03/09 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 531 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 503 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 468 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 365 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 307 
     H. STATE 20401 
     I. STATE 13279 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) DCM and PolOffs met March 10 with Vice Foreign 
Minister Anibal Quinonez and MFA Senior Advisor Policarpo 
Callejas on the issue of drafting the UN Commission on Human 
Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba.  The meeting followed the 
Secretary\'s March 9 meeting with President Ricardo Maduro in 
 
SIPDIS 
Washington (refs A and B).  Quinonez appeared not to have yet 
received a readout of the Secretary\'s meeting with Maduro 
from GOH participants.  Thus, DCM briefed Quinonez on the 
meeting, most notably Maduro\'s agreement to draft a UNCHR 
Cuba resolution.  EmbOffs gave Quinonez copies of past UNCHR 
Cuba resolutions, UNESCO statements on the crackdown on 
dissidents in Cuba and the awarding of the 2004 UNESCO World 
Press Freedom Prize to Cuban dissident poet and journalist 
Raul Rivero, and U.S. goals for the 2004 resolution (which 
EmbOffs had previously given Quinonez).  EmbOffs emphasized 
that the U.S. was hoping for a draft resolution ASAP, as the 
plan was to have a resolution introduced in Geneva March 15. 
 
2. (C) Callejas stressed that, by agreeing to draft the 
resolution, the GOH was definitely putting at risk Cuban 
signature of a pending bilateral convention on maritime 
borders.  Quinonez noted that this issue would likely be spun 
negatively by the opposition and the press. 
 
3. (C) Callejas then asked what, if anything, was the U.S. 
doing for Honduras in return.  DCM replied that the Secretary 
and Maduro had discussed several areas of bilateral 
cooperation and the Secretary had asked the Honduran 
Ambassador to the U.S., Mario Canahuati, to follow-up with 
WHA A/S Noriega on specific issues. 
 
4. (C) Later in the afternoon, Ambassador spoke with 
President Maduro upon his return from Washington to thank him 
for his support on the UNCHR Cuba resolution.  Maduro said 
that he had agreed to commit Honduras to draft the resolution 
as a matter of principle, noting that the U.S. was Honduras\' 
closest ally and that drafting the resolution was the right 
thing to do.  He added, however, that he too was concerned 
about the maritime border agreement with Cuba.  Maduro said 
that the pending agreement was a high priority item for 
Honduras that may be affected as a result of his decision. 
He agreed to discuss with the Embassy how the resolution was 
progressing tomorrow. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  It is clear that the decision to draft the 
UNCHR resolution on Cuba was President Maduro\'s and not 
supported by career MFA officials.  Post notes with interest 
the fact that Quinonez and Callejas had not yet received 
instructions on how to proceed from Foreign Minister Leonidas 
Rosa Bautista, who returned to Honduras with President 
Maduro.  While we expect the MFA to dutifully draft a 
resolution, it is clear that considerable guidance, coaxing, 
and perhaps pushing, will be required from this end to ensure 
that the proposed resolution has teeth and that it is 
submitted on time.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"14926","3/12/2004 21:40","04TEGUCIGALPA595","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL AND DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/12/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PINR, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN VICE FM GIVES EMBASSY WEAK DRAFT UNCHR 
CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. PALMER/NORIEGA TELCON 03/12 
 
     B. PALMER/FISK TELCON 03/12 
     C. FISK/PIERCE TELCON 03/12 
     D. STATE 54952 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 574 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 531 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 503 
     H. TEGUCIGALPA 468 
     I. TEGUCIGALPA 365 
     J. TEGUCIGALPA 307 
     K. STATE 20401 
     L. STATE 13279 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) DCM and PolOffs met March 12 with Vice Foreign 
Minister Anibal Quinonez, MFA Senior Advisor Policarpo 
Callejas, and Legal Advisor to the FM Carlos Lopez Contreras 
(a former FM himself) to receive the first Honduran draft of 
a UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba. 
Quinonez noted that, as stated by President Ricardo Maduro in 
his meeting with the Secretary March 9 (ref D), the Honduran 
draft was a moderate document compared to past resolutions 
and was not as strong as the U.S. would prefer.  However, MFA 
officials noted that the mere act of sponsoring a Cuba 
resolution would be seen as an act of aggression by the GOC. 
 
2. (C) DCM and PolOffs quickly reviewed the draft resolution 
and noted that the draft made no mention of the crackdown on 
dissidents, journalists, and others in Cuba since the 2003 
UNCHR resolution on Cuba.  MFA officials said that the GOH 
wants to try to maintain good relations with Cuba, for now 
and for post-Castro. 
 
3. (C) EmbOffs emphasized that the resolution needed to be 
ready to be tabled in Geneva March 15, noting that the 
resolution would likely be discussed at a planned March 15 
meeting in Washington between U/S Grossman and Ambassadors 
from UNCHR member countries.  MFA officials said early GRULAC 
co-sponsors were key, noting that the Central American 
countries discussed the possibility of a common position on 
the resolution during their meetings in Spain (ref D), but 
said they had failed to come to a consensus.  A resolution 
seen as too strong by some countries would be seen as too 
weak by others.  Lopez Contreras said that if the resolution 
was too strong Honduras would not sponsor it nor would it 
stand a good chance of being adopted in Geneva. 
 
4. (C) EmbOffs indicated they would seek immediate guidance 
from the Department on the draft text and get back to the GOH 
with comments ASAP.  Quinonez said he was prepared to discuss 
the text further, but noted that the draft text had been 
approved by President Maduro and that changing the text would 
require his approval. 
 
5. (C) As EmbOffs were leaving the MFA, they passed Foreign 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista who said that, if we were not 
satisfied with the draft resolution, we should push for 
changes.  He implied that MFA lawyers had come up with the 
text, but the language could be changed by the political 
leadership. 
 
6. (SBU) Post has faxed the draft resolution to WHA/CEN and 
WHA/CCA. 
 
7. (C) Comment:  As noted in ref C, career MFA officials are 
strongly opposed to drafting a resolution and their first 
draft is an extremely weak resolution.  Post seeks desired 
resolution text from the Department, which Ambassador will 
present directly to President Maduro in an attempt to obtain 
his approval.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"15013","3/17/2004 0:17","04TEGUCIGALPA642","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1243|03TEGUCIGALPA2249|04TEGUCIGALPA234","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/16/2014 
TAGS: MOPS, MARR, PREL, PGOV, ASEC, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS REMAINS COMMITTED TO IRAQ DEPLOYMENT BUT 
UNLIKELY TO EXTEND PRESENCE PAST JULY 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 234 
     B. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 101921Z 04 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2249 
     D. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1243 ( ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L, Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  Reports in the U.S. and international press 
which suggest that the Government of Honduras (GOH) now plans 
to withdraw its troops from Iraq this summer are misleading 
and contradict local Honduran media coverage of the issue. 
On March 16, President Ricardo Maduro held a press conference 
in which he reiterated support for the U.S. war against 
terrorism; made clear that the act of terrorism in Madrid 
last week would not change Honduran policy; and underscored 
that Honduran troops would fulfill their commitment in Iraq. 
Maduro did, however, announce that he did not intend to seek 
an extension of the Honduran troop deployment, which is due 
to end in July.  He held out the possibility that this 
decision could change based on how the situation in Iraq 
develops.  Maduro\'s declaration echoed comments made by the 
Foreign and Defense Ministers on March 15.  Those earlier 
comments were inaccurately reported to indicate that Honduras 
had decided to join Spain in withdrawing troops.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) On March 16, President Ricardo Maduro held a press 
conference in which he reiterated support for the U.S. war 
against terrorism; made clear that the act of terrorism in 
Madrid last week would not change Honduran policy; and 
underscored that Honduran troops would fulfill their 
commitment in Iraq.  Maduro did, however, announce that he 
did not intend to seek an extension of the Honduran troop 
deployment past the current end date of July.  He held out 
the possibility that this decision could change based on how 
the situation in Iraq develops.  Maduro added that Honduras\' 
extension decision was not based on whether or not there was 
a UN request but, as they see it, rather the conclusion of 
the first phase of coalition operations in June which had 
been authorized by the National Congress for the troops\' 
deployment.  He added that his government would have to 
reevaluate this decision at that time.  Maduro\'s declaration 
echoed comments made by the Foreign and Defense Ministers on 
March 15, in which they made clear that Honduran troops would 
fulfill their commitment in Iraq. 
 
3. (U) Reports in the U.S. and international press which 
suggest that the Government of Honduras (GOH) now plans to 
withdraw its troops from Iraq this summer are misleading and 
contradict local Honduran media coverage of the issue. 
Three of the four major dailies all ran front page headlines 
highlighting that Honduran troops would continue in their 
role in Iraq.  These local reports were based on the same 
statements attributed to the Foreign and Defense Ministers 
and reported in other wire service reports. 
 
4. (U) Foreign Minister Rosa Bautista actually publicly 
confirmed March 15 that Honduras would honor its commitment 
to Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) by completing its one-year 
commitment in Iraq.  He said that the Honduran forces would 
be maintained in Iraq.  He did not comment on the GOH\'s plans 
beyond this one-year commitment, but accurately noted that 
the National Congress would have to approve an extension of 
the deployment.  In separate public comments. Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve stressed in response to a question 
from a journalist that \"independently of any decision by 
Spain, the current Honduran deployment would end this summer 
as previously planned.\" 
 
5. (C) COMMENT: As previously reported (refs A-D), according 
to high level Honduran sources (both political and military), 
the GOH was open to the possibility of continuing the 
deployment after this summer.  However, Post believes that 
the GOH would prefer to end its deployment to Iraq this 
summer, marking the end of its one year commitment.  The cost 
of the deployment has been an ongoing concern (with local 
reporting and leftists critics highlighting the $800,000 
annual cost to the stretched national budget.)  Still, Maduro 
made clear he would not allow the recent terrorist attacks in 
Madrid to deter his government\'s policy.  Nonetheless, the 
reality is that Spain\'s announcement that it would withdraw 
its troops from Iraq, unless the United Nations assumes 
operational control of the deployment, further complicate 
matters politically for the Maduro government.  As noted in 
ref A, Honduran popular support for the deployment remains 
very low.  Maduro\'s party would prefer to end its Iraq 
deployment and reduce its political exposure, which would be 
high if Honduran troops were to suffer casualties.  While the 
deployment is unpopular, as long as Honduras continues to 
suffer no casualties and is not targeted by terrorist 
activity, the GOH, given the right incentives, might be 
willing to seek, and even be granted by the National 
Congress, an extension of the Iraqi deployment.  END COMMENT 
 
6. (U) Minimize considered. 
PALMER 
"
"15074","3/17/2004 22:55","04TEGUCIGALPA649","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04STATE14279","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, PM, INL/LP, G/TIP, DRL/PHD, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2014 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, PGOV, SMIG, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM ACTION GROUP -- TEGUCIGALPA 
MEETING; U.S. ONLY COUNTRY PROVIDING CT ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: STATE 14279 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: At our first Counterterrorism Action Group 
(CTAG) meeting to discuss counterterrorism (CT) assistance to 
the Government of Honduras (GOH) and assess GOH CT needs, 
representatives of G-8 missions, Spain, and the European 
Union (EU) all concurred that the threat of a terrorist 
attack in Honduras remains low.  At this time, no other 
government or international organization, apart from the 
U.S., has active CT programs in Honduras.  The participants 
had the opportunity to review U.S. CT assistance programs in 
Honduras, and some support was expressed for a Central 
American regional CT program if one were to be developed. 
Embassy plans to invite representatives from the GOH to 
participate in the next CTAG meeting.  End Summary 
 
2. (U) Embassy Tegucigalpa hosted its CTAG meeting March 9, 
to share information on current U.S. CT programs and 
assistance to Honduras with other interested governments and 
to review and assess GOH CT needs.  In attendance were 
representatives from the following embassies:  France, 
Germany, Italy, Spain, and Japan.  A representative of the 
European Union also participated.  PolOff met separately with 
a representative from Canada who could not attend the March 9 
meeting. 
 
3. (C) All participants concurred that the threat of a 
terrorist incident in Honduras remains low.  There was 
agreement, however, that the GOH lacks the ability to 
effectively control its borders and that this remains 
problematic.  Participants agreed that alien smuggling and 
trafficking in persons, organized crime syndicates, and 
narcotrafficking remain the largest external threats facing 
Honduras, particularly as some of these organizations could 
possibly be affiliated with terrorist organizations in 
Colombia.  Control of Honduras identity documents is weak and 
fraudulent passports are easily obtained via corrupt public 
officials.  The fact that Honduras has yet to name a CT 
Coordinator, as obligated by the UN, was also highlighted. 
(Note:  Honduras convened an emergency National Security 
meeting attended by Minister of Defense Federico Breve, 
Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez, and Minister of 
Interior and Justice Jorge Ramon Hernandez Alecerro to 
discuss the March 11 terrorist attack in Madrid, Spain and to 
review Honduras\' security postures.  The GOH is concerned 
that it might possibly be targeted for future terrorist 
attacks due to its support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. End 
Note) 
 
4. (SBU) Participants noted that Honduras is the only country 
in the region, apart from Panama, to have signed and ratified 
all UN and OAS counterterrorism treaties, conventions, and 
protocols.  (Note:  Decrees making official congressional 
approval of three of the conventions are awaiting 
presidential signature and publication.  End Note.)  Honduras 
also does appears to do a better job than its neighbors at 
apprehending illegal aliens and their smugglers, although the 
GOH needs more assistance in investigative techniques and 
with how to orchestrate undercover operations.  The Honduran 
Frontier Police remain the most capable law enforcement 
entity in the country and they would likely be called upon to 
respond to any internal terrorist threat, although the 
organization is not particularly geared toward CT activities. 
 The Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) are also in the process of 
reconfiguring their Special Forces Battalion (stationed in La 
Venta) into a more effective CT unit.  No CTAG participant 
has, however, conducted an independent assessment of GOH CT 
needs and capabilities. 
 
5. (SBU) Political Counselor reviewed with the participants 
recent U.S. CT and law enforcement assistance/training to the 
GOH to include: port security; INL programs; money laundering 
training; assistance with machine readable passports; some 
special forces training; the construction of a shoothouse in 
La Venta; and training to Honduran immigration, customs, law 
enforcement, and border guards to better identify fraudulent 
documents, impostors, suspicious persons, and in recognizing 
bonafide U.S. documents, all to help combat alien smuggling 
and trafficking in persons and contraband. 
------ 
Canada 
------ 
 
6. (U) Canada does not currently have any CT programs planned 
or in place for Honduras.  Their Embassy is, however, 
interested in participating in a regional CT program if one 
were to be developed. 
 
----- 
Japan 
----- 
 
7. (U) Counselor Naganuma of Japan reported that, in the 
past, the GOJ has sent some Honduran law enforcement agents 
to Japan for training, although no programs are currently 
ongoing.  He also noted the possibility of illegal Chinese 
immigrants transiting Honduras on their way to the U.S., 
using stolen Japanese passports. 
 
------ 
France 
------ 
 
8. (U) France does provide some limited police 
training/assistance to the GOH although this does not focus 
on CT efforts.  France currently has no plans to fund CT 
projects or training in Honduras. 
 
------- 
Germany 
------- 
 
9. (U) Germany does not have any ongoing programs in Honduras 
that would contribute to the GOH\'s ability to conduct CT 
operations. 
 
----- 
Italy 
----- 
 
10. (U) Italy does not have any ongoing CT programs in 
Honduras. 
 
----- 
Spain 
----- 
 
11. (U) Spain has been providing some limited training to the 
GOH through assistance to the Public Ministry to improve rule 
of law, the intelligence services, and to modernize the 
security forces, but there has been no real focus on CT 
efforts. 
 
-------------- 
European Union 
-------------- 
 
12. (U) The EU has not particularly focused on law 
enforcement or CT threats in Central America and no programs 
are currently being planned. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
In Honduras, G-8 Not Focused on CT Issues 
----------------------------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) Comment:  Other diplomatic missions in Honduras 
remain primarily focused on traditional consular services, 
rule of law, and development issues.  There is a growing 
consensus, however, that transnational threats such as alien 
smuggling/trafficking in persons and organized crime 
syndicates need to be better addressed.  There is some 
interest in a regional CT program if one were to be 
developed.  Embassy will continue to work with  CTAG members 
to support efforts to enhance Honduran law enforcement, 
military, and judicial institutions to address these 
concerns.  Embassy will invite a representative from the GOH 
to the next CTAG meeting.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"15103","3/18/2004 14:33","04TEGUCIGALPA652","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MARCH 17, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 3/17 entitled \"They should come back.\"  \"The 
bloody terrorist attacks in Madrid last week, the defeat of 
Jose Maria Aznar\'s Partido Popular in Spain, and the 
announcement by recently elected Spanish Prime Minister 
Rodriguez Zapatero that their troops will leave Iraq by June 
30 if the U.N. doesn\'t approve a resolution on the Iraqi 
occupation, confirm that everyone who opposed the first 
illegal and immoral `preventive war\', including EL HERALDO, 
were absolutely right, as well as all those who opposed the 
sending of Honduran troops to the Iraqi occupation.\" 
 
\"In many ways, the Honduran people have expressed their 
disagreement with the decision to get involved in the Iraqi 
conflict.  The disclosure of all those lies used by the Bush 
administration to justify the invasion and occupation has 
done nothing but confirm the fact that there were no valid 
reasons to destroy the cradle of human civilization and 
cause so much pain and suffering to the Iraqi people.\" 
 
\"The war in Iraq wasn\'t even about fighting terrorism, 
because, so far, no one has been able to prove any ties 
between Saddam Hussein and Osama bin Laden.\" 
 
\"On the other hand, Honduran troops shouldn\'t be expected to 
ensure public safety and help rebuild another country, as 
long as there\'s so much insecurity and so much to do here in 
our own country.\" 
 
\"The Maduro administration made a terrible mistake by 
sending Honduran troops to Iraq, and that needs to be fixed, 
before we seriously have something to regret by getting 
involved in a cause that\'s not fair, moral, legal, and, 
especially, not ours.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"15105","3/18/2004 14:34","04TEGUCIGALPA653","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000653 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, WHA/CAR, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON HAITI, MARCH 17, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 3/17 entitled \"Maneuvers.\"  \"In a similar situation to 
what has happened in Iraq, where a provisional government 
backed by Washington tries to handle a transitional period 
until they come up with a new government to take over after 
a harsh dictatorship, in Haiti the temporary government of 
Gerard Latortue, who until a few days ago was a radio 
announcer in Miami, tries to do whatever he can, with the 
support of 2,200 American marines, to stabilize Haiti.\" 
 
\"Although it is evident that the Americans overthrew the 
dictatorship in Iraq, there are doubts about how and why 
former Haitian President Jean Bertrand Aristide left his 
country.  The Americans argue that he resigned and left on 
his own and that they only provided a safe means of 
transportation for Aristide to leave.\" 
 
\"It\'s evident that, whoever finally becomes the President of 
Haiti would have a similar fate to Aristide if he doesn\'t do 
something to relieve Haiti from the extreme poverty it\'s 
going through.  Severe poverty and economic crises are a 
fertile territory for non-governance.  That\'s what needs to 
be addressed, to avoid undertaking maneuvers that only delay 
the inevitable crises.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"15108","3/18/2004 14:56","04TEGUCIGALPA654","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 000654 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO SARI, OFC/MCMANUS, STEFFICK, B. BROWN, 
P. BROWN, HUTCHISON, BOND, SENA, NTRM/BERGMANN 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO USMS WASH DC 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO NEW ORLEANS FD/ARKANSAS RO/ GS ROBERTS 
DEA MEXICO PLS PASS TO RD/HOLIFIELD, ARD/ORTEGA, DEA MEXICO 
CITY PLS PASS TO USMS ATTACHE 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: N/A 
SUBJECT: APPREHENSION OF US FUGITIVES TEDDY LEE FRENCH AND 
CHRISTOPHER FRENCH; GFTI-04-9154; HONDURAS 
CCX: FRENCH, TEDDY, KY-04-0004/WGA2L 
 
REF: A. TELCON BETWEEN GS ROBERTS/AKRO AND ACA RIOS/TCO 
        ON 2-18-04 
     B. E-MAIL REQUEST FROM CA RAY KELLY/BELICE CO ON 
        2-24-04 
 
1. (SBU) On March 10, 2004, U.S. Fugitives Teddy Lee FRENCH 
and Christopher FRENCH were apprehended by the Honduran 
National Police and Frontier Police at the San Pedro Sula 
International Airport.  Both Teddy Lee FRENCH and Christopher 
FRENCH were placed into the custody of Deputy U.S Marshals 
and returned to the United States for prosecution.  The 
details are as follows: 
 
2. (SBU) Based upon the above referenced telephone 
conversations and e-mail requests, A/CA Ivan Rios contacted 
the Director of Frontier Police and requested that 
surveillance be conducted at the airport in San Pedro Sula. 
On March 10, 2004, at approximately 5:00 a.m., members of the 
Honduran semi-vetted unit established surveillance at the 
airport attempting to locate Ted Leon FRENCH while the 
Frontier Police established a uniformed presence.  At 
approximately 6:30 a.m., S/A Rios observed Ted Leon French on 
the passenger line of the American Airlines ticket counter 
and notified the police of his presence.  At approximately 
7:00 a.m., Ted Leon French terminated his business at the 
ticket counter and proceeded to the airport tax collection 
counter where he was met by two males.  One male was later 
identified as Teddy Lee FRENCH and the other was a taxi 
driver.  All three subsequently walked to a Wendy\'s 
restaurant window located inside the airport.  At this point, 
the Frontier Police began conducting a random sweep of the 
airport with a K-9 dog.  It was apparent that the FRENCHs 
became visibly nervous as they maintained constant visual 
with the dog.  They later retrieved their food and walked to 
a table at the opposite side of where the K-9 patrol was 
located. 
 
3. (SBU) Subsequently, the K-9 was brought to the table where 
the FRENCHs were eating.  The police asked to review their 
documentation and they all complied.  Upon reviewing the 
paperwork, the police asked that they accompany the police to 
interview rooms for investigation.  Under Honduran law, the 
police are authorized to hold anyone for investigation at 
border locations.  The two FRENCHs were separated and were 
interviewed.  Teddy Lee FRENCH told the police he was a 
Honduran national born in Omoa, Honduras, but that he moved 
to the United States at a very early age.  He had recently 
returned to Honduras but, because he had been living in the 
U.S. for over thirty five years, he did not speak Spanish. 
Teddy Lee FRENCH had in his possession a Honduran drivers 
license (which is what he had shown the K-9 officer) and a 
Honduran passport, number B046138.  Both forms of ID 
identified him as Fernando GUARDADO-Guardado, born on 
February 17, 1962 in Omoa, Honduras.  The passport appeared 
brand new, practically without creases and had no immigration 
travel stamps in it.  Teddy Lee FRENCH continued to insist 
that the documents were real and that\'s who he was. 
 
4. (SBU) Ted Leon French was interviewed and asked 
rudimentary questions pertaining to his stay in Honduras to 
which he responded that he loved Honduras and was just 
visiting family that lived in Omoa and San Pedro Sula.  Ted 
Leon French (from henceforth referred to as Ted Leon) stated 
that Fernando GUARDADO was married to his step-daughter and 
had known him for approximately five years.  Ted Leon 
initially stated that GUARDADO lived in Omoa, but later 
stated that he lived in San Pedro Sula.  Ted Leon French 
claimed that he was returning to the United States to retire 
and would return in June to start constructing homes as a 
business and homes for his family.  Ted Leon also stated that 
he had another family member living in Honduras named Chris. 
When asked who he was, Ted Leon stated Chris was married to 
his other step-daughter.  When confronted with the fact that 
\"Fernando\" had a fictitious passport, Ted Leon stated he knew 
nothing of that.  When asked how well he knew Fernando, Ted 
Leon replied that he knew Fernando for about five years, but 
didn\'t know him well.  Ted Leon claimed that Fernando was 
Honduran by birth, born in Omoa, but that Fernando had moved 
to the U.S. when he was about five years old and that\'s why 
Fernando didn\'t speak much Spanish.  When asked if he was 
sure about his relationship to Fernando, Ted Leon responded, 
Yes, that Fernando was married to his step-daughter. 
 
5. (SBU) Ted Leon complied with a police request to open his 
brief case. Inside the briefcase was Ted Leon\'s birth 
certificate, numerous bottles of medications he needed for 
various ailments, many photographs of himself, Teddy Lee 
FRENCH and Christopher FRENCH with their families taken 
throughout various locations in Honduras and blank personal 
checks from two separate accounts at Peoples Bank belonging 
to Christopher FRENCH and Amanda FRENCH that were signed. 
All that was needed to endorse these checks were to add a 
name, date and a dollar amount.  From the photographs, Ted 
Leon identified Teddy Lee and identified Chris as the man 
that was married to his other step-daughter.  Ted Leon\'s 
passport had immigration stamps that showed he entered Belize 
by plane and then drove a vehicle through Guatemala on either 
February 2 or 3, 2004.  He then drove the vehicle into 
Honduras on February 04, 2004. The vehicle was identified as 
a 1997 Jeep Grand Cherokee.  When asked about this strange 
itinerary, Ted Leon responded that his step-daughter had 
become really ill with stomach trouble and, since she had a 
baby he traveled to Belize to help her.  She was flown to 
Mexico City and found to be all right  She then flew to 
Honduras.  Since they had left the vehicle in Belize, he 
helped transport it to Honduras.  Inside the briefcase was a 
paper with handwritten notes with the names Chris and Ted, 
phone numbers 504-658-9076, 504-434-4545 and Lin 
479-238-4303.  Also on the paper was a note with the 
following information:  Belize City Airport, Call Darwin 
August, 203-3252, 600-5824; Vehicle 1997 Jeep Grand Cherokee 
black, Vin, Map in glove box, redline to destination which is 
San Pedro Sula. 
 
6. (SBU) Also in the possession of Ted Leon (inside the 
briefcase) was a map of Honduras, a hand written letter, 2 
pages with hand written notes concerning construction 
equipment and supplies, a receipt from MegaTel dated February 
18, 2004 in the name of Fernando GUARDADO-Guardado for the 
purchase of a Motorola V66i cellphone, simm card and two 
prepaid cards.  There were also two money wrappers from Banco 
Ficensa, each stamped for fifty thousand Lempiras (local 
Honduran currency).  The total is equivalent to approximately 
six thousand dollars in U.S. currency.  In addition, there 
was a business card from a real estate company called Insol. 
On the card was a hand written marking indicating the 
location of a residence for Fernando at 23 Calle 50, # 1521, 
San Pedro Sula.  Subsequently, the police found that this 
address corresponded exactly with the address where the 
FRENCH\'s were living.  Ted Leon was later escorted to the 
airplane where he left for Miami, Florida without incident. 
S/A Rios notified GS Larry Roberts at the Arkansas RO to 
inform him of these facts. 
 
7. (SBU) Police then interviewed the taxi driver who was 
found to be in possession of a silver .38 caliber revolver. 
The driver was later identified as Luis Ernesto Leva-Rivera. 
Leva-Rivera admitted that he had been a driver for the 
FRENCHs for the past month and had transported them to many 
locations including Omoa, Puerto Cortes, Trujillo, Copan, 
Santa Rosa de Copan, and Lago Yojoa.  While on a trip to 
Trujillo, Fernando (Teddy Lee FRENCH) provided Leva-Rivera 
with five hundred dollars to legally purchase a gun from the 
armory.  Leva-Rivera would later carry the weapon to protect 
them.  Leva-Rivera purchased it legally and a week later 
purchased another one in the same manner.  The second weapon 
was maintained by Teddy Lee FRENCH at his residence. 
Leva-Rivera was told he would be arrested for his actions and 
at that point he agreed to cooperate.  Leva-Rivera stated he 
knew where the FRENCHs lived, that a boy named Chris, two 
women and a child were living at the house, and that he could 
take the police to the location.  S/A Rios suggested that 
since Christopher FRENCH was a fugitive it might be easier to 
lure him to the airport where he could be arrested under 
border entry laws.  The police agreed, gave Leva-Rivera 
instructions and followed him to the FRENCH\'s residence. 
Leva-Rivera arrived at the residence and told Christopher 
FRENCH that his grandfather (Ted Leon) had become ill at the 
airport.  Leva-Rivera then transported Christopher FRENCH to 
the airport where he was escorted by the police to a waiting 
area for investigation.  The police attempted to interview 
Christopher FRENCH, but he claimed he could not speak 
Spanish.  No identification was found on his person. 
 
8. (SBU) Police then returned to the FRENCH residence in an 
attempt to retrieve the weapon.  Karen French came out of the 
residence to greet the police but was uncooperative.  She was 
told that Christopher FRENCH had been detained for lack of 
identification and that the police needed to retrieve it. 
She entered the house but returned stating she could not 
locate it.  She asked for her husband Fernando.  When asked 
what was Fernando\'s last name, it took her approximately five 
seconds to think of it.  It was visibly obvious that she had 
a problem remembering it and then pronounced the name 
incorrectly.  Karen French was told that Fernando had false 
identification and that Chris had none.  If proper 
identification wasn\'t produced they would both be arrested 
and deported to the United States.  At that point, she began 
to cry.  She was then advised that the police knew there was 
a weapon inside the house that needed to be retrieved.  She 
initially declined, stating that the weapon belonged to the 
taxi driver and that she did not trust the police.  After 
some further conversation, Karen French agreed to allow the 
police to enter and take possession of the weapon.  The 
police then seized a black .38 revolver manufactured in the 
Philippines.  After further conversation and further attempts 
at deception, Karen French agreed to cooperate with the 
authorities for the sake of her family, providing the 
following statements over a course of several meetings: 
 
9. (SBU) Karen French stated that Teddy Lee FRENCH had to 
flee the United States because the cops in Arkansas were 
going to kill him, otherwise they never would have come to 
Honduras.  It all began several years earlier when Teddy Lee 
FRENCH\'s step-daughter notified the police Task Force that 
she was obtaining drugs from her step-father.  Karen FRENCH 
stated the step-daughters\'s statements were complete lies and 
the truth was that the step-daughter regularly received money 
from Teddy Lee FRENCH.  When Teddy Lee FRENCH realized she 
was using the money to purchase drugs, he stopped providing 
her with money.  The police then targeted him and eventually 
conducted a search warrant that didn\'t produce anything. 
Teddy Lee FRENCH went to trial and beat the charges, 
subsequently suing the police.  According to Karen French, 
Teddy Lee FRENCH won the law suit and was awarded a large sum 
of money.  The day before Teddy Lee FRENCH was to collect the 
settlement, the police conducted another search warrant 
because they couldn\'t allow the FRENCHs to make them look 
bad.  It was not clear when this occurred but Karen French 
stated that the police attempted to kill Teddy Lee FRENCH and 
conducted another search warrant on a location that had 
previously been searched with negative results.  At that 
point, Teddy Lee FRENCH and her son, Christopher FRENCH, were 
arrested.  They then fled in fear for their lives. 
 
10. (SBU) Karen FRENCH went on to say that they all had 
traveled in a Jeep Cherokee through Mexico into Belize.  They 
were allowed to remain in Belize for a short period of time 
on temporary tourist papers (S/A Rios believes she may have 
stated they were allowed to stay three days).  They all then 
took a boat to Honduras with the understanding that the 
Belizian government would not allow them re-entry into Belize 
if they were denied access into Honduras.  The boat ride was 
very rough and frightening.  Once in Honduras, they attempted 
to gain entry through Honduran Immigration but a man claiming 
he would assist them with their paperwork actually stole 
their identifications (i.e. drivers licenses).  Teddy Lee 
FRENCH then decided to obtain fictitious paperwork for the 
whole family. 
 
11. (SBU) During this conversation, the maid advised the 
police that another woman was in a room in the back of the 
house.  Police asked that Karen French bring the woman to the 
living room.  Karen French complied and shortly thereafter 
Amanda French walked to the living room carrying a small male 
child later identified as Chance Christopher French.  Amanda 
French was advised that her husband Christopher FRENCH was 
detained and would probably be deported.  Amanda French asked 
if she was going to be arrested.  She then stated that Chance 
was six months old and she did not want to be separated from 
him.  Both Karen and Amanda French stated they missed their 
homes in Arkansas and had only traveled to Honduras following 
their husbands.  When asked if she thought that traveling in 
a boat with such a young child (six months old) was too 
dangerous, Amanda French replied that it was and that it was 
the scariest thing she had ever done.  The police asked if 
Karen and Amanda French had any false documents.  Karen 
French replied that they did not because the man who was 
producing the Honduran documents had not completed them yet. 
Karen French stated she only wanted to do what was best for 
their husbands and their family.  The police originally 
wanted to arrest Karen and Amanda French and have immigration 
deport them.  S/A Rios asked if there was another way to 
accomplish this considering they were cooperating and had a 
child who would be displaced from the family.  The police 
agreed to forgo all charges if they agreed to exit the 
country as quickly as possible but this could only be 
accomplished if they all, especially/primarily Teddy Lee and 
Christopher FRENCH, agreed to sign waivers where they would 
voluntarily leave the country.  This would minimize 
intervention from immigration authorities, otherwise they 
would all have to be arrested and brought to trial to face 
illegal entry and deportation charges.  Both Karen and Amanda 
French immediately agreed. 
 
12. (SBU) The police met with Teddy Lee FRENCH and 
interviewed him.  Teddy Lee FRENCH claimed he was Fernando 
GUARDADO, born in Honduras and raised in the U.S.  Teddy Lee 
FRENCH was confronted with the fact that it was already 
confirmed that his paperwork was fictitious, that the police 
had already spoken to his wife and that he needed to stop 
lying.  Teddy Lee FRENCH then agreed to tell the truth and 
related the following: 
 
13. (SBU) Teddy Lee FRENCH stated that approximately in 1999, 
his step-daughter was buying and using drugs so he stopped 
providing her with money.  She became upset and notified a 
Task Force in Arkansas that she was obtaining drugs from him. 
 The police then conducted a search warrant that didn\'t 
produce anything.  Teddy Lee FRENCH beat the criminal charges 
and sued.  Teddy LEE FRENCH won the law suit and was awarded 
approximately four million dollars.  Sixteen hours before he 
was to collect the settlement, the police conducted another 
search warrant because they couldn\'t allow him to win and 
unsuccessfully attempted to kill him.  Teddy Lee FRENCH then 
showed S/A Rios and the police a series of scars he claimed 
were gunshot wounds.  The police then executed two more 
search warrants and charged him with having a Methamphetamine 
Lab.  Teddy Lee and Christopher FRENCH each made bond at 
one-hundred thousand dollars a piece.  Teddy Lee FRENCH 
posted twenty thousand dollars for himself and for 
Christopher FRENCH.  They were to return to post another 
one-hundred thousand dollars, but fled upon the advise of his 
lawyer. 
 
14. (SBU) Teddy Lee FRENCH and his family then traveled to 
Belize in a Jeep Grand Cherokee and then took a boat to 
Honduras.  The boat dropped them off in Omoa during a storm. 
Teddy Lee FRENCH stated his family was upset at him but there 
was nothing he could do.  It was unclear exactly when they 
met Saudy Javier REYES-Rodriguez, but they met him in Omoa 
where he offered to provide them with authentic Honduran 
documentation.  REYES-Rodriguez charged Teddy Lee FRENCH 
one-hundred twenty-five thousand dollars to provide them all 
with Honduran documents.  Over a period of time, 
REYES-Rodriguez took Teddy Lee FRENCH to various locations 
where he obtained different documents.  REYES-Rodriguez took 
Teddy Lee FRENCH to Omoa to get a birth certificate and a 
social security card (Honduran identity card) where it was 
done at a government office. They went to Puerto Cortes where 
the police and other workers photographed him and provided 
him with a drivers license.  They traveled to San Pedro Sula 
where Teddy Lee FRENCH was photographed and processed at the 
passport office by government workers.  REYES-Rodriguez and 
Teddy Lee FRENCH filled out all the applications at the 
office and obtained the authentic Honduran passport.  The 
same was subsequently done for Karen French.  Teddy Lee 
FRENCH was vague about whether Christopher FRENCH and Amanda 
had already gone through the process or were still preparing 
to do it.  REYES-Rodriguez also kept their vehicle (the Jeep 
Cherokee) at his home or office because REYES-Rodriguez did 
not want them driving it until he had obtained all the proper 
paperwork for it, including license plates.  Since meeting 
REYES-Rodriguez, the FRENCHs obtained a rental vehicle they 
used or had Luis Ernesto (Leva-Rivera) transport them by taxi 
(although REYES-Rodriguez frequently used the rental vehicle 
attempting to obtain their documents).  According to Teddy 
Lee FRENCH, REYES-Rodriguez works from an office in Omoa that 
has a green sign with the words Legal on it. 
 
15. (SBU) The U.S Embassy\'s Consular Section was advised of 
the situation concerning the family (U.S. citizens) and 
requested advice as to how to proceed so they could travel 
back to the U.S.  The Consular Section stated that Karen, 
Amanda, and the child needed to go to the Consulate in San 
Pedro Sula (SPS) to expedite their paperwork that would allow 
them re-entry into the U.S.  Considering the fact that one 
parent was awaiting deportation, it was imperative that a 
document signed by both parents granting the child to travel 
with one parent to the United States be brought to the 
Consulate in SPS immediately. The Embassy Consular Section 
then coordinated with the Consulate in SPS and arranged that 
it remain open to await the arrival of the agents and the 
affected family. 
 
16. (SBU) Teddy Lee FRENCH was advised that the police 
already knew he was a fugitive from the United States and 
that he would be deported.  Teddy Lee FRENCH stated he only 
wanted to do what was right for his family and agreed to 
leave the country voluntarily.  Teddy Lee FRENCH said he was 
prepared to face the challenges awaiting him in Arkansas and 
asked if he could speak to his son so as to convince him to 
also leave voluntarily. 
 
17. (SBU) The police briefly spoke to Christopher FRENCH and 
physically checked him, finding a tattoo on his back with the 
word FRENCH.  Christopher FRENCH was advised that the police 
already knew he and his father were both wanted in the United 
States, that the police had spoken to everyone in the 
household and that everyone was cooperating.  It was 
explained to Christopher FRENCH that he had the same two 
options that were given to his father and that his father had 
already agreed to leave the country voluntarily.  It was also 
explained that his family could be displaced and that the 
police were attempting to do everything possible to avoid 
that.  Christopher FRENCH was also told that he would need to 
write a letter granting Amanda French permission to obtain a 
passport for his son Chance French so they could travel 
together to the U.S.  Christopher FRENCH agreed and wrote the 
letter.  He then thanked everyone and the police proceeded to 
pick up Amanda French and her son. 
 
18. (SBU) The police picked up Amanda and Chance French and 
transported them to the Consulate in SPS where all the 
necessary documents were prepared to expedite the paperwork. 
The paperwork was turned over to U.S. personnel to hand carry 
to the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa for expedited processing. 
Amanda and Chase French were then transported back to the 
residence.  While transporting Amanda French back to her 
residence, she was told that she needed to contact the 
airlines to make reservations and find out which airlines had 
the most convenient route back home and the best prices.  At 
this point, Amanda French stated that she was afraid of 
flying home because she had never flown in a plane before. 
 
19. (SBU) Karen French subsequently provided S/A Rios and the 
police with a Honduran passport belonging to her and a 
briefcase belonging to REYES-Rodriguez.  The Honduran 
passport, number B046450 had her photograph and the name Ana 
Maria GONZALEZ-Ayala with Honduran identity number 
0503-2004-00117.  Karen French stated she never wanted it and 
that Teddy Lee FRENCH had obtained it for her because their 
identifications where stolen in Puerto Cortes.  She stated 
that they had traveled by bus to Puerto Cortes when their 
ID\'s were stolen.  When asked where she obtained the 
passport, Karen FRENCH stated that REYES-Rodriguez had taken 
her to the passport office and had all the paperwork and 
photographs done. 
 
20. (SBU) Inside the briefcase were some personal items and 
folders containing documents/applications used to obtain 
Honduran documents (like those obtained by Teddy Lee FRENCH). 
 One folder contained the applications and paperwork to 
process and obtain Honduran documents for Christopher FRENCH 
and Amanda French.  The paperwork included witness statements 
from Gabino Bautista (Honduran identity 1002-1941-00003), 
Alfonso Bautista (Honduran identity 1002-1934-00125) and 
Yolanda Zelaya who is the president of the Muchilena Village 
in Omoa.  The witness statements were stamped/notarized by 
Ana Franciasca Palna at the National Register of Persons, 
Municipal Civil Registry.  Christopher FRENCH\'s new identity, 
pending completion of the paperwork, would have been 
Christopher Charles GUARDADO-Gonzalez while Amanda French\'s 
new identity would have been Amanda Maria GONZALEZ-Ayala. 
 
21. (SBU) Amongst the personal paperwork that was found in 
the briefcase was a bank book from Banco de Occidente in 
Omoa, Cortes, account number 21-225-000852-5.  Interestingly, 
this account was open on June 17, 1999 and very small 
deposits are registered until February 4, 2004.  On February 
4, 2004, a fifteen-thousand dollar deposit was made.  The 
following day, a fifty-thousand dollar deposit was made.  On 
February 6, 2004, a fifty-two thousand dollar was withdrawn 
and then on February 20, 2004, another fifty-thousand dollar 
deposit was made.  This corresponds with the time frame in 
which the FRENCH\'s had recently arrived and the exact arrival 
time of Ted Leon French.  The aggregate one-hundred 
fifteen-thousand dollar deposit closely corresponds with the 
one-hundred twenty-five thousand dollars Teddy Lee FRENCH 
claims he gave REYES-Rodriguez.  Also found was paperwork for 
a sonogram taken of Ana Carolina REYES-Barahona on February 
23, 2004 at Centro Medico Litoral Atlantico in SPS.  Ana 
Carolina REYES-Barahona is believed to be the wife of 
REYES-Rodriguez. 
 
22. (SBU) The police later returned to the airport and 
notified Teddy Lee and Christopher FRENCH about the process 
that was taken on behalf of their family and advised them how 
they themselves would be processed.  The FRENCHs acknowledged 
that they understood and they were allowed to telephonically 
speak to their wives before being processed.  At 
approximately 9:00 p.m., the police transported Teddy Lee and 
Christopher FRENCH to Tegucigalpa where they were lodged at 
the Frontier Police Headquarters in the early morning hours 
of March 11, 2004. 
 
23. (SBU) On March 11, 2004, at approximately 1:00 p.m., 
Teddy Lee FRENCH and Christopher FRENCH were transported to 
Toncontin Airport where the Frontier Police handed custody of 
the FRENCHs to Honduran Immigration.  The A/RSO arrived at 
the airport to assist in the coordination between the 
Honduran authorities and the U.S. Marshals.  At approximately 
2:30 p.m., the U.S. Marshals Service arrived at the airport 
where Honduran Immigration handed them custody of both Teddy 
Lee and Christopher FRENCH.  The Marshals then processed them 
and prepared them for the return flight back to the United 
States on the Justice Prisoner Alien Transportation System 
(JPATS).  At approximately 3:12 p.m., the JPATS flight 
departed Honduras enroute to the U.S. 
 
24. (SBU) The TCO would like to extend a special thanks to 
everyone who provided the TCO with so much cooperation and 
coordination during this operation, especially the Arkansas 
RO, the Tegucigalpa and Belize RSO\'s office, the JPATS and 
Arkansas US Marshals, the Belize CO, the TAT, and, of course, 
our Honduran counterparts who worked hard and diligently to 
make this a success. 
 
24. (SBU) Pursuant to the DEA Agents Manual, section 6242.11, 
this TWX is submitted in lieu of a DEA-6. 
 
25. (U) Any questions regarding this cable can be directed to 
A/CA Ivan Rios or I/A John Domingue. 
 
 
INDEXING 
 
1. FRENCH, Teddy Lee - NADDIS - 5325915,  Aka. Fernando 
GUARDADO-Guardado.  Honduran passport number B046138. 
Honduran identity number 0503-2004-00116. 
 
2. FRENCH, Christopher Charles - NADDIS - 5718916,  Aka. 
Christopher Charles GUARDADO-Gonzalez 
 
3. FRENCH, Karen - NADDIS - 5731857,  Aka. Ana Maria 
GONZALEZ-Ayala.  Honduran passport number B046450.  Honduran 
identity number 0503-2004-00117. 
 
4. FRENCH, Amanda - NADDIS NEGATIVE.  Aka. Amanda Maria 
GONZALEZ-Ayala 
 
5. LEVA-RIVERA, Luis Ernesto - NADDIS NEGATIVE,  Honduran 
male.  Taxi driver/escort/security for Teddy Lee FRENCH and 
Christopher FRENCH. 
 
6. REYES-Rodriguez, Saudy Javier - NADDIS NEGATIVE.  DOB: 
March 18, 1964, Honduran male, Honduran ID Number: 
0503-1979-01254.  Provider of false documentation to 
fugitives Teddy Lee FRENCH and Christopher FRENCH.  Account 
Number: 21-225-000852-5 
 
7. BAUTISTA, Gabino - NADDIS NEGIATVE, DOB: December 30, 
1940, Honduran identity number: 1002-1941-00003. 
 
8. BAUTISTA, Alfonso - NADDIS NEGATIVE,  DOB: August 4, 1934, 
Honduran identity number: 1002-1934-00125 
 
9. ZELAYA, Yolanda - NADDIS NEGATIVE,  President of the 
Muchilena Village in Omoa, Honduras. 
 
10. PALNA, Ana Franciasca - NADDIS NEGATIVE,  Person signing 
witness statements at the National Register of Persons, 
Municipal Civil Registry. 
PALMER 
"
"15161","3/19/2004 18:59","04TEGUCIGALPA669","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000669 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, NEA/NGA, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MARCH 16, 2004 
 
1. Editorial on front-page corner of Tegucigalpa-based 
moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 3/16 entitled \"Mending 
errors.\"  \"As El Heraldo warned when it was decided to send 
troops, the continuing terrorist attacks and the 
announcement of the withdrawal of the Spanish troops from 
Iraq have shown that the government made a poor decision by 
sending Honduran troops to help the U.S. maintain their 
occupation in Iraq.  We wish this lamentable error could be 
mended as soon as possible.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"15164","3/19/2004 20:16","04TEGUCIGALPA671","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE52611","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/USOAS, WHA/PPC, WHA/CAR, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR IO/SHA (JBRACKEN) 
STATE PASS AID FOR DCHA/OFDA (JBORNS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PREF, PGOV, EAID, HA, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS UNABLE TO CONTRIBUTE TO HUMANITARIAN AID 
TO HAITI 
 
REF: STATE 52611 
 
PolCouns delivered March 17 reftel demarche on the need for 
humanitarian aid for Haiti to MFA Senior Advisor Policarpo 
Callejas.  Callejas said that the GOH was unable to 
contribute given its tight fiscal situation. 
PALMER 
"
"15168","3/19/2004 20:43","04TEGUCIGALPA672","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 000672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR INL, L, INR, WHA, WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
SOUTHCOM FOR GENERAL HILL 
JIATF-S FOR RADM SIROIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, PINS, PREL, MCAP, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: DRUG PLANE BURNED ON PROMINENT HONDURAN\'S PROPERTY 
 
REF: PIERCE E-MAIL 03/19/04 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco L. Palmieri 
for reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (U) On March 18, post received initial sketchy information 
involving the burned wreckage of a twin-engine aircraft in 
the area of Farallones in the Department of Colon on 
Honduras\'s north coast.  It does not appear that any aircraft 
actually crashed on March 18.  Upon further investigation, 
Post learned that the owner of the private property where the 
wreckage was discovered reported to the National Police on 
March 17 that an unauthorized plane had used a private 
airstrip on his property to land on March 16.  National 
Police responding to his report located the burned wreckage 
March 18.  The property owner reported that his guards had 
shot at the plane which then erupted into flames.  This 
version does not track with other information post has 
developed on this wreckage (see para. 2).  The only 
involvement of the Honduran Air Force (HAF) in this incident, 
which post has been able to confirm, is that the HAF did 
launch an aircraft to respond to an incoming air track March 
14.  The HAF reported no contact at all with this air track. 
 
2. (S/NOFORN) Post\'s JIATF-S TAT provided information to the 
HAF March 14 about a known drug trafficking flight with a 
1,000 kilo cocaine shipment from Colombia, which resulted in 
a fruitless air interdiction attempt.  Separately, a law 
enforcement source provided information that the aircraft 
successfully landed March 14 on the private property of 
Miguel Facusse, a prominent Honduran, who is one of the 
nation\'s wealthiest individuals, leading industrialist, and 
uncle of former Honduran President Carlos Flores Facusse. 
Sources informed the police that the aircraft successfully 
landed March 14 and its cargo was off-loaded onto a convoy of 
vehicles that was guarded by about 30 heavily armed men. One 
source claimed that the property\'s single caretaker was shot 
at and fled the scene. The aircraft was then burned on March 
14 during daylight hours near the runway.  According to a 
source, a bulldozer/front-end loader buried the wreckage on 
the evening of March 15. 
 
3. (C) Based on Miguel Facusse\'s March 17 report to the 
National Police (see para. 1), police interviewed several of 
his employees at the property and residents in the area.  It 
is clear that these witnesses were aware of what had happened 
but did not report it at the time to police authorities 
because they were afraid.  Facusse\'s property is heavily 
guarded and the prospect that individuals were able to access 
the property and, without authorization, use the airstrip is 
questionable.  In addition, Facusse\'s report obviously 
contradicts other information received from the law 
enforcement source about the actual date of the event and 
TAT\'s intelligence about the March 14 air track.  The source 
also claimed that Facusse was present on the property at the 
time of the incident.  Finally, there is absolutely no 
evidence to suggest that the HAF was involved in any way with 
the end result of this air track, except that Post finds it 
improbable that the HAF interceptor would not have been able 
to see an aircraft being burned on the ground. 
 
4. (C)  Of additional interest is that this incident marks 
the third time in the last fifteen months that drug 
traffickers have been linked to this property owned by Mr. 
Facusse.  In July 2003, a go-fast boat crashed into a sea 
wall on the same property and engaged in a firefight with 
National Police forces.  Two known drug traffickers were 
arrested in this incident and 420 kilos of cocaine were 
recovered.  Earlier in the year, another air track terminated 
at the same property and appeared to have used the same 
airstrip. 
PALMER 
"
"15226","3/22/2004 22:01","04TEGUCIGALPA688","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000688 
 
SIPDIS 
 
VISAS CLOK DELETION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS, CLOK (CANAHUATI YACAMAN MIGUEL FELIPE) 
SUBJECT:  REQUEST FOR DELETION FROM CLASS 
 
1. VISAS CLOK DELETION - 00001666 
 
2. NAME: CANAHUATI YACAMAN, MIGUEL FELIPE, DATE OF BIRTH: 
06OCT1954, GENDER: M, COUNTRY OF BIRTH: HOND, NATIONALITY: 
HOND,  CASE NUMBER: 761- 001/03106. 
 
3. PLEASE DELETE APPLICANTS P2I, VRVK AND 2I HITS. A RECENT 
DETERMINATION BY THE HONDURAN PUBLIC MINISTRY AND LOCAL 
COURTS HAVE ELIMINATED SUBJECT AS A PARTICIPANT AND 
PRINCIPAL IN THE BANHCRESER AND PLAN VITAL FINANCIAL SCAMS. 
THEREFORE POST NO LONGER HAS ANY BASIS FOR MAINTAINING THE 
INELIGIBLE LISTINGS AND RECOMMENDS THAT SUBJECTS VISA 
PRIVELEDGES BE REINSTITUED. 
 
PALMER 
"
"15308","3/24/2004 18:07","04TEGUCIGALPA704","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE51412","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000704 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/EPSC:DNOLAN 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/MST:TNISSEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, PREL, HO, UNCTAD, WTO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN VIEW ON UNCTAD IX 
 
REF: STATE 51412 
 
1.  EconOffs delivered reftel talking points to Melvin 
Redondo, Director of Trade Policy and Honduras\' Chief 
Negotiator for trade agreements, on March 17.  While Redondo 
was initially unaware of the draft UNCTAD document, he 
quickly appreciated its importance, and expressed agreement 
that a re-interpretation of the Doha mandate would not be 
desirable. 
 
2.  Redondo did not know who Honduras would be sending to 
the UNCTAD session.  He did say that it would probably be 
someone from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs rather than the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade, hence probably someone who 
is not closely acquainted with Honduras\' positions on 
international trade and the Doha agenda.  Redondo promised 
to examine the draft document and our proposal more closely, 
and look into arranging the participation of a Trade 
Ministry representative in the delegation.  We will report 
back to Washington any further response. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15309","3/24/2004 18:08","04TEGUCIGALPA705","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE50349","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000705 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT/ATP: BYODER AND AWINTON 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS USTR FOR MCOLON-PULLANO 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT SHUETE 
MANAGUA FOR APHIS ATTACHE SSMITH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, ECON, ETRD, AMED, TBIO, PGOV, HO, OIE 
SUBJECT: AVIAN FLU: HONDURAS STILL BANS POULTRY FROM TEN 
U.S. STATES 
 
REF: STATE 50349 
 
1.  SUMMARY: A new decree has renewed and slightly modified 
the ban which Honduras places on poultry exports from 
certain U.S. states, citing concerns of high-pathogenic and 
low-pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI and LPAI).  The decree 
implementing the ban was signed on March 5, but only brought 
to the Embassy\'s attention when EconOff delivered reftel 
demarche on March 12.  Three aspects of the GOH\'s position 
are particularly disturbing.  First, the selection of states 
subject to the ban seems to have been made arbitrarily, 
perhaps even accidentally.  Second, the GOH refuses to 
recognize any distinction between the high-pathogenic and 
low-pathogenic varieties of the disease, contrary to the 
guidelines of the World Organization for Animal Health 
(OIE).  And third, the GOH will give no clear guidance as to 
what evidence a state must present for the ban to be lifted. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  Even prior to the recent request for a demarche on the 
subject, the Embassy has been engaged with the Honduran 
authorities on the issue of unjustifiable restrictions 
against U.S. poultry exports.  In July 2002, the GOH 
declared a ban on poultry products from eleven states, 
citing concerns about LPAI and other poultry diseases. 
Throughout 2002 and 2003, APHIS representatives and USDA and 
Embassy officials communicated regularly with the GOH 
official in charge of the issue, Dr. Lizardo Reyes, Director 
of the National Agricultural Health Service (SENASA). 
Documents from APHIS updated Dr. Reyes on the measures taken 
to eradicate LPAI and other diseases in the states subject 
to the ban.  Finally in February 2004, Dr. Reyes verbally 
agreed to write a letter lifting the poultry ban.  Embassy 
officials were still waiting for the letter when reftel 
demarche request arrived. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
A New Ban, With a Revised List of States 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3.  On March 12, EconOff and the USDA Agriculture Specialist 
delivered reftel demarche to Dr. Reyes, echoing the points 
that APHIS and Embassy officials had been making for nearly 
two years.  Instead of presenting a letter lifting the ban 
that he had promised a month earlier, Dr. Reyes gave EmbOffs 
a copy of a decree that had been published on March 5, 
renewing the ban on poultry products, and slightly altering 
the list of states affected.  When pressed, Dr. Reyes 
acknowledged his earlier promise for a lifting of the ban, 
but declared that the discovery of HPAI in Texas in late 
February changed matters, and under the new circumstances 
the ban would remain. 
 
4.  The eleven states covered by the original 2002 ban were: 
Arizona, California, Connecticut, Maine, Nevada, New York, 
North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, and West 
Virginia.  The ten states covered by the new 2004 ban are: 
California, Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, New Jersey, North 
Carolina, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. 
Thus, two states, Delaware and New Jersey, have been added 
to the list, while three states, Arizona, Nevada and New 
York, have been dropped.  While Dr. Reyes mentioned other 
poultry diseases such as Newcastle disease in our 
discussion, the decree itself justifies the ban solely on 
the basis of outbreaks of avian flu in the states covered. 
 
5.  The addition of Delaware and New Jersey can be explained 
by the detection of LPAI in those two states in February, 
even though, according to international standards, the 
presence of LPAI does not justify trade restrictions.  More 
disturbing was the fact that Dr. Reyes did not seem to be 
acquainted with the contents of his own decree.  He was, for 
example, plainly unaware that the new decree had dropped 
three states which were previously forbidden from exporting 
poultry to Honduras (Arizona, Nevada and New York).  When 
asked why these three states were now considered acceptable, 
Reyes stated that there must have been a scientific reason 
for the decision, but that he did not have the information 
available at the time, and that he would send it to us as 
soon as possible.  (As of March 22, ten days later, we have 
received nothing.) 
 
6.  Furthermore, the continued presence of Virginia on the 
list of banned states is having a direct impact on potential 
U.S. exports to Honduras, as one U.S. company that we know 
of is actively interested in exporting poultry from 
Virginia, but cannot currently do so. 
 
----------------------------------- 
No Difference between LPAI and HPAI 
----------------------------------- 
 
7.  In response to the point that the OIE regards LPAI as a 
non-reportable disease that should not alter trading 
patterns, Dr. Reyes countered with fears that the low- 
pathogenic variety of the disease could develop into the 
high-pathogenic variety and said that, based on this 
possibility, Honduras would treat LPAI and HPAI equally.  He 
admitted that this was a \"unilateral\" decision which 
contradicts current OIE guidelines, but claimed that at the 
next General Session of the OIE International Committee (to 
be held in Paris in late May), the OIE will likely change 
its guidelines and eliminate the current distinction between 
LPAI and HPAI.  EconOff countered that, even if this were 
true, Honduras should be basing its trade restrictions on 
existing international guidelines, not rumors of possible 
forthcoming changes to those guidelines. 
 
8.  The Honduran policy of equal treatment for the low- 
pathogenic and high-pathogenic varieties of avian flu is not 
new.  Even before the recent decree, Honduran regulations 
have required that all poultry imports carry the following 
statement in the Remarks section of FSIS Form 9060-5: \"All 
fresh/frozen poultry meat, including mechanically deboned 
meat, comes from an area free of high or low pathogenic 
Avian Influenza.\"  Dr. Reyes stressed that, as Honduras is 
entirely free of both LPAI and HPAI, a less restrictive ban 
which would allow poultry from states with LPAI is a risk 
that Honduras cannot take. 
 
9.  Dr. Reyes further justified Honduras\' ban by presenting 
EconOff with copies of the official decrees from Mexico, 
which has banned poultry from the same 10 states as 
Honduras, and from Guatemala, which has banned poultry from 
16 states and the District of Columbia.  Dr. Reyes suggested 
that Honduras\' actions are in line with those being taken by 
many other countries as well.  He also cited examples of 
occasions on which the United States has maintained 
restrictions against countries with animal health problems, 
such as the case of BSE in Japan.  And he reminded EconOff 
that Honduras is not permitted to export poultry to the 
United States, despite Honduras\' assurance that the country 
is free of avian flu and other poultry diseases. 
 
---------------------------- 
The Way Forward: No Guidance 
---------------------------- 
 
10.  Dr. Reyes provided no guidance as to how a state can 
demonstrate that it is free of LPAI and thus be allowed to 
export poultry to Honduras.  Documents already presented to 
Dr. Reyes by APHIS, which outline the efforts taken to 
control and eradicate the disease, have apparently not been 
sufficient.  EconOff pointed out that in states such as 
Maine, Virginia and West Virginia, these efforts concluded 
in 2002, and there have been no further outbreaks detected 
in these states for nearly two years.  Dr. Reyes said only 
that \"a considerable period of time\" must pass for Honduras 
to be sure that avian flu has been fully eradicated from a 
state, but would not define this length of time. 
 
11.  Theoretically, since Arizona, Nevada and New York have 
been removed the list of states whose poultry is banned, 
other states could follow the same steps that these three 
states have taken in order to have the ban removed. 
Practically speaking, however, it seems that the three 
states were removed from the list by mistake, possibly by 
Honduras simply copying the list of states covered by 
Mexico\'s ban. 
 
12.  COMMENT: In the context of the CAFTA Working Group on 
SPS (sanitary and phyto-sanitary) issues, Honduras agreed to 
move to a systems approach, under which CAFTA countries 
would agree to accept the sanitary or phyto-sanitary 
measures of other CAFTA countries as equivalent to their 
own.  The CAFTA countries also committed to better 
coordination and communication on SPS issues.  While of 
course CAFTA has not yet entered into force, the GOH\'s 
current position on avian flu, coupled with the fact that 
this is not the first time the USDA office has been 
frustrated by Dr. Reyes\' habit of promising one course of 
action then doing the opposite, demonstrates that the GOH 
still has some way to go before the principles agreed to in 
CAFTA become a reality.  END COMMENT. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15310","3/24/2004 21:20","04TEGUCIGALPA707","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa542","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000707 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, EB, DS, AND INR 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, SOCI, ETRD, PINR, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT:  Popular Block Protests Presence of Honduran Troops 
in Iraq and Against U.S. Foreign Policy 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 542 
 
1.  The Popular Block (Bloque Popular-BP) pulled together a 
small and peaceful two-hour demonstration on March 20 at the 
Embassy to protest the \"War on Iraq.\"  The BP convoked its 
member labor unions, indigenous groups, affiliated leftist 
political party, the Democratic Union, student organizations, 
and human rights non-governmental organizations (NGOs). 
Despite the participation of at least nine different 
\"popular\" groups, the estimated turnout was below the 
organizers\' desired goal (although twice as large as previous 
protests.)  Embassy security officials estimated the crowd at 
about 300 people while local media reported its size at about 
1,000. 
 
2. The BP leader, Carlos H. Reyes, led the group\'s protest 
against Honduran President Ricardo Maduro\'s deployment of 
Honduran troops in Iraq and a wide range of other U.S. 
foreign policies, including the recently concluded Central 
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) and the presence of 
U.S. troops in Honduras (a hardy perennial for the BP.)  He 
called for the return of Honduran troops from Iraq and the 
departure of President Maduro from office, calling on Spain 
to take away Maduro and his \"gang\".  He also warned that the 
(terrorist) attacks in Madrid demonstrated the risks Honduras 
was incurring for making common cause with what he termed 
President Bush\'s invasion of Iraq. 
 
3. Reyes charged that in the era of globalization the U.S. 
was pursuing two ways of taking over the natural resources 
and wealth of poor countries - free trade agreements and war. 
He said that \"in the case of Iraq the (U.S.) applied a war 
policy but in Honduras and Central America it was using free 
trade agreements.\"  He then told the crowd that the BP called 
on the U.S. to end its military intervention in Iraq and its 
intervention in other countries around the world.  Other 
leaders reportedly called Presidents Bush and Maduro 
\"fascists\" and said they were the \"terrorists.\"  The BP also 
announced a petition campaign to gather signatures in 
opposition to ratification of the CAFTA by the National 
Congress. 
 
4. Comment:  This protest by the BP was only sparsely 
attended, included at least two buses of protesters for hire, 
and evinced very little substantive support by the broader 
Honduran political spectrum, despite public opinion polls 
that show that approximately 70 percent of Hondurans are 
opposed to the deployment of Honduran troops in Iraq.  The BP 
remains unable to motivate mass public protest against either 
the Maduro government\'s policies or U.S. foreign policy, and 
poses at this moment a minimal political threat.  End 
Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15354","3/25/2004 19:55","04TEGUCIGALPA715","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE44578","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000715 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS USTR FOR JWOLFE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS READY TO MOVE FORWARD ON FTAA, BUT FEELS 
SOMEWHAT SIDELINED 
 
REF: STATE 44578 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: EconOffs discussed reftel and the way 
forward on the FTAA with Honduran Director of Trade Policy, 
Melvin Redondo.  The GOH is committed to the negotiation of 
a high-quality plurilateral agreement within the FTAA, and 
supports using the next Trade Negotiating Committee (TNC) to 
move toward this goal.  However, GOH officials think that 
the main action in the FTAA negotiations is taking place 
without them, and as a result are focusing their energies on 
other areas, at least for now.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On March 17, EconOffs met with Melvin Redondo, 
Director of Trade Policy and Honduras\' Chief Negotiator for 
trade agreements, and discussed the points contained in 
reftel.  Redondo confirmed that Honduras is committed to 
negotiating a high-quality plurilateral agreement with the 
Group of 14, and supports using the April TNC in Puebla to 
move toward this goal.  However, Redondo also acknowledged 
that the FTAA is, at best, the GOH\'s third most important 
policy priority at the moment.  Honduras\' top trade 
priorities for 2004 are the WTO negotiations and the 
completion of the Central American Customs Union (see septel 
for a further discussion of these issues). 
 
3. (SBU) Redondo said that his office is preparing a goals 
paper, including a proposed safeguard mechanism to respond 
to agricultural subsidies, which should be ready for the 
April TNC.  However, he also expressed some frustration 
that, while countries were encouraged to put forth offers, 
very little negotiation of those offers in fact seems to be 
taking place.  Redondo was also concerned about continued 
ambiguity in the relationship that the FTAA will have with 
the large number of regional agreements that already exist, 
specifically mentioning CAFTA, the Costa Rica-Canada FTA, 
and the agreement among Mexico, Venezuela, and Colombia, 
among others. 
 
4. (SBU) Redondo expressed his strong disappointment that 
Honduras had not been invited to participate in the pre-TNC 
informal discussions held March 9-10 in Buenos Aires.  He 
pointed out that Costa Rica, which was included at Buenos 
Aires, was a part of the troublesome Group of 20-plus 
nations in Cancun, and that it was \"not consistent\" for the 
United States to have apparently drawn Costa Rica into its 
inner circle, leaving other Central American countries on 
the sidelines. 
 
5. (SBU) In a separate conversation on March 18, Vice 
Minister for External Trade Irving Guerrero echoed Redondo\'s 
view that Honduras is on the periphery of the FTAA 
negotiations.  According to Guerrero, Honduras \"is not the 
problem\" with the FTAA.  While Honduras is ready to move 
forward at any time, the real work that must be done is 
between the U.S. and the Mercosur countries.  Guerrero 
confirmed that he will attend the April TNC in Puebla. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15466","3/29/2004 22:53","04TEGUCIGALPA734","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 000734 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR H PASS TO CODEL BALLENGER 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, DRL/PHD, EB, AND CA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP, PREL, PGOV, PHUM, ECON, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR CODEL BALLENGER\'S VISIT TO 
HONDURAS, APRIL 12-13 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Post welcomes the visit of CODEL Cass 
Ballenger (R-NC, Chairman, House International Relations, 
Western Hemisphere Subcommittee) to Honduras April 12-13. 
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, a little over half way 
through his constitutionally mandated single four-year term, 
faces a difficult task leading a highly indebted poor country 
with numerous challenges.  Bilateral relations between the 
U.S. and Honduras are excellent; Honduras was the first 
country in the Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an ICC 
Article 98 Agreement with the United States.  Honduras\' 
support for the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) is steadfast 
and the Government of Honduras (GOH) has sent troops to Iraq 
in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Counterterrorism Cooperation 
---------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) Maduro is a solid supporter of the U.S. on GWOT. 
The GOH has responded quickly to all USG requests regarding 
terrorist threats and financing, although to date, no 
terrorist assets have been found in Honduran financial 
institutions.  Honduras is also the only country in the 
region, apart from Panama, to have signed and ratified all UN 
and OAS counterterrorism conventions and protocols.  Honduras 
has also been aggressive in upgrading port security and 
appears to be on track to comply with port certification 
requirements in the U.S.\'s Maritime Transportation Security 
Act by July 1, 2004. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Iraq and Other Key Foreign Policy Goals 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) The GOH is very supportive of USG foreign policy 
goals, including the reconstruction of Iraq.  In support of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), the GOH deployed some 370 
troops to the vicinity of An Najaf as part of the Spanish 
Brigade operating under the Polish Division.  These troops 
are currently scheduled to return to Honduras this July when 
Honduras\' formal commitment to OIF ends.  President Maduro 
announced on March 16 that he would not seek to extend this 
costly deployment for another year.  Central American units 
from El Salvador and the Dominican Republic are also serving 
under Spanish command.  In August 2003, CJCS GEN Myers and 
Secretary Rumsfeld visited Honduras, and in November 2003, 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretary Powell visited, to thank the GOH for its support of 
 
SIPDIS 
OIF.  Their visits were well received and provided important 
political support for Maduro\'s Iraq policy.  As in most of 
the region, the general public overwhelmingly opposes the 
Honduran deployment.  Honduras is also very supportive at the 
UN, sharing our views on resolutions covering such key issues 
as human rights, human cloning, and the Middle East. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Bilateral Political/Military Issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Honduras was the first country in the Western 
Hemisphere to sign and ratify an Article 98 Agreement with 
the United States.  Honduras now has a civilian Minister of 
Defense (MOD) and a Chief of the Joint Staff who heads the 
Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF). In January of 1999, the 
constitution was amended to abolish the position of military 
commander in chief of HOAF, thus codifying civilian authority 
over the military.  Civilian control over the HOAF is 
complete and civil/military relations are good.  This 
transition has resulted in greater transparency and fiscal 
accountability. The HOAF has a new focus on trans-national 
threats, including counterterrorism, narcotrafficking, and 
combating international criminal organizations.  The HOAF is 
interested in establishing an ability to further increase its 
participation in international peacekeeping operations. 
Honduras also stands ready to participate in a regional arms 
\"rationalization\" process, but has announced that it will not 
negotiate on a bilateral basis. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Soto Cano Air Base - Joint Task Force Bravo 
------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) About six hundred U.S. service men and women and 
fourteen civilian DOD employees are currently stationed at 
Honduras\' Soto Cano Air Base under the command of the 
Combatant Commander, U.S. Southern Command (SOUTHCOM) as 
Joint Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment and enables our military forces to continue to 
work together in such areas as disaster relief, joint 
training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
 
---------------- 
Counternarcotics 
---------------- 
 
6. (U) Honduras\' geography places it squarely in the middle 
of a major illegal drug trans-shipment zone, and the 
trans-shipment of cocaine through Honduras by air, land, and 
maritime routes continues.  However, this trade has now begun 
to face significant disruptions.  In 2003, overall seizures 
in Honduras were higher than the past five years combined and 
in 2004 Honduras has already seized over 1,500 kilos of 
cocaine. 
 
7. (SBU)  Corruption within the police, Public Ministry, and 
the judiciary remain a primary impediment to successful law 
enforcement cooperation.  However, the GOH has moved forward 
with the implementation of new units in support of the 
strengthened Money Laundering Law, which was passed in 2002. 
The National Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking 
(CNCN) has renewed its commitment to lead the country\'s 
counternarcotics efforts.  Available funds to implement a 
government approved master counternarcotics plan, though, 
remain severely limited. 
 
---------------- 
Border Relations 
------------------ 
 
8. (SBU) Honduras has border disputes with its three Central 
American land neighbors and its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  Its land and maritime 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
The Gulf of Fonseca on the Pacific coast has been a 
particularly difficult point.  A 1992 International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) ruling laid out a shared area of control in the 
Gulf of Fonseca and established the land border between 
Honduras and El Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow 
to implement the ruling.  In September 2002, El Salvador 
requested a revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling.  In December 
2003, the ICJ ruled against the Salvadoran appeal, bringing 
an end to the case.  The Organization of American States (as 
a neutral third party) is providing both nations technical 
assistance to help them implement the non-disputed elements 
of the ICJ\'s ruling. 
 
9. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.  In the past, the dispute has threatened to derail 
trilateral counternarcotics operations.  In 1999, Honduras 
provoked Nicaraguan retaliation when it signed a maritime 
treaty with Colombia recognizing the 15th parallel as its 
maritime border.  Nicaragua subsequently filed an ICJ case 
over the maritime border and more importantly in 1999 slapped 
a punitive 35 per cent tariff on Honduran goods.  This tariff 
remained in place until April 2003 despite a Central American 
Court of Justice ruling that it was illegal.  Only after 
Honduras responded with a retaliatory tariff, threatening 
Nicaraguan exports, did Managua rescind the tax. 
 
----------------- 
Economic Overview 
----------------- 
 
10. (SBU)  Honduras, with a per capita income of USD 950, is 
the third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere ahead of 
only Nicaragua and Haiti.  The economy is still growing 
(about 2.5 percent per year) but slower than the population 
growth.  Social indicators are improving, but two-thirds of 
all Hondurans live in poverty and average education levels 
are very low.  Historically, low world coffee prices have hit 
rural areas particularly hard (although they are now rising 
somewhat) forcing major cutbacks in planting, fertilizing, 
harvesting and investment.  Agriculture continues to 
contribute significantly to the economy, particularly the 
production of bananas, coffee, cultivated shrimp, melons and 
other fruits, vegetables, and grains. 
 
11. (SBU) The apparel assembly (maquila) sector grew 
dramatically in the 1990s, reaching peak employment in 2000 
of about 120,000 people.  Activity slowed after 2001 because 
of the U.S. economic slowdown in 2001-2002 and increased 
competition from Asia, but the sector appears to be 
rebounding since 2003.  While there has been some economic 
diversification (melons, cultivated shrimp, palm oil), there 
continues to be a large subsistence farmer population with 
few opportunities other than illegal immigration to the U.S. 
The Honduran government\'s desire to attract new types of 
foreign investment has been hindered by the stagnant economy 
and a wide range of investment climate/competitiveness 
problems. 
 
12. (SBU) Remittances from Hondurans abroad, particularly the 
U.S., continue to grow rapidly and have become the most 
important source of foreign exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras, 
largest trading partner.  The roughly 150 U.S. companies that 
do business in Honduras constitute the largest block of 
foreign direct investors.  After almost two years of 
negotiations, the Maduro Administration signed a Letter of 
Intent with the International Monetary Fund, which was 
approved by the IMF\'s Executive Board on February 26, for a 
new three-year arrangement for Honduras under the Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).  The IMF expects the 
GOH to reach its Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
completion point by 2005 with good PRGF implementation.  The 
Paris Club needs to negotiate HIPC interim relief for 
Honduras in April (a cancellation of 90 percent of the GOH\'s 
debt payments falling due during the period until completion 
point).  The GOH, along with its four Central American 
neighbors (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua) 
also recently signed the U.S.-Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA).  Maduro\'s team is hoping that CAFTA can 
serve as a catalyst to spur regional economic cooperation and 
integration. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
The Importance of CAFTA 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
13. (SBU) The Honduran government, along with El Salvador, 
Guatemala and Nicaragua, reached agreement on the terms of 
the U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) in 
December 2003; Costa Rica closed its negotiations in January 
and the Dominican Republic recently negotiated its market 
access chapters in March.  Honduras is hoping that the 
Central American countries will have a signing ceremony with 
President Bush in late May (once the required consultation 
period with the U.S. Congress is completed) and to begin 
national ratification shortly thereafter.  The Honduran 
government and private sector are concerned that election 
year politics in the United States may delay ratification by 
the U.S. Congress. 
 
14. (SBU) The CAFTA agreement is strongly supported by the 
Honduran private sector.  The CAFTA textile chapter is 
perceived as absolutely vital to the survival of the textile 
and apparel sector in Honduras after worldwide quotas are 
eliminated in 2005.  The CAFTA agricultural chapter is 
expected to liberalize agricultural trade gradually while 
protecting Honduran farmers from sudden disruptions caused by 
subsidized imports.  The agreement also will spur 
modernization in government procurement and services, and 
will help lock in the GOH\'s structural reforms in areas such 
as telecommunications.  Honduras is already seeing about $200 
million in new foreign investment as a result of CAFTA, just 
this year.  While the agreement will require some politically 
sensitive changes to legislation and there is a small, but 
vocal, leftist opposition led by the Popular Block, which 
includes NGOs, unions, and a leftist political party, 
Honduran ratification is expected to be relatively easy. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
15. (SBU) In 2000, the GOH initiated substantial judicial 
reforms intended to allow the Supreme Court to develop into 
an independent branch of power, unlike any of its predecessor 
courts since democracy was restored in 1982.  While the new 
court is pro-reform in orientation and has fought for its 
prerogatives, its performance of late, under the leadership 
of its President, Vilma Morales, has been a disappointment. 
There continues to be a high level of political manipulation 
in the court\'s proceedings and the issue remains open as to 
whether or not it can become a fully independent and co-equal 
branch of political power, consistent with the separation of 
powers provision in the Honduran Constitution.  The 
established political order is fighting that prospect with 
vigor.  In fact, the National Congress seized the political 
opportunity to introduce legislation that would amend the 
constitution to give itself the power to interpret the 
constitutionality of the laws it passes.  The Supreme Court 
ruled in May 2003 that the proposed amendment was 
unconstitutional, which sparked a tense confrontation between 
the Supreme Court and Congress.  The issue receded until 
recently when Congress passed a new amendment to the 
Constitution again granting Congress the right to interpret 
the constitutionality of laws it passes.  A legal challenge 
to this amendment is expected in the near future, although 
the amendment has yet to be printed in the official register 
(La Gaceta) and therefore is not yet law.  Judicial 
corruption remains an ongoing problem and the President of 
the Court has not acted decisively to root out and punish bad 
judges. 
 
---------------------------- 
Public Security/Human Rights 
---------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27, 2002, President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
intolerably high crime situation.  He deployed more than 
5,000 soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The 
public responded enthusiastically.  However, after initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides, continued at a high rate, 
although there is evidence that the murder rate has fallen in 
the last six months or so.  The U.S. is helping the Maduro 
government establish an anti-kidnapping unit, increase 
intake/training of police recruits, create a model tourist 
police force, boost its counternarcotics efforts, expand the 
frontier police, and improve prosecutional and forensic 
capacities.  The country\'s geographic position makes it an 
obvious strategic transit point for narcotics trafficking, 
alien smuggling operations, trafficking in persons, and other 
organized crime activities. 
 
17. (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults since 1998, have been a source of 
serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to take 
steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases.  Human 
rights groups regularly accuse former security force 
officials and the business community of colluding to organize 
\"death squads\" to commit these summary and arbitrary 
executions.  On April 5, 2003, 68 persons, 61 of them gang 
members, were killed in a violent incident at El Porvenir 
prison near La Ceiba.  Reports produced by the Public 
Ministry, a Special Commission of the Honduran National 
Council for Internal Security (CONASIN), and the Human Rights 
Commissioner put the blame for the vast majority of deaths on 
government security forces (police and military under police 
command) and nongang member inmate trusties. 
 
18. (SBU)  While Honduran labor law is deficient in some 
areas with respect to International Labor Organization core 
conventions, the main issue for the protection of labor 
rights, including freedom of association and collective 
bargaining, is the effective enforcement of existing laws. 
There are serious problems with child labor in several 
industries, particularly melon, coffee, and sugar cane (but 
not in the maquila sector), as well as in the informal 
economy, and trafficking in persons of women/children for 
commercial sexual exploitation in the U.S., Central America, 
and Mexico.  USAID and Peace Corps have both been involved in 
HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
--------------------------- 
Corruption and Rule of Law 
--------------------------- 
 
19. (SBU) Honduras remains one of the most corrupt countries 
in the Western Hemisphere and was recently ranked 106 out of 
133 counties surveyed by Transparency International, an NGO 
that tracks international corruption issues.  Only Ecuador, 
Haiti, and Paraguay scored lower in the Western Hemisphere. 
U.S. policy to combat endemic corruption has struck a nerve 
in Honduras, especially any mention of our visa revocation 
authorities.  Maduro has stated he is willing to address 
corruption, even if it will cost him political support within 
his party, but real achievements to date have been lacking. 
Of particular concern are individual judges and prosecutors 
who solicit and/or remain open to offers of bribes.  The 
Attorney General\'s office has been unwilling, or unable, to 
prosecute high-profile cases, with the notable exception of 
several sitting congressmen recently accused of drug 
trafficking and other offenses.  The selection of Ovidio 
Navarro as the new Attorney General was also a clear 
political move orchestrated by those with a direct interest 
in the status quo.  Given the scope of the problem, any 
public discussion about the country\'s pervasive corruption is 
a positive development. 
 
------------ 
USAID Programs 
-------------- 
 
20. The Central America and Mexico (CAM) Regional Strategy 
focuses bilateral and regional USAID investment on the three 
performance \"arenas\" of Ruling Justly, Economic Freedom, and 
Investing in People, and is closely aligned with the 
Millennium Challenge Account (MCA).  USAID supports the 
Ruling Justly objective by increasing the responsiveness and 
accountability of public institutions, while also building on 
successful municipal development programs to create better 
models for governance, justice reforms, and transparency and 
participation.  In the arena of Economic Freedom, there is a 
concerted focus on trade policy and preparations to ready 
Honduras\' participation in the CAFTA and FTAA.  USAID strives 
to bridge agricultural production in rural areas with 
relatively higher value processing and marketing enterprises 
in urban centers.  The integrated natural resource management 
program emphasizes sustainable land and water-use, 
biodiversity, and reduced disaster vulnerability.  Also, to 
support the Investing in People objective, the health program 
aims toward improving reproductive health, family planning, 
child survival, prevention of HIV/AIDS and other infectious 
diseases, and household food security.  Seeking a 
better-educated Honduran work force through expanded access 
at the pre-school, middle school, and upper secondary levels 
(grades 10-11) is done using alternative delivery systems and 
implementing the Centers for Excellence in Teacher Training 
(CETT) Presidential Initiative.  USAID is also assisting GOH 
efforts to develop quality education standards, testing, and 
evaluation. 
 
------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
21. (SBU) Approximately 800,000 Hondurans, both legal and 
illegal, live in the U.S., a fact that places immigration 
issues high on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of 
Honduras is 6.5 million.)  There is deep appreciation for the 
U.S.\'s extension of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) in the 
U.S. and interest in possible congressional action on the 
proposed Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief 
Act (NACARA), which would give immigration parity for 
Hondurans.  With approximately 11,000 American citizens 
residing in Honduras and many thousands visiting Honduras 
annually for tourism and business, American Citizen Services 
are a key part of the Embassy\'s work.  Since 1995, 35 
American Citizens have been murdered in Honduras.  There was 
not much progress on most of these cases until 2003, but 
there have now been 15 convictions in eight cases.  Some 
progress has been made on extradition cases involving 
American Citizens residing in Honduras who are wanted for 
felonies in the United States. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
22. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  The Peace Corps program, with more than 245 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission had a FY04 budget of USD 45 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula. 
PALMER 
"
"15506","3/30/2004 20:11","04TEGUCIGALPA738","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04GENEVA885","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000738 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN FOREIGN MINISTER TELLS AMBASSADOR GOH 
WILL BEGIN WORKING ON UNCHR CUBA RESOLUTION CO-SPONSORS 3/31 
 
REF: A. GENEVA 885 
 
     B. ZUNIGA/SBILLA/KELLY/PIERCE E-MAIL 3/26 (NOTAL) 
     C. STATE 68031 
     D. STATE 65652 
     E. STATE 62815 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 595 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
AMB Talks to Foreign Minister 
----------------------------- 
 
1. (C) Ambassador spoke March 29 with Honduran Foreign 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista to discuss Honduran actions 
to support their draft UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) 
resolution on Cuba (text in ref D).  Ambassador emphasized 
the need for the MFA to issue instructions to the Honduran 
Mission to Geneva to (a) actively support the Cuba 
resolution, and (b) seek the support of likely co-sponsors. 
Ambassador suggested several countries that the USG believed 
were likely co-sponsors (refs A, D and E).  The FM said that 
the MFA would issue instructions for its Geneva Mission, led 
by PermRep Benjamin Zapata, to seek co-sponsors beginning 
Wednesday, March 31. 
 
Cuban Ambassador Talks to Press; MFA Silent 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) The Cuban Ambassador to Honduras, Alberto Polanco 
Gonzalez, on March 27, urged the GOH not to support any UNCHR 
resolution on Cuba.  He announced the GOC\'s sharp criticism 
of the proposed resolution in a press release March 28. 
Polanco stepped up the criticism in comments March 29.  The 
MFA has made no comment on the resolution to the press, and 
Zapata told reporters that he had not received any 
instructions on the issue.  Polanco said that the GOC would 
be surprised if the GOH was the drafter of the resolution, 
noting the two countries maintained good relations.  The 
press articles have noted the GOC\'s medical assistance to 
Honduras, in the form of Cuban doctors and medical workers in 
Honduras and Honduran students in Cuba. 
 
First Lady\'s Trip to Cuba Appears to be Unrelated 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
3. (C) The March 28 - April 1 visit of First Lady Aguas Ocana 
de Maduro to Cuba appears unrelated to the GOH\'s UNCHR Cuba 
resolution.  As noted by USINT Havana (ref B), the First Lady 
was invited by the Cuban Women\'s Federation (Federacion de 
Mujeres Cubanas - FMC), a Communist Party mass organization. 
According to Honduran press reports, her visit was to seek 
assistance for centers for abused women and children.  The 
First Lady is active on women\'s issues and on behalf of 
street children and works closely with the Honduran Institute 
for Children and the Family (IHNFA). 
PALMER 
"
"15508","3/30/2004 23:47","04TEGUCIGALPA741","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN FM TELLS AMBASSADOR GOH WILL ANNOUNCE 
MARCH 31 ITS DECISION TO TABLE UNCHR CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. TRIVELLI/PIERCE E-MAILS 03/30 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 738 
     C. GENEVA 885 
     D. ZUNIGA/SIBILLA/KELLY/PIERCE E-MAIL 3/26 
     E. STATE 68031 
     F. STATE 65652 
     G. STATE 62815 
     H. TEGUCIGALPA 595 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Ambassador spoke March 30 with Honduran Foreign 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista to seek confirmation of 
Honduran Ambassador Mario Canahuati\'s statement to WHA Acting 
DAS Trivelli that the GOH would publicly announce its 
decision to table a UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) 
resolution on Cuba on March 31 (ref A).  The FM assured the 
Ambassador that on March 31 the MFA would announce its 
decision to table a resolution and issue instructions for its 
Geneva Mission, led by PermRep Benjamin Zapata, to seek 
co-sponsors. 
 
Only Criticism is from Cubans 
----------------------------- 
 
2. (C) The UNCHR Cuba resolution is not (at the moment) a 
political issue in Honduras.  There have been no statements 
by the opposition Liberal Party on this issue.  In fact, 
press coverage of this issue has been heaviest in the 
Nationalist-leaning newspaper \"El Heraldo.\"  The Cuban 
Ambassador to Honduras, Alberto Polanco Gonzalez, has been 
vocal in his criticism, and Post believes it is likely that 
the Popular Block will oppose the GOH\'s decision once it is 
announced. 
PALMER 
"
"15559","3/31/2004 23:28","04TEGUCIGALPA751","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA672","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SEIZES 700 MORE KILOS OF COCAINE; 2004 
TOTAL IS UP TO APPROXIMATELY 2,234 KILOS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 672 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 665 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 388 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 265 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) On March 30, Honduran authorities confiscated 
approximately 700 kilos of cocaine and arrested six 
individuals in the vicinity of Santa Cruz de Yojoa, near 
Puerto Cortes on Honduras\' Caribbean coast.  Police arrived 
in the area as the traffickers were in the process of 
preparing a false compartment in a Volvo van to transport the 
cocaine overland.  Apart from the some 125 kilos discovered 
in the van, a search of the property yielded another 
approximately 575 kilos. 
 
2. (C) Police were alerted to the situation through a 
confidential informant.  A high ranking official within the 
 
SIPDIS 
Ministry of Public Security speculated the cocaine may have 
come from the plane discovered March 18 burned and buried on 
the property of Miguel Facusse, a prominent Honduran 
businessman (ref A). 
 
3. (U) The names of the detained are: Darwin Ruben Diaz, 
Honduran, (25); Dennis Pineda Oriana, Honduran, (33); Pedro 
Guevara, Honduran (24); Sandy Suazo, Honduran, (24); Ruiz 
Rodriguez, Guatemalan, (34); and Pedro Ellias Sanchez, 
Guatemalan, (33).  The property is owned by Emilio Gama Liano 
Mejia and is rented to Darwin Ruben Diaz. 
 
4. (U) This seizure, combined with previous seizures (refs 
B-D) brings the total amount of cocaine seized in Honduras in 
2004 to approximately 2,234 kilos. 
PALMER 
"
"15560","4/1/2004 0:11","04TEGUCIGALPA752","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE34946|04TEGUCIGALPA67","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000752 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/AS NORIEGA, WHA/DAS FISK, WHA/CEN WAGNER, WHA/PPC 
ALAIN NORMAN FROM DCM ROGER PIERCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, KCRM, SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA\'S 90-DAY PLAN: FINAL STATUS 
 
REF: A. A) 03 STATE 34946 
     B. B) TEGUCIGALPA 00067 
     C. C) EMAIL LAURANCE/KELLY/NORMAN DATED 3/16/04 
 
Classified By: ROGER D. PIERCE, DCM, FOR REASON 1.5 (D) 
 
 1.  (U)  Please find requested status for Embassy 
Tegucigalpa\'s 90-day plan for the first quarter of 2004 (ref 
B) below. 
 
2.  (SBU)  Ensure selection of qualified Attorney General to 
support rule of law 
 
(C)  STEPS TAKEN:   Despite a coordinated Mission public 
diplomacy campaign, which included USAID funded public 
service announcement and a major policy speech by the 
Ambassador, and an intense diplomatic lobbying effort, which 
included private meetings with the President, Cabinet 
members, the President of Congress, members of Congress, the 
President of the Supreme Court, key members of the nominating 
selection committee, and other influential opinion leaders, 
including the Mayor of Tegucigalpa, the next Attorney General 
unfortunately does not meet the goal of being a fully 
respectable rule of law agent.  He does meet the legal 
qualifications for the position. 
 
(U)  FUTURE STEPS:  Continue to monitor new AG\'s performance. 
 Encourage his support for the rule of law and adherence to 
the highest ethical standards in performance of his 
responsibilities. 
 
(U)  STATUS:  A new AG was selected through the legally 
established process. 
 
3. (SBU) Negotiate & sign a Letter of Agreement (LOA) on 
narcotics/law enforcement 
 
(C)  STEPS TAKEN:   DCM met with Honduran Vice President, who 
chairs the Government of Honduras National Council for the 
Fight Against Drug Trafficking (CNCN), and concluded 
negotiations over the LOA\'s budget line items during third 
week of January.  POL/INL provided updated draft text of LOA 
language and its standard provisions to Vice President during 
last week of January.  Vice President reviewed LOA and did 
not respond with proposed revisions, including changes to INL 
standard provisions, until last week of February.  POL/INL 
and INL Bureau reviewed proposed changes and POL/INL has met 
twice with CNCN officer over these technical corrections. 
INL Bureau\'s has given final approval for the LOA text.  It 
is still, however, pending the Vice President\'s approval. 
 
(U)  FUTURE STEPS:  Obtain final approvals and arrange 
signing ceremony. 
 
(U) STATUS:   LOA is in final stage of negotiation and should 
be signed by the end of the month. 
 
4. (SBU)  IMF approval of Poverty Reduction & Growth Facility 
(PRGF) program 
 
(U)  STEPS TAKEN:  Ambassador, DCM, Econ Counselor, Pol 
Counselor, and AID Director  discussed with GOH and key 
members of Congress the importance of fulfillment of prior 
actions needed for IMF Board Approval of Honduras\' PRGF 
program. 
 
(U)  FUTURE STEPS:  Continue to monitor.  Encourage strict 
compliance with the agreed economic program. 
 
(U)  STATUS:  Completed.  Honduras did complete all prior 
actions listed in the IMF program and signed the Letter of 
Intent on the program on February 2, 2003 in the presence of 
the IMF\'s Anoop Singh and his delegation.  The IMF Board 
approved the program on February 18 and the World Bank 
approved it as well on February 26, along with the status 
report on the Poverty Reduction Strategy.  This puts Honduras 
back on track for possible HIPC completion point in February 
of 2005. 
PALMER 
"
"15583","4/1/2004 12:51","04TEGUCIGALPA756","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000756 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL/LP, WHA/PPC, PRM/PRP, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, SMIG, KWMN, KCRM, ELAB, ASEC, PGOV, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT:  EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA FY2004 ANTI-TIP BILATERAL 
PROJECT PROPOSAL 
 
REF: (A) Tegucigalpa 576 
     (B) State 28738 
     (C) State 7869 
 
1. As one of the focus countries for the President\'s 
Initiative to combat Trafficking in Persons (TIP) (ref B), 
Post is pleased to present an anti-TIP bilateral project 
proposal.  Post understands that several of the Mission\'s 
proposed anti-TIP activities in the areas of prevention, 
assistance to victims, and prosecution of TIP offenders will 
be under strong consideration for funding under the 
President\'s initiative. 
 
2. Post shares G/TIP\'s desire to produce immediate tangible 
results.  The best approach in Honduras - particularly with 
respect to effective prosecution of TIP offenders - would be 
to build on existing POL/INL and USAID criminal justice sector 
strengthening and training programs. 
 
3. At Post, POL/INL and USAID provide training to Honduran 
prosecutors and law enforcement on issues of priority to the 
U.S., such as drug trafficking, money laundering, alien 
smuggling, and extradition.  During the past four years, 
POL/INL helped the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
sponsor training, technical assistance, and conferences 
directed at combating alien smuggling and TIP.  Historically, 
POL/INL has directed training efforts toward prosecutors, 
investigators, and police at all levels in Honduras in the 
area of law enforcement investigations, and USAID has been 
responsible for the training of prosecutors and judges in the 
areas of prosecutions and trial methods.  In addition, given 
that trafficking in persons is a crime in Honduras (as is 
illegal migration), POL/INL should manage the law enforcement 
investigations training for this project. 
 
4. USAID has worked closely with the Honduran Attorney 
General\'s office providing significant technical assistance in 
the development of a new oral, adversarial criminal justice 
system under the new Criminal Procedure Code.  This work has 
been ongoing for the past four years and USAID has developed 
an excellent working relationship with the Public Ministry in 
the process.  Given this track record, USAID should be 
responsible for training prosecutors and judges on TIP- 
specific projects. 
 
5. USAID and the Public Affairs Section (PAS) should oversee 
any U.S. assistance to support a campaign that promotes public 
awareness in the Honduran context.  PAS has a wealth of 
established contacts in the Honduran media that are 
unsurpassed.  The Ambassador looks to PAS to take the lead on 
public information aspects of issues, such as TIP, in 
Honduras.  Moreover, PAS has successfully partnered with 
Honduran public institutions and NGOs in the past on similar 
projects.  USAID may also be able to contribute significantly 
to this campaign, as it has worked successfully with local 
NGOs on public information campaigns in the areas of anti- 
corruption and judicial reform. 
 
6. In summary, Post is convinced that a country-based and well- 
coordinated approach on TIP investigations, prosecutions, and 
a public awareness campaign is the key to helping Honduras 
develop a more effective, indigenous anti-TIP law enforcement 
and prevention strategy. 
 
7. Goal:  Post will provide a two-year project including 
training, technical assistance, equipment, and public 
awareness campaigns that will facilitate strengthened laws, 
institutionalization of a specific police investigative unit 
working in cooperation with prosecutors and judges focused on 
TIP and TIP-related crimes, and a more fully developed public 
awareness campaign that will help bring the justice sector and 
the NGO community closer together in this urgent fight against 
trafficking in persons. 
 
8. Objectives:  This project will provide for three equally 
important and intertwined objectives: the establishment and 
institutionalization of a Ministry of Public Security 
investigative unit that will focus solely on TIP and TIP- 
related crimes; the strengthening of laws that govern this 
type of crime (already underway by the GOH) as well as the 
capabilities of the prosecutors and judges to prosecute and 
convict perpetrators of TIP crimes; and a well-defined public 
awareness campaign that will reach the population that is most 
vulnerable to TIP crimes. 
 
9. Activities:  The Ministry of Public Security (MoPS - 
police) and the Public Ministry (prosecutors), as well as 
Post, have acknowledged a need to focus specific attention on 
TIP.  In furtherance of this acknowledgement, Post, through 
its INL program, proposes to provide training, technical 
assistance, and equipment to the Ministry of Public Security 
to strengthen a well-trained TIP investigative unit that will 
also work closely with POL/INL, DHS, and other U.S. law 
enforcement agencies in the investigation of TIP crimes. 
Training, technical assistance, and equipment will be provided 
by USAID to prosecutors and judges to form a countrywide group 
of prosecutors and judges that will work closely with 
investigators to prosecute TIP crimes.  USAID and PAS will 
work closely with Honduran NGOs and Honduran government 
agencies to expand and strengthen implementation of a national 
public awareness strategy. 
 
10. Timeline:  The project as a whole should be 
institutionalized and turned over to the Government of 
Honduras (GOH) in two years.  Using Post resources, POL/INL 
and PAS can begin providing training, technical assistance, 
and equipment within 30 days of receiving funds and USAID 
within 90 days of receiving funds.  It is estimated that this 
project as a whole will be completed within a two-year period 
if funding request levels are met. 
 
11. Sustainability:  At the completion of this two-year plan 
to strengthen the capabilities of the (GOH), the GOH will be 
expected to fund the infrastructure and necessary budget to 
insure continued success in the investigation and prosecution 
of TIP crimes.  The GOH has already demonstrated their 
commitment to this issue by providing adequate budget in the 
MoPS five-year strategic plan and budget for the Special 
Investigation Unit of the Frontier Police.  The Public 
Ministry continues to support its Organized Crime Unit, which 
is made up of prosecutors that have worked closely with 
POL/INL, DHS, and other U.S. agencies on TIP-related crimes 
and issues.  The assistance provided for a public awareness 
campaign would be sustained and continued through efforts by 
the GOH and NGOs, as well as other international donors. 
 
12. Performance Indicators:  This three-pronged project will 
produce strengthened capabilities of the investigative unit 
and prosecutors as well as the increased prosecution and 
cooperation with the U.S. on TIP-related crimes.  In addition, 
public awareness of this predatory crime will have reached 
many rural areas outside the major cities of Tegucigalpa and 
San Pedro Sula. 
 
13. Evaluation Plan/Process:  The three portions of this 
project will be discussed on a monthly basis at Post\'s 
Democracy Working Group.  In addition, on a quarterly basis, 
Embassy officials in charge of the three projects will meet 
with their Honduran counterparts to discuss and review 
statistics gathered on arrests, prosecutions, and reports of 
attempted TIP crimes to determine the level of activities 
being undertaken by the units receiving assistance under this 
project, as well as to discuss problematic areas and propose 
solutions to those problems.  In addition, annual inventories 
and end use monitoring of all donated equipment will be 
conducted by Post. 
 
14. Cost:  The cost estimate for the first year of this 
proposed two-year project is $800,000.00: 
 
Investigative support (POL/INL) 
 
a. Training $60,000 (including \"train the trainer\" training 
for investigators, as well as a field training program that 
will provide assessment of impact of classroom training and 
feedback on investigative techniques) 
 
b. Technical assistance and operational support 
$170,000 (in addition to the technical assistance and 
operational support that is already provided and ongoing by 
POL/INL, DHS and other U.S. law enforcement agencies, 
technical advisors specializing in specific TIP-related 
forensic, crime scene, investigative techniques, use and 
control of informants and information will be utilized.  In 
addition, services for mobile phones and satellite phones, as 
well as other operational support mechanisms, will be funded.) 
 
c. Equipment $90,000 (provide equipment used in the 
investigation of TIP-related crimes such as surveillance 
equipment, a small amount of vehicles, and a server-based 
computer system which can be connected to the current Honduran 
criminal information database.) 
 
Prosecutorial and Judicial Support (USAID) 
 
d. Training $ 170,000 (included will be TIP-specific \"train 
the trainer\" training for the Public Ministry and Supreme 
Court training departments, as well as TIP-specific training 
courses for prosecutors and judges based on Honduran laws.) 
 
e. Technical Assistance $130,000 (included will be TIP- 
specific technical assistance to facilitate the strengthening 
of laws and/or regulations that impact TIP crimes and 
prosecution.) 
 
f. Equipment $90,000 (the organized crime unit which will have 
a special TIP unit of prosecutors will be provided with a 
computer system that will enable them to access the criminal 
information database.) 
 
Public Awareness Campaign  (USAID and PAS) 
 
g. Training $40,000 (provide training seminars to reporters 
and NGO\'s in furtherance of the public awareness campaign 
against TIP-related crimes.) 
 
h. Technical Assistance $50,000 (provide funding and technical 
assistance to insure distribution of information and seminars 
to the population of Honduras, specifically to those who are 
most vulnerable to TIP crimes.) 
 
Palmer 
"
"15602","4/1/2004 20:12","04TEGUCIGALPA759","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 000759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/01/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS RELEASES TEXT OF UNCHR CUBA RESOLUTION; 
PRESIDENT MADURO EMPHASIZES IMPORTANCE OF DEMOCRACY 
 
REF: A. PALMER/LINDWALL/PIERCE E-MAILS 3/31 AND 4/1 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 741 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 738 
     D. GENEVA 885 
     E. STATE 68031 
     F. STATE 65652 
     G. STATE 62815 
     H. TEGUCIGALPA 595 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) Honduran Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista 
called Ambassador just prior to 11:00 a.m. to inform 
Ambassador that the MFA had released the text of the UN 
Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) Cuba Resolution.  The text 
was included in a press release that laid out the GOH\'s 
reasons for sponsoring the resolution.  The Honduran Embassy 
in Washington sent the press release, under cover of a 
diplomatic note, to WHA/CEN prior to the document being 
released.  The MFA subsequently faxed the press release to 
the Embassy.  Post will send an informal translation of the 
press release by septel. 
 
2. (S) Post had learned a short time earlier that, at 9:00 
a.m., the Director of Protocol at the MFA, Ambassador Ricardo 
Flores, who has traveled to Cuba on several occasions, had 
delivered the text of the resolution to Cuban Ambassador 
Gonzalez Polanco.  Gonzalez told Flores that Cuba viewed the 
resolution as a hostile act against Cuba, ordered by 
Honduras\' \"superiors.\"  He said the resolution represented 
interference in internal Cuban affairs, with no legal or 
moral basis.  He added that he was saddened by the language 
which the \"Yanquis\" had given to the Hondurans.  As Flores 
left, Gonzalez gave him three copies of the book \"The 
Dissidents.\"  There was no commentary on how the Honduran 
action would affect Cuban-Honduran bilateral relations. 
 
3. (C) Post understands that the GOH waited to issue the 
press release until after First Lady Aguas Ocana de Maduro 
had left Cuba at the conclusion of her March 28 - April 1 
trip to seek Cuban assistance for centers for abused women 
and children in Honduras. 
 
4. (U) When asked by reporters March 31 about whether or not 
the U.S. had asked Honduras to draft a resolution, President 
Ricardo Maduro stated that \"We are not talking about where a 
request originated, we are talking about certain principles. 
In the last two years, since my administration assumed 
office, I have been a very clear defender of democracy, 
political pluralism, and freedom of expression.  Hondurans 
feel profoundly proud of what we have done in the last 23 
years since the adoption of a new constitution in 1981, with 
respect to democratization and participation.\"  Maduro noted 
that the GOH for the last two years had supported UNCHR Cuba 
resolutions that had called on Cuba to receive a 
representative of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, 
something Cuba had yet to do.  \"This is what it is about, 
principles, democracy, and I will act based on that.  This is 
what I do internationally, what the country does, it is an 
extension of the principles which Hondurans live with 
internally and that we have fought for and will continue to 
fight for in the future, nothing more, nothing less.\" 
 
Criticism Expands from Cubans in Press 
-------------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) The Honduran press continued to report Cuban criticism 
of the GOH\'s actions.  After the GOH issued the press 
release, the GOH was sharply criticized by some TV and radio 
commentators.  Post will send septel reporting on media 
reaction in more detail. 
PALMER 
"
"15604","4/1/2004 21:39","04TEGUCIGALPA762","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000762 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, HO, AID 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAM - EFFECTIVE, GROWING, 
AND ATTRACTING PRIVATE SECTOR SUPPORT. 
 
1.  EconOff and intern attended a donation event on March 23 
at the Clarion Hotel, hosted by the United Nations World 
Food Program (WFP) and Clover Brand, a Honduran private 
corporation specializing in cooking oil and butter. Clover 
donated a sum of $335,200 for food products to the School 
Lunch Program in the department of Intibuca, in western 
Honduras, where malnutrition has reached 72% of the infant 
population.  This is the first sizable private company 
donation to the School Lunch Program in Honduras. 
 
2.  Representatives from the World Food Program and the GOH, 
including the Honduran Minister of the Presidency, Luis 
Cosenza, described the benefits of the school lunch program 
coordinated by the GOH and WFP in rural (and some urban) 
areas throughout the country.  The school lunch funding 
promotes improved school attendance by children from poor 
families, contributes to higher nutrition levels, and 
stimulates student attention.  In addition, about 500,000 
parents of children in departments benefiting from the Lunch 
Program have formed committees to prepare meals for 
children.  The WFP supplies school districts with food and 
products for preparation, including rice, corn, beans, and 
cooking oil, to cover basic nutritional standards. 
 
3.  Cosenza underscored the importance of the program and 
the GOH\'s appreciation for this new private sector 
involvement.  Before the Maduro administration, the Lunch 
Program only covered about 55,000 children and the WFP was 
not involved in the effort.  The GOH funding has expanded 
since Maduro took office in 2002 to 70% coverage of school 
districts, more than 600,000 children in 8,000 schools in 18 
departments.  Cosenza also noted that this donation by 
Clover to the school lunch program will benefit more than 
10,000 students in 120 schools of Intibuca for one year, 
which will work to reduce the high level of student dropouts 
in the area.  Another major priority of the program is for 
children to complete grade school.  To this end, the GOH is 
investing 240 million lempiras in the Lunch Program in 
Honduras, but is seeking more private sector donations to 
expand the program. 
 
4.  Comment:  The School Lunch Program is one of the most 
valuable poverty reduction projects in Honduras -- 
simultaneously improving school attendance, child nutrition, 
and cohesiveness in rural communities.  Intibuca school 
officials told us that school attendance has tripled since 
the institution of school lunches, and they are now 
scrambling to find the resources to add more classrooms and 
teachers to fill the demand.  However, the program is 
threatened by resource cuts.  The World Food Program in 
Honduras, as in other Central American countries, did not 
receive FY04 funding for school lunches because of cutbacks 
in U.S. McGovern-Dole appropriations.  GOH funds and private 
donations will only be able to fill a part of this gap.  End 
Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15608","4/1/2004 23:38","04TEGUCIGALPA766","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa759","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT:  TEXT OF HONDURAN PRESS RELEASE ON UNCHR CUBA 
RESOLUTION 
 
REF: (A) Tegucigalpa 759 
 
     (B) State 65652 
 
1. Below is Embassy\'s unofficial translation of the Honduran 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs press release on the UNCHR Cuba 
resolution, issued at 12:00 p.m. E.S.T. on April 1. 
 
2. Begin text: 
 
Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Republic of Honduras 
 
Press Communique No. 5 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations, hereby informs the 
following to national and international opinion, on its 
position as a member in the context of the United Nations 
Commission on Human Rights: 
 
  1. The actions of Honduras in the Human Rights Commission 
are based, and will always be based, rigorously in 
International Law, divested of ideological prejudice or 
political interests; 
 
  2. Cuba is a friendly country and Honduras maintains normal 
diplomatic relations with it as well as a high level of 
cooperation; 
 
  3. In this sense, Honduras, in exercising its sovereignty, 
has submitted to the mandatory control and jurisdiction of 
jurisdictional instances that monitor compliance with Human 
Rights, just as all Nations without exception should commit 
to; Honduras responds in total sovereignty as it pronounces 
itself with respect to these matters, within the framework of 
the United Nations Charter, being a fundamental aspect of the 
Charter in addition to the principle of Nations\' sovereign 
equality and the obligation of not threatening or using force 
in order to damage the sovereignty and territorial integrity 
of other Nations; 
 
  4. Taking into account all of the above, the Government of 
Honduras has submitted to the consideration of the Human 
Rights Commission the following draft resolution which has as 
its\' fundamental objective, the authorization on the part of 
the Cuban Government for a Representative of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to carry out her 
mandate in Cuba: 
 
\"The Commission on Human Rights, 
 
Taking into consideration its resolution 2003/12 of April  17, 
2003, 
 
Considering that in the aforementioned resolution the 
Commission urged the Government of Cuba to receive the 
Personal Representative of the High Commissioner of the United 
Nations for Human Rights and to afford all the necessary 
facilities so that she can fulfill the mandate established in 
the resolution 2002/18 of April 19, 2002, 
 
Conscious that compliance with human rights and fundamental 
liberties is an obligation inherent to all States in the 
framework of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations, 
 
  1. Expresses that the Government of Cuba like all other 
sovereign States, independent of the prevailing exceptional 
international circumstances which have obliged many States to 
intensify security measures, should avoid the adoption of 
measures which could threaten fundamental rights, freedom of 
expression and the right to due process of its citizens.  In 
this regard, laments the actions which occurred last year in 
Cuba in respect to sentencing of political dissidents and 
journalists, as has been reported by the international news 
media. 
 
  2. Expresses its hopes that the Government of Cuba will 
continue making an effort to strengthen religious freedom and 
that it will put into place measures with the objective of 
facilitating the transition toward the establishment of a 
fruitful dialogue with all the currents of thought and 
organized political groups in its society, despite the 
precarious international environment, with the objective of 
promoting the full development of democratic institutions and 
civil liberties. 
 
  3. Urges the Government of Cuba to cooperate, within the 
full exercise of its sovereignty, with the Representative of 
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, facilitating the 
fulfillment of her mandate, as other sovereign States must do 
in compliance with the purposes and principles which govern 
the Charter of the United Nations. 
  4. Decides to give further consideration to this subject in 
the Sixty-first session, under the same agenda item.\" 
Tegucigalpa M.D.C., April 1, 2004 
Directorate of Institutional Communication 
 
3. End text. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15655","4/2/2004 20:51","04TEGUCIGALPA778","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa715","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000778 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS USTR FOR JWOLFE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EAGR, PGOV, HO, WTO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN TRADE PRIORITIES: DOHA NEGOTIATIONS AND 
CENTRAL AMERICAN CUSTOMS UNION 
 
REF: A) Tegucigalpa 715 
 
     B) Tegucigalpa 704 
     C) State 6662 
     D) Guatemala 305 
 
1.  SUMMARY: The GOH\'s two top trade priorities for 2004 are 
progress in the WTO negotiations of the Doha Development 
Agenda (DDA) and the creation of a Central American customs 
union.  In the WTO negotiations, Honduras\' main concerns 
focus on agricultural market access, rather than 
agricultural subsidies or the Singapore issues.  In Central 
America, Honduras supports the completion of the regional 
customs union, but believes it will take several months to 
work out certain technical issues.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Top Priorities for 2004: WTO and Central America 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2.  On March 17, EconOffs met with Melvin Redondo, Director 
of Trade Policy and Honduras\' chief negotiator for trade 
agreements.  In addition to discussion of Honduras\' view of 
the ongoing FTAA negotiations (reftel A) and the upcoming 
UNCTAD XI session (reftel B), Redondo outlined Honduras\' 
priorities in regional and global trade negotiations for the 
coming year.  He stated that, as Honduras\' top trade 
priority in 2003 had been CAFTA, its focus in 2004 would be 
the WTO negotiations and the Central American customs union. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
WTO Negotiations: Agricultural Market Access is Key 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3.  Redondo acknowledged that the GOH has not yet formally 
responded to Ambassador Zoellick\'s January letter (reftel C) 
regarding next steps in the Doha Development Agenda.  He 
said that his office is still working on putting its views 
on the negotiations into a comprehensive response that can 
be discussed in detail.  However, he was supportive of the 
letter and appreciative of Ambassador Zoellick\'s efforts to 
advance the Doha negotiations in 2004. 
 
4.  The GOH\'s primary concern with the DDA is with market 
access for agricultural goods, and the formulation of a list 
of products that will receive special treatment.  Redondo 
pointed out that Honduras is unusual for a developing 
country, in having a maximum WTO tariff binding of only 50 
percent, and a tariff binding of only 35 percent on most 
products.  Redondo compared this to other countries with 
tariff peaks of 600 percent (he mentioned Kenya and India), 
and said that the Swiss Formula, designed with countries 
with higher tariffs in mind, would not be appropriate for 
Honduras.  Applying the Swiss Formula to Honduras, according 
to Redondo, would lead to a schedule of tariff reductions 
that the Honduran private sector would find unacceptable, 
and that would seem unfair, given the already low level of 
Honduras\' tariff bindings. 
 
5.  As in the CAFTA negotiations, Honduras hopes to be able 
to set aside a group of sensitive agricultural products for 
which tariff reductions will be negotiated differently. 
Redondo expects that a paper outlining the GOH position in 
greater detail will be ready for discussion by April.  The 
GOH believes that, with only Sri Lanka in a similar 
situation, an accommodation for developing countries with 
low initial bindings should be possible. 
 
6.  Redondo stressed that agricultural subsidies or domestic 
supports are not a primary concern of his government, nor 
are the Singapore issues; the agricultural market access 
issue described above is far more important.  Redondo said 
that Honduras is also working to build an offer on services 
that will lock in recent domestic liberalization of the 
telecom industry. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Central American Customs Union: Honduras Supportive 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
7.  The GOH\'s second major trade priority for 2004 is the 
establishment of a Central American customs union.  As 
discussed in reftel D, this project has received high-level 
political attention from the new administration in 
Guatemala, which in January announced its intention to open 
its borders with El Salvador by late April, with Honduras 
and Nicaragua to follow later in the year. 
 
8.  Redondo emphasized that Honduras supports the goal of a 
regional customs union and is actively engaged in this 
project.  Redondo stated that Honduras has acquired the 
image of the regional \"bad boy\" simply for being the one to 
point out some of the practical difficulties involved in the 
creation of a full customs union.  He stressed that the 
issue is not the presence or absence of border controls, but 
the technical details involved in the management of the 
customs union - specifically, administration of certain tax 
issues - which imply a concern over trade distortions and 
diversions. 
 
9.  Redondo discussed at length some of the difficulties in 
managing the differing tax systems of the countries 
involved: for example, applying Honduran sales tax to goods 
which originate in El Salvador, or vice versa.  (Note: while 
commonly called a sales tax, Honduras\' tax is in fact a 
hybrid of a sales tax and a value-added tax (VAT).  Tax is 
therefore levied not only at the point of sale, but also 
throughout the production and distribution process.  End 
note.)  Furthermore, Redondo stressed that, unlike Guatemala 
and El Salvador, Honduras exempts a sizable number of 
products -- mainly foodstuffs -- from the sales tax.  True 
tax harmonization across the region would imply either 
persuading other countries to exempt the same basic basket 
of goods from sales tax, or applying the sales tax to those 
goods in Honduras.  Neither is considered remotely feasible. 
 
10.  Setting aside the issue of tax harmonization, however, 
Redondo raised other examples of trading patterns which, 
under a customs union, would present \"difficulties\".  For 
example, if El Salvador has a trade agreement with Chile but 
other members of the customs union do not, would Chilean 
goods for the entire region simply enter the region via El 
Salvador and then be shipped throughout the region tariff- 
and tax-free?  Redondo also expressed concern over 
differences in sanitary and phyto-sanitary regulations among 
the various countries that would belong to the customs 
union, saying that Guatemala has declared itself to be free 
of certain poultry diseases, but implying that Honduran 
authorities have less than complete confidence in such 
declarations. 
 
11.  Redondo believes that, for Honduras, the technical 
questions can all be worked out so that Honduras could join 
by the end of the year.  He outlined a two-stage process. 
In stage one, Honduras would open up to all goods which 
satisfy a Central American rule of origin, and to all goods 
for which the tariff for countries from the rest of the 
world is zero.  In the second stage, Honduras would open up 
to goods originating from outside Central America, and those 
for which the different Central American countries have 
different tariffs. 
 
12.  In a separate meeting the following week, EconOffs also 
discussed the customs union with Marlene Urtecho, who is 
Assistant Director of Customs at the Honduran tax collection 
agency, the DEI (Direccion Ejecutiva de Ingresos).  Urtecho 
downplayed the difficulty of managing different internal 
taxes, saying that each country could simply impose its own 
taxes on products passing through its own territory. 
Instead, she focused on the revenue losses to Honduras that 
would likely accrue because importers of the five products 
for which Honduras has higher taxes than its neighbors 
(petroleum products, wheat, sugar, alcoholic beverages and 
ethyl alcohol) would transship these imports through 
neighboring countries to avoid the tax.  Honduras is not in 
a position to lower these taxes (particularly the fuel 
taxes), given the importance of meeting IMF fiscal targets. 
Like Redondo, however, Urtecho believes that these 
outstanding tax issues can be handled and expects that 
Honduras will belong to the customs union before the end of 
the year. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15664","4/2/2004 22:44","04TEGUCIGALPA781","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000781 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD, WHA/CEN, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KDEM, CU, OIIP, KPAO, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON RESOLUTION AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS 
VIOLATION IN CUBA, APRIL 2, 2004 
 
 
1.  Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 3/31 entitled \"Let it not be true\".  \"We hope 
that the claims of the Cuban government that Honduras has 
been designated by the U.S. to table a resolution to condemn 
Cuba for human rights violations isn\'t true.  We hope the 
Honduran government doesn\'t do the dirty work that no one 
else wants to do.\" 
 
\"It isn\'t just about the appreciation of Hondurans for the 
disinterested solidarity we\'ve received from Cuba.  It\'s 
just not fair that Honduras should be exposed once again to 
the international community as a servant of the U.S.  We\'ve 
already done too much by sending our troops to occupy Iraq 
with our own money, while we\'re still living in so much 
poverty.\" 
 
\"No Honduran would want to see our Ambassador in Geneva 
acting as an aggressor for hire.  We\'ve already gone through 
so much embarrassment in the past, as a result of the 
submissiveness of our authorities to the great empire.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 4/1 entitled \"Rumors\".  \"There is a rumor that the U.S. 
government has requested that Honduras sponsor a resolution 
condemning Cuba in the upcoming meeting of the U.N. 
Commission for Human Rights.  Up to this moment, the 
Honduran government hasn\'t said anything on this matter, 
neither has the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa, but we feel 
something will happen shortly.\" 
 
\"We don\'t think the government of President Maduro and the 
Nationalist Party will be able to undertake such a 
dishonorable task, no matter how valid or legitimate the 
grounds of that resolution might be.  We believe there are 
limits to which a country like Honduras can serve the U.S. 
interests.  We still think Hondurans have the highest sense 
of patriotism, dignity, and honor.\" 
 
NOTE:  President Maduro\'s nationally televised press 
conference was broadcasted on March 31 at night after the 
news cycle had ended and the paper had been sent for 
printing and distribution. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15666","4/2/2004 23:18","04TEGUCIGALPA782","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE68205|04TEGUCIGALPA642","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000782 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/RPM, PM/RSAT AND PMAT 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2014 
TAGS: MARR, PREL, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN RESPONSE TO MND-CS FORCE GENERATION 
CONFERENCE: POSSIBLY OPEN TO IRAQ EXTENSION 
 
REF: A. STATE 68205 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 642 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger Pierce; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) The Government of Honduras (GOH) has indicated 
publicly and privately that at this moment it does not/not 
plan to extend its troop contribution to Operation Iraqi 
Freedom (OIF) beyond its initial one-year commitment which is 
due to end in July.  The GOH, however, has never entirely 
ruled out continued participation in OIF (ref B).  Honduran 
CENTCOM liaison LT COL Betancourth told PolMilOff April 2 
that both Honduran Minister of Defense Federico Breve and 
Chief of the Joint Staff General Jose Isaias Barahona have 
hinted that Honduras would consider prolonging its commitment 
to OIF if the U.S. were to formally request Honduras\' 
continued participation.  These same sentiments have been 
expressed by others within the Honduran Military.  (Note: 
President Maduro has stated that he in under increasing 
political pressure regarding Honduras\' commitment to OIF and 
the deployment remains very unpopular among the general 
population.  However, sources within the Honduran military 
have indicated that Maduro\'s public comments were intended 
for a domestic political audience nervous about the prospect 
of a terrorist attack in Honduras following the terrorist 
attack in Madrid and should be viewed within that context. 
End Note) 
 
2. (C)  For contingency planning purposes, Honduras will send 
COL Francisco Guevera and LT COL Betancourth to Poland\'s 
April 6-8 force generation conference. 
 
3. (U) Note:  Post notes that because of official Holy Week 
holidays, April 6-12, any non-emergency contact with MOD 
Breve or CJCS Barahona will be very difficult.  End Note. 
 
4. (U) Minimize considered. 
PALMER 
"
"15723","4/5/2004 17:27","04TEGUCIGALPA787","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 2, 2004 
 
 
1.  Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 3/31 entitled \"Let it not be true\".  \"We hope 
that the claims of the Cuban government that Honduras has 
been designated by the U.S. to table a resolution to condemn 
Cuba for human rights violations isn\'t true.  We hope the 
Honduran government doesn\'t do the dirty work that no one 
else wants to do.\" 
 
\"It isn\'t just about the appreciation of Hondurans for the 
disinterested solidarity we\'ve received from Cuba.  It\'s 
just not fair that Honduras should be exposed once again to 
the international community as a servant of the U.S.  We\'ve 
already done too much by sending our troops to occupy Iraq 
with our own money, while we\'re still living in so much 
poverty.\" 
 
\"No Honduran would want to see our Ambassador in Geneva 
acting as an aggressor for hire.  We\'ve already gone through 
so much embarrassment in the past, as a result of the 
submissiveness of our authorities to the great empire.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 4/1 entitled \"Rumors\".  \"There is a rumor that the U.S. 
government has requested that Honduras sponsor a resolution 
condemning Cuba in the upcoming meeting of the U.N. 
Commission for Human Rights.  Up to this moment, the 
Honduran government hasn\'t said anything on this matter, 
neither has the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa, but we feel 
something will happen shortly.\" 
 
\"We don\'t think the government of President Maduro and the 
Nationalist Party will be able to undertake such a 
dishonorable task, no matter how valid or legitimate the 
grounds of that resolution might be.  We believe there are 
limits to which a country like Honduras can serve the U.S. 
interests.  We still think Hondurans have the highest sense 
of patriotism, dignity, and honor.\" 
 
Note:  President Maduro\'s nationally televised press 
conference was broadcasted on March 31 at night after the 
news cycle had ended and the paper had been sent for 
printing and distribution. End note. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15728","4/5/2004 20:52","04TEGUCIGALPA792","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA751","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SEIZES 122 MORE KILOS OF COCAINE; 2004 
TOTAL IS UP TO APPROXIMATELY 2,356 KILOS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 751 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 665 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) On April 3, Honduran authorities confiscated 
approximately 108 kilos of cocaine and arrested Luis Armando 
Juarez Pineda (46) at a make-shift check point police 
established at Bonito Oriental in the Department of Colon on 
the Caribbean coast.  The cocaine was discovered hidden in a 
false compartment of a truck.  An accompanying vehicle 
carrying three other passengers escaped.  Police also seized 
numerous firearms from the truck.  The operation was 
conducted by the Preventative Police and the Frontier Police, 
who have been cooperating in an unprecedented manner. 
 
2. (C) Police were alerted to the movement of the cocaine by 
a confidential informant.  There has been speculation that 
the April 4 execution-style murder of five individuals in San 
Pedro Sula is related to other recent cocaine seizures (refs 
A and B), although Post has been unable to confirm this. 
 
3. (U) In an unrelated incident, on April 1, local Tela 
police on Honduras\' Caribbean north coast seized another 14 
kilos of cocaine from a pick-up truck after its occupants 
tried to force their way through a roadblock by opening fire 
on the police.  The vehicle\'s four occupants escaped on foot, 
although three were later apprehended.  The identities of the 
detained individuals have yet to be released. 
 
4. (U) This seizure, combined with previous seizures (refs A 
and B), brings the total amount of cocaine seized in Honduras 
in 2004 to approximately 2,356 kilos. 
 
5. (U) According to Honduran press reports, another 188 kilos 
of cocaine were seized by Costa Rican authorities at a border 
check-point in Penas Blancas.  The cocaine was discovered 
sealed in a hidden compartment of a truck with Honduran 
license plates.  Post would appreciate any information that 
Embassy San Jose has on this seizure. 
PALMER 
"
"15729","4/5/2004 22:07","04TEGUCIGALPA793","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04GENEVA885|04STATE62815|04STATE65652|04STATE68031|04STATE74060|04TEGUCIGALPA595|04TEGUCIGALPA738|04TEGUCIGALPA741|04TEGUCIGALPA759|04TEGUCIGALPA766|04TEGUCIGALPA787","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000793 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PINR, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MADURO ADMINISTRATION SHARPLY CRITICIZED BY 
POLITICAL OPPONENTS FOR TABLING UNCHR CUBA RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. ALMAGUER E-MAIL 04/05 
     B. STATE 74060 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 787 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 766 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 759 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 741 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 738 
     H. GENEVA 885 
     I. STATE 68031 
     J. STATE 65652 
     K. STATE 62815 
     L. TEGUCIGALPA 595 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  President Ricardo Maduro and his 
Administration have come under tough criticism from political 
opponents and left-leaning nongovernmental organizations 
since the GOH publicly announced that it had drafted a UN 
Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba.  Much 
of this criticism was to be expected and the GOH\'s delay in 
announcing the resolution did not help matters.  Post expects 
this criticism to die down somewhat with the start of the 
Holy Week holidays.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) President Ricardo Maduro and his Administration have 
come under tough criticism from political opponents and 
left-leaning nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) since the 
GOH publicly announced April 1 that it had drafted a UN 
Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba. 
Critics have included opposition Liberal Party congressmen 
such as Ramon Villeda Bermudez and Omar Cerna, Liberal 
presidential candidate Mel Zelaya, and Nationalist \"Dark 
Side\" congressman Oswaldo Ramos Soto.  NGOs such as the 
Committee of the Families of the Detained and Disappeared in 
Honduras (COFADEH), the Black Fraternal Organization of 
Honduras (OFRANEH), the Association of Nongovernmental 
Organizations (ASONOG - which despite the name is not a large 
organization), as well as the Honduran medical students in 
Cuba, have all issued statements criticizing the GOH. 
 
3. (U) A common argument made by critics is that the GOH is 
in no position to criticize another country due to the 
serious human rights problems in Honduras, especially 
extrajudicial killings.  Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez made a 
veiled statement along these lines with respect to the GOH 
action when he criticized the GOH for looking at the speck in 
an another\'s eye while overlooking the plank in the their own 
eye.  The one-year anniversary of the April 5, 2003 violent 
incident at El Porvenir prison near La Ceiba when 68 persons, 
61 of them gang members, were killed and the lack of action 
to hold the 51 people (including police and military) found 
responsible by the Public Ministry has given opponents 
further ammunition.  Other arguments made by critics include 
castigating the GOH for criticizing a country that has been 
helpful since Hurricane Mitch hit in 1998 by providing 
doctors and educating medical students, calling the GOH as a 
U.S. lackey, arguing that the GOH sold out for Millennium 
Challenge Account (MCA) funds, and has faulting the 
resolution for not criticizing the U.S. detention of foreign 
citizens at Guatanamo Bay. 
 
4. (U) Honduran Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista has 
been the main GOH spokesman defending the Maduro 
Administration, with Minister of Government and Justice Jorge 
Ramon Hernandez Alcerro also giving a particularly strong 
defense (in a TV interview).  President of Congress Porfirio 
\"Pepe\" Lobo publicly supported the Administration and said he 
did not see why the resolution should cause a problem.  First 
Lady Aguas Ocana de Maduro, who returned from Cuba April 1, 
told reporters April 2 that Honduras was thankful for the 
assistance Honduras has received from Cuba.  She declined to 
comment on the UNCHR Cuba resolution issue, other than to say 
that she did not discuss political issues during her visit. 
A group of Hondurans in Miami (Hondurans United) supported 
the GOH\'s move and called for a tougher resolution. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  Much of the criticism of the GOH\'s action 
was to be expected given the ideological points of view 
and/or political interests of those criticizing the GOH.  The 
GOH\'s delay in announcing the resolution did not help 
matters, as it allowed the GOC to paint the GOH as being 
manipulated by the USG.  Post expects domestic criticism to 
die down somewhat with the start of the Holy Week holidays 
April 5.  End Comment. 
PALMER 
"
"15730","4/5/2004 23:12","04TEGUCIGALPA802","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000802 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 2, 2004 
 
 
1.  Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 3/31 entitled \"Let it not be true\".  \"We hope 
that the claims of the Cuban government that Honduras has 
been designated by the U.S. to table a resolution to condemn 
Cuba for human rights violations isn\'t true.  We hope the 
Honduran government doesn\'t do the dirty work that no one 
else wants to do.\" 
 
\"It isn\'t just about the appreciation of Hondurans for the 
disinterested solidarity we\'ve received from Cuba.  It\'s 
just not fair that Honduras should be exposed once again to 
the international community as a servant of the U.S.  We\'ve 
already done too much by sending our troops to occupy Iraq 
with our own money, while we\'re still living in so much 
poverty.\" 
 
\"No Honduran would want to see our Ambassador in Geneva 
acting as an aggressor for hire.  We\'ve already gone through 
so much embarrassment in the past, as a result of the 
submissiveness of our authorities to the great empire.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 4/1 entitled \"Rumors\".  \"There is a rumor that the U.S. 
government has requested that Honduras sponsor a resolution 
condemning Cuba in the upcoming meeting of the U.N. 
Commission for Human Rights.  Up to this moment, the 
Honduran government hasn\'t said anything on this matter, 
neither has the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa, but we feel 
something will happen shortly.\" 
 
\"We don\'t think the government of President Maduro and the 
Nationalist Party will be able to undertake such a 
dishonorable task, no matter how valid or legitimate the 
grounds of that resolution might be.  We believe there are 
limits to which a country like Honduras can serve the U.S. 
interests.  We still think Hondurans have the highest sense 
of patriotism, dignity, and honor.\" 
 
Note:  President Maduro\'s nationally televised press 
conference was broadcasted on March 31 at night after the 
news cycle had ended and the paper had been sent for 
printing and distribution. End note. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15731","4/5/2004 23:13","04TEGUCIGALPA803","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 2, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 4/3 entitled \"The resolution.\"  \"President 
Maduro and the Minister of Foreign Affairs have stated that 
in the Cuba affair Honduras is acting as a sovereign state, 
in accordance with the U.N. Charter.\" 
 
\"We\'re going to take their word on this issue, and we\'re 
assuming that the resolution only intends to encourage the 
Castro regime to admit a representative of the U.N. High 
Commissioner for Human Rights.\" 
 
\"The Cuban people, to whom we as Hondurans are grateful for 
their generosity and solidarity, shouldn\'t feel betrayed by 
Honduras.  On the contrary, they should take advantage of 
any opportunity to help them ensure their freedom, the most 
fundamental right of any human being.\" 
 
2. Op-ed by Ramon Villeda Bermudez (Liberal Party 
Congressman and member of the External Affairs Committee in 
Congress) in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 
4/3 entitled \"The Passion of Castro.\"  \"As we approach Holy 
Week, the government has finally acknowledged that it will 
table an initiative, which isn\'t ours, to stick our nose 
into Cuba.\" 
 
\"There\'s an evident duality in a government where the 
President allows his wife to ask for assistance from the 
same government he\'s condemning.  Although I\'m not 
sympathetic to Fidel Castro and his regime, I\'m aware that 
the Honduran people are very grateful for the aid we\'ve 
received from Cuba.\" 
 
\"Looking at the wording of the resolution, the proposal 
looks fine, expressing its concern with the human rights 
situation in Cuba, which is good.  However, other experts 
have seen this `initiative\' as another attack by the U.S. on 
the Castro regime, using another puppet.\" 
 
\"We all want Cuba to comply with respect for human rights, 
but we also want the government of the National Party to 
respect the dignity of all Hondurans.\" 
 
\"This year, the obedient Honduran government has replaced 
the Passion of Christ with the Passion against Castro.\" 
 
3. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" on 
4/3 entitled \"Congressmen outraged by resolution to condemn 
Cuba.\"  \"Some Congressmen expressed their indignation and 
outrage as a result of the Honduran resolution against Cuba. 
National Party deputy Oswaldo Ramos Soto said, `I\'m 
surprised by this attitude: I\'ve talked to deputies of other 
parties and they don\'t agree with the decision of the Maduro 
administration.  I\'m just another Honduran and a 
Nationalist, but I don\'t agree with the position of my 
party\'.\" 
 
\"Liberal Party deputy Omar Cerna said, `I\'m outraged by what 
the government is doing.  we should go out on the streets to 
protest against the government\'s ominous external policy by 
getting involved in issues of other countries\'.\" 
 
4. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
on 4/3 entitled \"Honduras hasn\'t asked for a condemnation of 
Cuba.\"  \"In a joint press conference with the President of 
Congress Porfirio Lobo, President Maduro said, `Our proposal 
doesn\'t condemn Cuba, it\'s only a resolution to request that 
Cuba admit a representative from the U.N. Commissioner for 
Human Rights, as we have done twice before.  we aren\'t 
trying to insult a government that has been a friend to us 
for quite some time\'.  Lobo said, `There\'s nothing wrong 
with the resolution. I think Cuba should admit a 
representative of the U.N..  Honduras hasn\'t betrayed Cuba, 
which has an opportunity to show its compliance with respect 
for human rights\'.\" 
 
5. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
on 4/3 entitled \"First Lady Aguas Ocana received only 
support and appreciation in Cuba.\"  \"After returning from an 
official visit to Cuba, First Lady Ocana abstained from 
making any comment on the political tension between Honduras 
and Cuba.  She said, `We appreciate the help we\'ve gotten 
from Cuba.  they were very open to our requests, and they 
plan to help us to establish new shelters for abused women 
and children\'.\" 
 
6. Article in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
on 4/4 entitled \"Resolution was written in Spanish.\" 
\"Leonidas Rosa Bautista, Honduran Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, said, `The text of the resolution was written in 
Honduras.  we wrote it in the Spanish of Cervantes, and it 
was later translated into English, and that has led the 
Cuban government and others to believe that the U.S. gave it 
to us\'.\" 
 
7. On 4/4, the Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
published an interview with the Minister of Government and 
former Ambassador, Jorge Ramon Hernandez Alcerro, in which 
he said, `The Maduro government has had a consistent foreign 
policy in support of the protection of human rights, 
considering our own principles and goals.  the government of 
Honduras will defend the freedom of people in Honduras, 
Cuba, or anywhere in the world\'.\" 
 
8. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 4/4 entitled \"ASONOG criticizes Honduran position on 
Cuba.\"  \"In a press release, ASONOG, a Honduran NGO, 
criticized the Honduran government for presenting a 
resolution on Cuba, saying that, `The Honduran state doesn\'t 
have a moral right to demand respect for human rights from 
Cuba, when it\'s been unable to resolve the internal problems 
related to poverty which affect almost 80% of the Honduran 
people, denying them their utmost human right: their right 
to lead a life with dignity\'.\" 
 
9. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" on 
4/4 entitled \"Tense relationship between Honduras and Cuba\". 
\"About 600 Hondurans, who have been granted a scholarship 
from the Cuban government, released a public letter saying 
that, `we\'re proud of being Hondurans, but we\'re ashamed by 
the unscrupulous decision taken by our president.  Maduro 
has betrayed our country, because he went against the will 
of most of our people, selling our dignity for a few dollars 
more\'.\" 
 
10. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 4/5 entitled \"Hondurans in the U.S. pleased with Honduran 
resolution to the U.N.\"  \"In a letter to President Maduro, 
the Miami-based organization of Honduran immigrants in the 
U.S., Unidad Hondurena, said, `The resolution should be more 
vigorous, and it should ask for the immediate release of 
more than a hundred political prisoners.  It\'s a step in the 
right direction, but it won\'t be that effective if we don\'t 
make a strong condemnation of human right violations of the 
Castro regime\'.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"15732","4/5/2004 23:31","04TEGUCIGALPA804","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE74537","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000804 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/RSAT AND PM/PMAT 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
JOINT STAFF FOR INMA COALITION AFFAIRS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN RESPONSE TO JAYSH AL-MAHDI VIOLENCE 
AGAINST COALITION IN IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 74537 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Post delivered reftel demarche to Honduran Minister of 
Defense Federico Breve (MOD) and to Vice Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Anibal Quinonez on April 5.  MOD Breve had already 
contacted Deputy Chief of Mission earlier that day to request 
that the U.S. provide his office with more/better information 
concerning the recent developments in/around the Najaf area 
of Iraq.  DCM told Breve that he would provide more 
information as it became available.  MOD also stated that 
contrary to recent Honduran press reports, no Honduran 
soldiers have been reported injured in the latest round of 
violence.  MILGP is coordinating with CENTCOM on how to 
respond to Breve\'s request. 
 
2. (U) Minimize considered. 
PALMER 
"
"15770","4/6/2004 19:22","04TEGUCIGALPA810","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000810 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 6, 2004 
 
1. Op-Ed by regular columnist Juan Ramon Martinez in 
Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 4/6 entitled 
\"Why do you offend us Presi Maduro?\"  I\'m more surprised 
than Oswaldo Ramos Soto (National Party ) and more indignant 
than Omar Cerna (Liberal) because of the position of 
subordination that Honduras has shown toward the U.S. 
objectives in Cuba. 
 
\"It is not a matter of principles nor a fight in favor of 
democracy, neither, a matter of defending Cuba\'s style or of 
government not to celebrate inclination of Castro to 
maintain power\". 
 
\"If Honduras has decided as a sovereign power to obligate 
Cuba to respect the human rights of its citizens - by now, 
all us would be supporting the government\'s decision, but 
things are different.  According to the information, not a 
single country of the hemisphere accepted President Bush\'s 
order\" 
 
\"Presi\' Maduro was urgently called by Powell who ordered him 
to do it so - neither the President of El Salvador who was 
Bush\'s nominee for the OAS wanted to take such an 
embarrassing position. `The Presi\' of Honduras, as expected, 
agreed in tabling the resolution with enough knowledge of 
the risks of opinions that he has to undertake; but for 
sure, this task would let him have access to the millennium 
account\" 
 
 
2. Op-ed by regular collaborator Victor Manuel Ramos in San 
Pedro Sula-based liberal \"Tiempo\" on 4/6 entitled: \"Oil 
street lamp\" Our governments again, are protagonist in an 
action that is hundred percent against the thought and 
feelings of the Hondurans\" 
 
\"It is interesting to know that this resolution tabled to 
the UNCHR has been written in Washington, and not precisely 
in the Honduran Embassy in that country but in the offices 
of the North American government.  The Honduran Foreign 
Affairs Minister looks more as a north American employee 
than Honduran- according to his statements and his 
perception, he thinks we all are stupid and do not know the 
truth\" 
 
3. National Television news program Telenoticias on April 
5th carried an interview with former Foreign Minister Carlos 
Lopez Contreras who is now an advisor of the current Foreign 
Minister in which he said: \"The United Nations Commission on 
Human rights has had this issue on its agenda for two years. 
The commission asks for an investigation commission be sent 
to Cuba to examine human rights abuses. No one should be 
surprised that the United States is interested in this issue 
of human rights and that the Cubans have set up obstacles to 
the investigation of the United Nations.\" 
 
4. Note:  Today\'s dailies ran a wire service article \"United 
Stated trusts that Latin American countries would support 
the resolution against Cuba in Geneva. End note. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15773","4/6/2004 21:37","04TEGUCIGALPA811","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000811 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, EB/TPP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR WCLATANOFF 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ECON, ETRD, PHUM, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  Honduras Announces New Minimum Wage - Nine Percent 
Raise for Most Workers 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 560 
 
1. After long and contentious negotiations, on April 1, the 
Government, the private employers\' association (COHEP), and 
the three labor confederations announced they had agreed upon 
a raise in the minimum wage effective immediately.  Unlike 
past years when the raise was backdated to January, this 
year\'s raise is not retroactive.  The revised daily minimum 
wage scale is broken down by sector and by size of business: 
small (1-15 workers) and large (16 or more workers).  The 
scale ranges from 54.7 lempiras (USD 3.04) per day for workers 
in small agriculture to 89.7 lempiras (USD 4.99) per day for 
workers in financial/insurance companies and workers in export- 
oriented businesses (including maquilas and certain commercial 
agriculture such as tobacco, coffee, bananas, and seafood). 
Workers in such areas as construction, services, mining, 
transportation, communication, etc. have minimum wages in 
between these two rates. 
 
2. The minimum wage scale in 2003 ranged from 48.85 lempiras 
to 82.3 lempiras per day.  This year\'s raise was approximately 
12 percent for workers in small agriculture, but approximately 
nine percent for most other workers.  Inflation was 
approximately 7.7 percent in 2003 according to the Central 
Bank. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15775","4/6/2004 23:01","04TEGUCIGALPA813","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000813 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 6, 2004 
 
 
1. Op-Ed by regular columnist Juan Ramon Martinez in 
Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 4/6 entitled 
\"Why do you offend us `Presi\' Maduro?\"  I\'m more surprised 
than Oswaldo Ramos Soto (National Party) and more indignant 
than Omar Cerna (Liberal) because of the position of 
subordination that Honduras has shown toward the U.S. 
objectives in Cuba. 
 
\"It is not a matter of principles nor a fight in favor of 
democracy, neither, a matter of defending Cuba\'s style or of 
government nor to celebrate Castro\'s desire to maintain 
power\". 
 
\"If Honduras had decided as a sovereign power to obligate 
Cuba to respect the human rights of its citizens - by now, 
all us would be supporting the government\'s decision, but 
things are different.  According to the information, not a 
single country in the hemisphere accepted President Bush\'s 
order\" 
 
\"Presi\' Maduro was urgently called by Powell who ordered him 
to do it - not even the President of El Salvador who was 
Bush\'s nominee for the OAS wanted to take such an 
embarrassing position.  The `Presi\' of Honduras, as 
expected, agreed to table the resolution with enough 
knowledge of the risks of opinions that he has to undertake; 
but convinced this task would let him have access to the 
millennium account\" 
 
2. Op-ed by regular collaborator Victor Manuel Ramos in San 
Pedro Sula-based liberal \"Tiempo\" on 4/6 entitled: \"Oil 
street lamp.\" \"Our government again is a protagonist in an 
action that is one hundred percent against the thought and 
feelings of the Hondurans\" 
 
\"It is interesting to know that the resolution tabled to the 
UNCHR has been written in Washington, and not precisely in 
the Honduran Embassy in that country but in the offices of 
the North American government.  The Honduran Foreign Affairs 
Minister looks more like a North American employee than 
Honduran- according to his statements and his perception, he 
thinks we all are stupid and do not know the truth.\" 
 
3. National Television news program Telenoticias on April 5 
carried an interview with former Foreign Minister Carlos 
Lopez Contreras, who is now an advisor to the current 
Foreign Minister, in which he said: \"The United Nations 
Commission on Human rights has had this issue on its agenda 
for two years. The Commission has asked that an 
investigation commission be sent to Cuba to examine human 
rights abuses. No one should be surprised that the United 
States is interested in the issue of human rights and that 
the Cubans have set up obstacles to the investigation by the 
United Nations.\" 
 
5. Note:  Today\'s dailies ran a wire service article \"United 
States trusts that Latin American countries will support the 
resolution against Cuba in Geneva.  End Note. 
 
Palmer 
"
"15905","4/12/2004 18:27","04TEGUCIGALPA819","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03Tegucigalpa2939","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 000819 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR TERRORIST FINANCING TASK FORCE 
TREASURY ALSO FOR OTA:JANTONOVICH 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/ESP, S/CT, INL/LP, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, PTER, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, PGOV, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras\' Fight Against Money Laundering: A Good 
Start 
 
REF: (A) 03 Tegucigalpa 2939 
 
     (B) 04 Tegucigalpa 729 
     (C) 04 Tegucigalpa 381 
 
1. (U)  Summary and Action Request:  Two years after passing 
a new law against money laundering, the GOH has made 
considerable progress in implementing the law and 
establishing the entities responsible for the investigation 
and prosecution of financial crimes.  The USG, through the 
Department of Treasury\'s Office of Technical Assistance, has 
supported this process by aiding in the establishment of the 
Financial Information Unit (FIU), providing day-to-day 
assistance with investigations and case management, and 
training members of the investigative and judicial branches 
of government.  The Treasury advisors have been generally 
impressed at the speed with which Honduras has implemented 
the law.  While these efforts are beginning to show results, 
with over a hundred money laundering cases under 
investigation and over USD 3 million worth of assets seized, 
sustained progress will depend upon increased commitment 
from the GOH to prosecute financial crimes aggressively. 
 
2. (SBU) The Honduran FIU wishes to become a member of the 
Egmont Group, the international group of recognized FIUs.  A 
plan for Spain to sponsor the Honduran FIU for membership in 
2004 has fallen through, and the Director of the Honduran 
FIU has asked if the USG would be willing to sponsor the 
Unit for Egmont Group membership in 2005.  Action request 
(see also paragraph 22): Post requests input from agencies 
in Washington as to the appropriate response to this 
request.  Post\'s Treasury advisor believes that Honduras\' 
FIU is very close to meeting the requirements for Egmont 
membership.  End Summary and Action Request. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
3. (U) In February 2002, the Honduran Congress passed new 
anti-money laundering legislation, replacing a law whose 
narrow definition of money laundering made it virtually 
impossible to successfully prosecute the crime.  The law, 
which entered into force on May 15, 2002, called for the 
establishment of two new government entities: one to collect 
and analyze financial information, and another to manage 
seized assets resulting from investigations.  The law also 
requires the coordination of these new units with two 
existing units in two other ministries.  Work to establish 
and equip these units began soon after the law was passed, 
and after some initial start-up problems, they are working 
together fairly effectively (see reftel A and previous). 
 
---------------------------------- 
Anti-Money Laundering Institutions 
---------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) The 2002 law established a Financial Information Unit 
(FIU), analogous to FinCEN in the United States, for the 
collection and analysis of suspicious financial 
transactions.  Institutionally and physically, the FIU is 
located within the National Banking and Securities 
Commission (CNBS).  The Unit currently has a staff of six 
analysts and a director who reports directly to the 
President of the CNBS. 
 
5. (U) Actual prosecution of money laundering crimes is the 
responsibility of the Office of the Special Prosecutor for 
Organized Crime (FESCCO), which is under the Public Ministry 
(analogous to the U.S. Department of Justice).  The 2002 law 
requires that a public prosecutor from FESCCO be assigned to 
the FIU for investigation of financial crimes.  In practice, 
this arrangement has evolved over time.  In 2002, a 
prosecutor from the Public Ministry was assigned to the FIU 
full-time.  In 2003, the Public Ministry changed this 
arrangement so that there were four prosecutors assigned to 
the FIU, each on a part-time basis, with responsibility for 
specific cases divided among them depending on their 
expertise.  This has since been reduced to two prosecutors 
who visit the FIU together twice a week.  The current 
arrangement seems to be working to the satisfaction of both 
parties. 
 
6. (U) In its investigation of possible financial crimes, 
FESCCO also coordinates with the Office of Special 
Investigative Services, or DGSEI, which is part of the 
Ministry of Public Security. 
 
7. (SBU) The final institution involved is the Office of 
Seized Assets, or OABI, within the Public Ministry.  The 
2002 money laundering law established this office to guard 
and administer \"all goods, products or instruments\" of a 
crime.  However, the actual process of establishing and 
equipping this office to carry out its function has been 
slow.  The implementing regulations governing OABI were not 
finalized until March 2003, and plans to build separate 
offices and a warehouse for the group are still incomplete, 
with the result that seized assets are currently kept in 
various locations under dispersed authority.  The press has 
reported that seized money under OABI\'s control has been 
used to pay the salaries of Public Ministry employees. 
Consequently, the Office of Seized Assets cannot yet be said 
to have established firm control over the asset seizure and 
forfeiture process. 
 
---------------------------------- 
The Process, and its Weakest Links 
---------------------------------- 
 
8. (U) The process for investigation and prosecution of 
financial crimes is as follows.  Banks and other non-bank 
financial institutions are required to send the FIU 
information on all transfers exceeding USD 10,000 or 500,000 
lempiras (about USD 28,000), or other atypical transactions. 
The FIU receives over 2,000 reports per month of 
transactions over the designated threshold, and is required 
to keep a registry of reported transactions for five years. 
 
9. (U) Twice a week, public prosecutors from FESCCO visit 
the FIU to examine their findings.  When the prosecutors 
from FESCCO identify a case that warrants further 
investigation, they pass the case to the investigators in 
the DGSEI.  This process can also operate in the opposite 
direction: that is, cases can be initiated by the DGSEI, 
brought to the attention of prosecutors from FESCCO, who 
then enlist the assistance of the FIU in collecting and 
investigating the financial records related to the case. 
 
10. (U) Either way, prosecutors from FESCCO, armed with the 
information from the FIU and the results of the DGSEI\'s 
investigations, can apply for a warrant to seize assets or 
funds identified as having been obtained through illicit or 
unlawful means.  Seized assets are turned over to OABI for 
safekeeping until a judicial hearing determines whether they 
should be permanently seized. 
 
11. (SBU) What are the weakest links of this process?  First 
and foremost, the FIU offices are not physically located in 
a safe and secure area.  Sensitive financial information 
about potentially criminal transactions is handled and filed 
in an area to which other employees of the CNBS have free 
access.  Despite urgings from three successive Treasury 
Department advisors, plans to move into a more secure 
location have been delayed due to budgetary reasons. 
However, a move is expected to occur in the latter part of 
April.  A lack of resources also means that the FIU has 
little capacity to check up on financial institutions to 
ensure that they are truly reporting all of the suspicions 
transactions that they are required to under the law. 
 
12. (SBU) In addition, the investigative capacity of the 
DGSEI officials could be considerably improved.  At present, 
some of their investigations are little more than 
perfunctory document checks, as many of the investigators 
have little knowledge of financial crimes and hence a poor 
sense of how to actively investigate such cases. 
 
13. (U) Despite these problems, it appears that the various 
government entities listed above have now worked out most of 
the kinks in their interagency relationship, and are working 
well together and communicating more effectively among 
themselves. 
 
14. (SBU) Above all, a successful fight against money 
laundering is hindered by a lack of high-level commitment to 
the prosecution of crimes committed by wealthy or well- 
connected Hondurans, and in particular by the weakness of 
the Public Ministry.  As the Ambassador and DCM have pointed 
out to senior GOH officials on several occasions (most 
recently reftel B), the Public Ministry has over a hundred 
open investigations into cases of money laundering, and has 
yet to produce a single conviction.  As any chain is only as 
strong as its weakest link, so the fight against money 
laundering and other financial crimes will only be as 
effective as the weakest institution involved in the 
process. 
------------------------------ 
USG and Other Donor Assistance 
------------------------------ 
 
15. (U) USG assistance has supported the implementation of 
the law, establishing the entities which the law requires, 
and improving the efficiency of day-to-day operations within 
these entities.  Beginning shortly after the passage of the 
law, consultants from the Department of Treasury\'s Office of 
Technical Assistance have been providing training sessions 
to the various groups listed above. 
 
16. (U) In August 2002, Treasury advisors held an initial 
seminar for judges, prosecutors, police investigators, 
Banking Commission officials and bank compliance officers. 
During 2003, training was more focused on specific groups, 
as Treasury advisors provided specialized training for 
roughly 80 Honduran judges, for members of the DGSEI and 
another police investigative unit, as well as regular 
periodic assistance to the FIU and the prosecutors at 
FESCCO.  Treasury advisors also assisted as the FIU provided 
training to bank compliance officers under the auspices of 
the National Association of Banks of Honduras (AHIBA). 
 
17. (U) Currently, the Treasury advisor accompanies the 
prosecuting attorneys from the Public Ministry to the FIU on 
their twice-weekly visits.  A second round of training for 
approximately 60 judges is also being planned for April, 
after which over 80 percent of Honduran judges, and all of 
those most likely to hear money laundering cases, will have 
received the training in money laundering and financial 
crimes.  Advanced investigative training and mentoring has 
also been scheduled for the latter part of April for DGSEI 
officials. 
 
18. (U) In addition to the assistance provided by the 
Treasury Department, INL funds go to strengthen the GOH 
agencies engaged in the fight against money laundering in 
various ways.  Through INL assistance in the form of 
computer equipment and technical assistance, the DGSEI Money 
Laundering Investigative unit has been able to work in a 
task force situation with prosecutors from FESCCO to 
identify and focus on strong money laundering cases. 
 
19. (U) Other donors are also supporting the GOH in this 
area.  In June 2003, the World Bank approved a seven-year, 
USD 9.9 million Financial Sector Technical Assistance 
Credit, which includes measures to support the fight against 
money laundering and the financing of terrorism.  This 
component of the Credit aims to provide training, and 
possibly equipment such as computers and software, to the 
FIU and other anti-money laundering entities within the GOH. 
The Treasury advisor and EconOff met with World Bank 
officials in mid-2003 to discuss the Bank\'s plans and avoid 
duplication of efforts. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
A Setback: Postponement of Egmont Certification 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
20. (U) The Honduran government had established, as an 
immediate goal, membership by 2004 in the Egmont Group, the 
international organization of recognized FIUs.  Acceptance 
of the Honduran FIU into the Egmont Group, which currently 
has 84 members, would signify that the Honduran Unit meets 
the international standards of Financial Information Units. 
In addition, membership would allow the Honduran FIU to 
share information with FIUs of other member countries, 
resulting in a significant increase in international 
cooperation and enhanced effectiveness in investigating 
cases of financial crimes. 
 
21. (SBU) In order for a new country to join the Egmont 
Group, an existing member must sponsor the new country for 
membership.  Spain had been planning to sponsor Honduras at 
the upcoming XII Egmont Plenary to be held in June 2004. 
However in late February, Spain advised that Honduras will 
have to wait until at least 2005 to be considered for 
membership, and will remain with only observer status in 
Egmont for the coming year.  Spain\'s failure to actively 
sponsor Honduras for membership this year was apparently due 
to Spain\'s decision to sponsor two other countries this 
year, rather than a judgment that Honduras does not meet the 
qualifications for membership.  While the Director of the 
Honduran FIU is disappointed, she is continuing to work with 
the Spanish for possible sponsorship in 2005, while also 
looking for other countries which might agree to sponsor 
Honduras. 
 
22. (SBU) Action request: The Director of the Honduran FIU 
has asked if FinCEN could sponsor Honduras for Egmont Group 
membership in 2005.  Post requests input from agencies in 
Washington as to the appropriate response to this request. 
We understand that sponsorship would entail a visit from 
FinCEN officials to the Honduran FIU, assistance in 
correcting any problems identified, and then formal 
nomination of the FIU for membership in the Egmont Group at 
their plenary meeting in 2005.  The Treasury advisor at Post 
believes that, once the FIU has moved to a more secure 
location, the Unit will be in a strong position to meet the 
requirements for Egmont membership.  End Action Request. 
 
------- 
Results 
------- 
 
23. (SBU) With the apparatus for fighting financial crimes 
now essentially in place, the system is beginning to show 
results.  There are currently 115 cases under investigation 
with the DGSEI, and the Treasury advisor is encouraging the 
investigators to maximize their efficiency by focusing on 
those cases most likely to lead to convictions and seizures. 
During 2003, according to its own official figures, OABI 
seized cash totaling USD 2.75 million and goods with an 
estimated value of USD 550,000, for a total of USD 3.3 
million worth of seized assets.  As mentioned above in 
paragraph 7, however, the ability of OABI to provide 
accountability and security for these seized assets is far 
from perfect, and remains a serious concern. 
 
24. (SBU) In 2003, 10 cases were brought to court under the 
money laundering law, but as yet no one has been convicted 
under the law.  This does not mean that the law has been of 
no use, as money laundering crimes are often tied to 
predicate offenses which are prosecuted.  For example, in a 
case that has received tremendous public attention, Honduran 
Congressman Armando Avila Panchame was convicted in February 
to 20 years of prison for drug trafficking (see reftel C). 
His assets at the time of his conviction, however, amounted 
to just over 100,000 Lempira (less than USD 6,000).  While 
he is unlikely to ever be convicted of money laundering, an 
investigation is ongoing to identify and locate the proceeds 
of his illicit activities. 
 
25. (SBU) The first full-blown trial to focus exclusively on 
money laundering activities is scheduled for June in La 
Ceiba.  The Treasury advisor is coordinating with INL to 
provide travel and per diem expenses for both national and 
international witnesses. 
 
26. (U) Banking officials have told EconOffs that they see 
evidence that the new legislation is having an effect. 
There has also been anecdotal evidence of an increase in the 
physical transportation of cash in Honduras and across its 
borders, confirming the sense of some in the banking 
community that individuals wishing to move illicit funds 
have become less likely to use the banking system to do so. 
If true, this has implications for future training, and 
highlights the need for an effective response to money 
laundering to evolve over time. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
27. (U) The passage of strengthened money laundering 
legislation in early 2002 was the first major legislative 
success for the Maduro administration, and was seen at the 
time as a sign of the new administration\'s support for 
issues of concern to the U.S. and initiatives that would 
address the overall security problems in the country.  The 
next step, ensuring proper implementation of the law, has 
encountered some difficulties, but has basically proceeded 
well over the last two years.  USG assistance has been 
crucial throughout this process, and continues to have a 
positive impact upon the quality of the investigations 
taking place.  Continued progress will depend on the further 
training and retention of personnel familiar with money 
laundering and financial crimes, clearer delineation of 
responsibility among different government entities, and 
improved ability and willingness of the Public Ministry to 
investigate and prosecute financial crimes aggressively. 
End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"16004","4/14/2004 22:37","04TEGUCIGALPA853","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000853 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 14, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 4/14 entitled \"Ours and theirs.\"  \"To take to 
Congress the resolution presented by Honduras to the UNCHR 
will stir a meaningless discussion when we have other issues 
and laws that, despite their importance, are being ignored 
by our deputies.\" 
 
\"Why should they keep talking about this?  For better or 
worse, the Maduro government has gotten the attention of the 
international community on this issue, confirming a position 
that the Maduro and previous administrations have maintained 
on the alleged violations of human rights by the Castro 
regime.\" 
 
\"We should be clear on something: nothing should be more 
important than promoting the respect for human rights here, 
in Cuba, or anywhere else.\" 
 
\"We have so many problems here that we can\'t afford to go on 
with this issue.  We should save our energy to solve our own 
problems.\" 
 
2. Op-ed by Jorge Ramon Hernandez in the Tegucigalpa-based 
moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 4/14 entitled \"The curious 
case of Cuba.\"  \"It\'s been curious to see the commotion 
caused by some people on the resolution presented by the 
Honduran government to the UNCHR, which only asks the Cuban 
government to allow a visit of a U.N. representative, to 
report on the human rights situation in Cuba.\" 
 
\"It\'s curious to notice that those who have said that our 
resolution is aggression against the Cuban people have 
remained silent when journalists, intellectuals, political 
leaders, workers, and other dissidents haven\'t been able to 
express their opinions and have failed to take notice of the 
fact that the Cubans don\'t have the same freedom and 
guarantees as we do here in Honduras.\" 
 
\"It\'s curious that they have a double standard when judging 
human rights, and that what\'s an obligation for the Honduran 
government isn\'t for others.\" 
 
\"Sovereignty or friendship between some governments can\'t be 
in opposition to the respect for life and to freedom in all 
its forms.\" 
 
\"The protection of the rights of any human being is beyond 
the slogans, the demonstrations, the opinions, and even 
political ideologies.\" 
 
3. Op-ed by Mayra Navarro in the Tegucigalpa-based liberal 
daily \"La Tribuna\" on 4/14 entitled \"Why don\'t they just 
tell the truth?\"  \"We know our authorities aren\'t used to 
telling the truth, but sometimes to be honest is the only 
honorable way to get out of trouble.  Most of the criticism 
that President Maduro has gotten from Honduras and abroad 
could have been avoided just by telling the truth, but the 
loyalty to the U.S. has driven him to sacrifice the 
country\'s and his own reputation.\" 
 
\"The error of the Maduro government is not wanting to tell 
the whole truth to the people.  The government isn\'t just 
doing a big favor to the U.S., it\'s also trying to make them 
unaccountable for this decision, and that is just 
inexcusable.  One thing is having to do something under 
pressure, and other is trying to defend foreign interests 
without regard to our own dignity.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"16005","4/14/2004 22:37","04TEGUCIGALPA854","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000854 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 7-10, 2004 
 
1. Op-ed by Rafael Delgado in the San Pedro Sula-based 
liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 4/7 entitled \"Foreign policy 
and subordination.\"  \"President Maduro and his ministers 
have said it: our foreign policy hasn\'t changed, which means 
that the current administration has maintained the same 
approach of subordination to U.S. policy.\" 
 
\"Our President should confirm his commitment to democracy by 
committing all his efforts to fight against corruption, 
poverty, and internal insecurity.  It\'s been ridiculous and 
disgraceful that the government has given in to external 
pressure to condemn other countries for their lack of 
respect to human rights.\" 
 
2. Op-ed by Wilmer Perez Regalado in the San Pedro Sula- 
based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 4/8 entitled \"The role of 
pawn.\"  \"We have several adjectives to define the role of 
the Honduran government as sponsor of an international 
resolution against Cuba: we can call it a servant, a 
marionette, or a pawn.\" 
 
\"I\'ll never support the prosecution, incarceration, and 
executions carried out by the Castro regime against its 
political opponents.  For instance, in 2003, more than a 
hundred people, some of them journalists, were jailed just 
because they dissented from official policy.  However, I 
wonder: why was Honduras chosen to condemn Cuba?  Are we 
morally competent to condemn other countries for human 
rights violations?\" 
 
3. Op-ed by Carlos Mendez in the Tegucigalpa-based moderate 
daily \"El Heraldo\" on 4/10 entitled \"Immorality.\"  \"For 
quite some time, Honduras carries a heavy debt in terms of 
human rights.  To point out just a couple examples, during 
the 1980s, the Honduran state was responsible for the 
disappearance of more than 200 people because of their 
ideological beliefs, and during the last four years more 
than 2,000 youths have been killed, and the state hasn\'t 
been able to properly investigate most of these killings.\" 
 
\"Except for some social groups that fight for the respect of 
human rights, is there anyone else saying anything about 
these issues?  Has anyone ever asked for a U.N. resolution 
to confirm the miserable situation of human rights in 
Honduras?  Could a country like ours have the moral 
authority to demand other countries to respect human 
rights?\" 
 
\"If your answer to any of those questions is yes, then, what 
kind of President do we have?  And, with all due respect, is 
he the President of all Hondurans?\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"16006","4/14/2004 22:40","04TEGUCIGALPA855","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000855 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, PHUM, PREL, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 13, 2004 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Julieta Castellanos in Tegucigalpa-based 
moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" on 4/13 entitled \"The aggression 
towards Cuba.\"  \"The last foreign policy move has placed our 
country in the disgraceful situation of becoming the 
backyard of a powerful country.  Public officials are losing 
credibility, and nobody in Honduras or abroad believes this 
decision is ours.  The presidential decision pleases 
Washington and the Cuban-American community, not the 
Honduran nor the Cuban people.\" 
 
\"As the head of our foreign policy, the aggression towards 
Cuba is the responsibility of President Maduro and his 
government.  It shouldn\'t be understood as an aggression of 
the Honduran people towards Cuba.\" 
 
2. Op-ed by Gaspar Vallecillo in Tegucigalpa-based moderate 
daily \"El Heraldo\" on 4/13 entitled \"The principles of 
Maduro and human rights.\"  \"Maduro doesn\'t surprise us 
anymore with his acts, and his constant attempts to tarnish 
the international image of Honduras, confirming that we\'re 
not identified with him in any way.\" 
 
\"The resolution on Cuba was the last reckless initiative of 
the President.  To say that he did it because of his 
`principles\' is another attempt to justify his imprudent 
actions.  What principles is he talking about, when our 
human rights are being violated every day?\" 
 
\"If he had any principles, he wouldn\'t have talked in the 
name of the people he has persistently lied to.  Maduro\'s 
principles have offended us all.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"16007","4/14/2004 22:50","04TEGUCIGALPA858","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA751|04TEGUCIGALPA782","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000858 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR H AND CODEL BALLENGER 
STATE FOR PM, INL/LP, DRL/MLA, DRL/IL, AND EB 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/EPSC, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL, OREP, ETRD, SNAR, PGOV, PHUM, EAGR, CU, HO 
SUBJECT: CODEL BALLENGER DISCUSSES CUBA, IRAQ, CAFTA, 
NARCOTRAFFICKING, AND U.S. ASSISTANCE WITH PRES. MADURO 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 782 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 751 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  On April 12, CODEL Ballenger met with 
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro.  Issues discussed at the 
meeting included Cuba, Iraq, the Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA), narcotrafficking, and 
humanitarian/development assistance.  Representative 
Ballenger expressed U.S. gratitude for the Government of 
Honduras\' (GOH) steadfast support of Operation Iraqi Freedom 
(OIF), the leadership the GOH has demonstrated in introducing 
a UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba, 
and Honduran efforts to interdict narcotics bound for U.S. 
markets.  Rep. Ballenger assured Maduro, who has been under 
intense political pressure for the GOH\'s positions on these 
issues, that Honduras\' support has been noted in Washington. 
Rep. Ballenger also told Maduro that he would lead an effort 
in the U.S. Congress to win ratification of CAFTA this year. 
Ambassador, Deputy Chief of Mission, USAID Director, 
HIRC/WHEM staff officer, and PolMilOff also attended the 
meeting.  End Summary. 
 
---- 
Cuba 
---- 
 
2. (C) Rep. Ballenger thanked President Maduro for 
introducing a UNCHR resolution on Cuba, noting that the U.S. 
stands ready to assist the GOH in support of the resolution. 
Maduro acknowledged that the GOH\'s position on human rights 
in Cuba was unpopular among some \"left-leaning\" elements in 
Honduran society, but he said it was a principled decision 
based on Honduras\' unwavering support for democracy and 
freedom of expression.  Maduro noted, however, that Honduras\' 
relationship with Cuba remains delicate.  The presence of 
Cuban doctors in Honduras, Honduran medical students in Cuba, 
the relatively recent restoration of diplomatic relations, 
and the GOH\'s effort to sign a maritime boundary with the 
Government of Cuba (GOC) all complicate the GOH\'s efforts to 
take a tough stand on Cuba.  Maduro assured Rep. Ballenger, 
however, that the GOH would not back down on supporting human 
rights and democracy in Cuba. (Note:  After the GOH 
introduced the UNCHR resolution, the GOC announced a 
suspension of the maritime boundary negotiations, which were 
reportedly near completion.  End Note) 
 
3. (C) Ambassador informed Maduro that Embassy information 
indicates the GOC intends to launch a smear campaign against 
the GOH\'s UNCHR resolution, to include personal attacks 
against Maduro.  Maduro stated that he remains deeply 
concerned/suspicious about Cuba\'s presence in Honduras and 
the GOC\'s agenda here.  He reiterated that restoring 
diplomatic relations with Cuba was a \"gift\" inherited from 
his predecessor, and not to his liking.  He also indicated 
that he would seek to limit the number of Cuban doctors in 
Honduras in the future.  Maduro did acknowledge that the GOH 
could have prepared better for the public relations and 
political campaign necessary to win the Honduran public\'s 
support for the resolution.  In response to an inquiry from 
Maduro, Ambassador indicated the U.S. is prepared to provide 
speakers and other assistance, if requested, in support of 
the GOH\'s stand on human rights in Cuba. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
4. (C) Rep. Ballenger thanked Maduro for the GOH\'s commitment 
to OIF and strong support of the Coalition\'s goals, in spite 
of continued violence in Iraq.  Rep. Ballenger told Maduro 
the U.S. recognizes the difficulties Maduro faces in 
sustaining Task Force Xatruch in Iraq and that we are 
grateful for Honduras\' support.  Maduro again reiterated that 
Honduras\' presence in Iraq is based on principle, apart from 
supporting its most important ally.  Maduro did not, however, 
respond directly to Rep. Ballenger when the Chairman noted 
that the GOH has stated that it will recall its troops from 
Iraq at the end of its one-year commitment this July. 
(Comment: Per ref A, Embassy believes the GOH remains open to 
continuing a Honduran presence in Iraq, although it may 
require a concerted U.S. effort to convince Maduro and his 
party\'s congressional leadership to keep Honduran troops 
there.  Minister of Defense Federico Breve, who has been a 
key supporter of the deployment, has been somewhat jolted by 
the recent violence in Najaf where the Honduran task force is 
stationed.  He, and other National Party members, fear 
potential Honduran casualties and the negative political 
repercussions that would certainly follow.  Nonetheless, 
Maduro\'s oft-repeated comments about supporting OIF as a 
matter of principle help keep alive the possibility of 
extending Honduras\' presence.  End Comment.) 
 
----- 
CAFTA 
----- 
 
5. (SBU) Rep. Ballenger told Maduro that he stands ready to 
push for CAFTA ratification in the U.S. Congress, while also 
commending the GOH for moving ahead with the agreement.  He 
indicated that if Honduras and the other Central American 
participants were able to pass CAFTA in their respective 
legislatures, it would make it easier for him to push for 
passage of the agreement in Congress in November.  Maduro 
thanked Ballenger for his support and stated that he is 
\"positive\" that the Honduran National Congress will pass 
CAFTA.  Maduro said that the Central American participants 
will probably introduce CAFTA legislation in their 
legislatures on the same day in a display of Central American 
solidarity.  He also offered to travel to Washington with the 
other Central American presidents to lobby for CAFTA support. 
 
 
----------------- 
Narcotrafficking 
----------------- 
 
6. (C) Rep. Ballenger congratulated Honduras for its recent 
successes in interdicting illicit narcotics en route to U.S. 
markets (ref B).  Maduro stated that combating drug 
trafficking remains one of the region\'s top priorities. 
Maduro once more raised his concern over narco-corruption in 
the Honduran political and economic system, commenting that 
Honduran political and economic institutions remain 
relatively weak and vulnerable.  He also referred to the 
existing \"no shoot-down\" policies for intruding 
drug-trafficking aircraft.  Maduro claimed that Honduras\' 
current policy of making contact with intruding aircraft and 
then \"handing\" them off to neighbors was both 
counterintuitive and not cost effective.  Rep. Ballenger 
acknowledged the limitations placed on Honduras by U.S. 
information sharing policy and told Maduro he would look for 
ways to further assist the GOH financially for their efforts. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Economic and Development Assistance 
----------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Rep. Ballenger told Maduro that the U.S. will be 
rejoining the International Coffee Organization (ICO) and 
noted that he hopes for a stabilization of world coffee 
prices that will deliver a \"fair\" price for quality coffee 
producers.  Rep. Ballenger raised the prospect that Honduras 
could possibly qualify for the first round of aid recipients 
under the new Millennium Challenge Account.  Maduro said he 
hoped Honduras would be among the first recipients and that 
the aid would be very useful in his efforts to sustain 
economic growth, reduce poverty, and lower chronic 
unemployment.   Rep. Ballenger also informed Maduro of his 
assistance with building schools in rural northern Honduras 
and in donating used school equipment to needy Honduran 
communities. 
PALMER 
"
"16045","4/15/2004 20:35","04TEGUCIGALPA862","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000862 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, AND WHA/CEN 
FOR PM, WHA/PPC, AND NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, APRIL 15, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 4/15 entitled \"Iraq.\"  \"The situation in Iraq has 
deteriorated in the last weeks, due to the uprising of 
several armed groups in territories controlled by Shiites 
and Sunnis threatens to spread the violence to the whole 
Iraq.\" 
 
\"Military actions won\'t lead to a rational and permanent 
solution if they aren\'t backed and strengthened by a 
political strategy focused on the dialogue and negotiation, 
to develop a process to establish a popularly-elected Iraqi 
government in a peaceful and safe environment.\" 
 
\"Our soldiers are certainly trying to help in that 
undertaking, but they face the risk of getting involved in 
the violence provoked by the religious and political 
extremism.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"16046","4/15/2004 23:14","04TEGUCIGALPA873","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000873 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, AND WHA/CEN 
FOR PM, WHA/PPC, AND NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, APRIL 15, 2004 
 
 
1. Article in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 4/15 entitled \"Sixth attack to Tegucigalpa Base.\" 
\"Colonel Wilfredo Calderon Canales, commander of battalion 
Xatruch II, confirmed in a phone interview that the Honduran 
base in Najaf was attacked by unknown Iraqi forces on the 
afternoon of 4/14.\" 
 
\"Colonel Calderon Canales said, `we\'re always alert, and we 
have reinforced our base to prevent other attacks.  I\'m 
happy to say that there have been no injuries or material 
losses to our base\'.\" 
 
2. Article in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" on 
4/15 entitled \"Troops would return from Iraq.\"  \"Federico 
Breve, Minister of Defense, said that only if the conditions 
of the war in Iraq become intolerable, he would recommend 
the return of the Honduran troops.\" 
 
\"Breve said, `If we believe the situation becomes 
intolerable, and it isn\'t possible for our troops to handle 
it properly, we\'d recommend their return.  However, I think 
the current instability is only temporary.  We\'re convinced 
we\'ll complete our mission, and the troops will return once 
the authorization by Congress terminates in July\'.\" 
 
3.  On 4/14, the news program \"Abriendo Brecha\" showed the 
second part of a series of reports from Iraq by Yuri Mora. 
The report focused on the work done by the 12 women soldiers 
who are part of Xatruch II battalion, and the fact that 
Honduras is the only Latin American country that has sent 
women to Iraq.  They are in charge of providing medical 
attention, patrolling, and other activities. 
 
Palmer 
"
"16047","4/16/2004 3:10","04TEGUCIGALPA874","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","04SECSTATE74537|04SECSTATE79427|04SECSTATE80156|04SECSTATE83947|04TEGUCIGALPA642|04TEGUCIGALPA782|04TEGUCIGALPA804|04TEGUCIGALPA858|04WARSAW1011","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PM, PM/RSAT, AND PM/PMAT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SEEKS BETTER INFORMATION SHARING AS 
TREPIDATION RISES AMID ONGOING VIOLENCE IN IRAQ 
 
REF: A. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA IIR 68419867 04 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 858 
     C. SECSTATE 83947 
     D. SECSTATE 80156 
     E. SECSTATE 79427 
     F. WARSAW 1011 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 804 
     H. SECSTATE 74537 
     I. TEGUCIGALPA 782 
     J. TEGUCIGALPA 642 (ALL NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (a), (b), and (d). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request; please see paragraph 9. 
 
2. (S) Summary:  Trepidation in Honduras continues to rise 
amid press reports that U.S. troops are preparing an assault 
on the city of Najaf, Iraq, to arrest and/or kill Muqtaba al 
Sadr and put an end to the armed uprising by his militia. 
The 369 Honduran troops that make up Task Force Xatruch 
remain primarily confined to their immediate surroundings on 
the outskirts of Najaf.  The Government of Honduras has 
stated that they will not/not participate in any type of 
offensive combat operations.  On April 14, Honduran Minister 
of Defense (MOD) Federico Breve announced publicly that 
Honduran troops would be withdrawn from Iraq if the situation 
becomes intolerable, but that for now Honduras would stay the 
course.  He stated that essential information regarding 
events in Iraq is not reaching the GOH.  Please see paragraph 
9 for action request from MOD Breve.  End Summary 
 
3. (C) Trepidation with the Government of Honduras (GOH) and 
the Honduran populace continues to rise amid reports that 
U.S. troops remain poised to strike Najaf in an effort to 
kill and/or arrest Muqtaba al Sadr and end the armed uprising 
by his militia.  While the GOH announced that Honduran troops 
will not participate in any offensive combat missions, the 
GOH remains nervous about the prospect of Honduran 
casualties, particularly since polls consistently indicate 
that over 70 percent of the general public remains 
substantially opposed to Honduras\' participation in Operation 
Iraqi Freedom (OIF).  MOD Breve also stated on April 14, that 
Honduras would withdrawal its troops from Iraq if the 
situation becomes intolerable, but reiterated that for now 
Honduras would stay the course. (Comment:  Any significant 
Honduran casualties related to a U.S. offensive in Najaf 
would probably result in widespread domestic calls for an 
immediate withdrawal of Honduran troops from Iraq, placing 
intense political pressure on President Ricardo Maduro. End 
Comment.) 
 
4. (SBU) At the request of the National Congress, during the 
week of April 19, MOD Breve is scheduled to deliver a brief 
on the events unfolding in Iraq to the legislative body. 
President of the National Congress, Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo, has 
generally been supportive of the troop deployment, but since 
violence erupted around Najaf, he has begun to back away 
publicly from his previous stance.  Embassy expects MOD Breve 
to assure Congress, in keeping with the congressional 
authorization to participate in OIF, that Honduran forces 
will not participate in offensive combat operations and that 
the GOH\'s mission in Iraq will remain limited to humanitarian 
and reconstruction operations.  In keeping with this 
commitment, Honduran troops currently remain confined to 
patrolling their immediate surroundings.  (Comment:  On 
numerous occasions the GOH has indicated that Honduras would 
not participate in offensive combat operations.  Honduran 
troops are neither trained nor equipped for a combat role. 
End Comment.) 
 
5. (C) MOD Breve privately stated to EmbOffs serious 
reservations regarding unfolding events in the Najaf area. 
He indicated that although Honduran forces in Iraq have tried 
to get information regarding upcoming U.S. operations in the 
Najaf area through the regular chain of command, essential 
tactical information regarding planned operations has not/not 
been shared with the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF).  MOD Breve 
is concerned that Honduran troops near Najaf do not have 
sufficient force protection and are vulnerable, particularly 
should U.S. forces launch offensive operations there.  He 
added that Honduran troops lack sufficient force protection 
material to construct an adequate defensive perimeter.  MOD 
Breve had phoned DCM several times during the Holy Week 
holidays for updates on the situation in Najaf, following 
local press report of a U.S. withdrawal from the city.  DCM 
related the most recent information he had received from 
CENTCOM. 
 
6. (C) MOD Breve also informed EmbOffs that while he 
understands that the anticipated June 30 handover of power to 
the Iraqi Governing Coalition is a sensitive diplomatic 
issue, the GOH has no idea how that will effect Honduras\' 
role in Iraq.  He mentioned that President Maduro has sought 
information from him on this transition phase, but to date, 
has been unable to generate any answers.  MOD Breve 
reiterated to PolCouns that he is not looking for a detailed 
roadmap, but that he would like a sense of the U.S.\'s 
strategic approach on the issue in order to adequately 
prepare for a change in Honduran policy toward Iraq, should 
that become necessary. 
 
7. (C) Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) Jose 
Isaias Barahona told EmbOffs that if Honduras were to further 
participate in OIF, a decision would have to be made by May 1 
in order to allow sufficient time to adequately prepare for a 
third deployment.  He also noted to PolCouns that Honduras 
has yet to be approached formally by the U.S. as to whether 
the U.S. wants Honduras\' continued participation in OIF. 
(Comment:  Although the HOAF has indicated an initial 
willingness to continue in Iraq (refs F & I), recent unrest 
in the Najaf area has somewhat dampened this interest (ref A). 
 
8. (U) The Honduran press has reported that Task Force 
Xatruch\'s compound near Najaf has come under six different 
mortar attacks, but, so far, no injuries or damage has been 
sustained.  In remarks to the press, the Honduran commander 
in Iraq, Colonel Wilfredo Calderon Canales, has stated that 
contrary to some local press reports, only one Honduran has 
been injured in the latest outbreak of violence and none have 
been taken hostage.  He also told the press that the 
situation around Najaf was returning to normal. 
 
9. (S) Action Request for WHA/PM:  Embassy requests guidance 
on how to respond to the following issues raised by MOD 
Breve: (a) what are U.S. strategic designs for Task Force 
Xatruch and Battalion Plus Ultra in the run up to, and after, 
the June 30 transfer of power; (b) what role does the U.S. 
anticipate for Honduran forces in Najaf if different from the 
current mission; and, (c) should the Embassy seek an 
extension of Honduran participation in OIF?  Embassy notes 
that refs C, D, E, H address security conditions and violence 
in Iraq, but requests that more detailed information be 
provided to further inform the GOH of events directly 
affecting their troops in Najaf. 
 
10. (C) Comment: Embassy notes that Honduras has more troops 
in Iraq than NATO allies such as Norway, Portugal, and the 
Czech Republic and that the GOH has steadfastly supported 
U.S. efforts in Iraq.  While President Maduro remains deeply 
concerned about the political ramifications of Honduran 
casualties in Iraq (ref B), and it appears unlikely the GOH 
will seek Congressional authorization for a third deployment, 
a window of opportunity continues to exist if the U.S. is 
prepared to act quickly.  The passage April 15 of the 
Honduran-drafted UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) 
resolution on Cuba gives the GOH a victory and is a setback 
to President Maduro\'s political opponents in the short-term. 
End Comment 
 
11. (U) Minimize considered. 
PALMER 
"
"16083","4/16/2004 23:56","04TEGUCIGALPA893","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 000893 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PM, PM/RSAT, AND PM/PMAT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS TO WITHDRAW IMMEDIATELY TROOPS FROM IRAQ 
 
REF: CJCS-CHOD APRIL 16 2004 LETTER 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (a), (b), and (d). 
 
1. (S) Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza called the 
Ambassador at 1700 on April 16 to advise him that he will 
travel to Washington on Sunday, April 18 to meet with 
Department of State officials on Monday, April 19, to inform 
the U.S. that Honduras has decided to withdraw immediately 
its troops from Iraq.  He said that the security situation in 
An Najaf and isolation of their troops forced this difficult 
decision upon the Government of Honduras.  The GOH is 
concerned about the safety of its troops.  Reftel request for 
coalition partners to reconsider their rules of engagement 
also forced the GOH into a difficult position because the 
congressional authorization for the deployment of the troops 
did not cover combat operations.  It only authorized Honduran 
troops to participate in and provide security for 
humanitarian and reconstruction activities. 
 
2. (C) Comment: Cosenza was apologetic but decisive in 
relaying this news.  He indicated that the GOH wants to 
explain its decision to U.S. officials before making its 
decision public.  End Comment. 
 
3. (U) Minimize considered. 
PALMER 
"
"16169","4/20/2004 23:36","04TEGUCIGALPA910","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE87181","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000910 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PM, PM/RSAT, AND PM/PMAT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MADURO DECLARES HONDURAS WILL WITHDRAW 
FROM IRAQ 
 
REF: A. STATE 87181 
 
     B. LINDWALL/PALMER E-MAIL 04/19 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 893 
     D. CJCS-CHOD APRIL 16 2004 LETTER 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 874 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (a), (b), and (d). 
 
1. (C) On April 19, President Maduro alerted the National 
Congress and announced publicly that Honduras would withdraw 
its troops from Iraq as soon as possible.  The Government of 
Honduras (GOH) cited Spain\'s decision to immediately withdraw 
its troops from Iraq as a significant factor in its decision. 
 Maduro stated, however, that Honduran troops had completed 
their congressionally-mandated mission there in response to 
UN Security Council Resolution 1483.  Prior to his public 
announcement, President Maduro had increasingly expressed 
concern over events in Iraq and their domestic political 
ramifications (ref\'s C and E). (Note: Post understands, via 
high-level contacts at the Presidential Palace, that ref D 
was a significant factor in Maduro\'s decision to announce the 
withdrawal of Honduran troops.  End Note.) 
 
2. (C) Minister of Defense Federico Breve already contacted 
MILGP Commander regarding the logistics of Honduras\' 
withdrawal from Iraq.  MILGP Commander told Breve that those 
types of details would have to be worked out with CENTCOM and 
commanders in the field, although Post would assist the GOH 
where appropriate.  (Comment: Post understands that Coalition 
airlift capacity is limited.  Per ref B, we will work with 
the GOH regarding any unrealistic expectations of how quickly 
Honduran troops can be transported out of theater.  End 
Comment.) 
 
3. (C) Comment:  Honduras\' participation in Operation Iraqi 
Freedom (OIF) was never popular, with public opinion polls 
indicating that 70 percent of the general public remain 
consistently  \"very opposed\" to a Honduran troop presence in 
Iraq, regardless of their mission there.  President Maduro\'s 
popularity remains tenuous and any Honduran casualties as a 
result of the GOH\'s participation in OIF could severely hurt 
his Nationalist Party in the next presidential election 
cycle, which has already begun in earnest.  Maduro also 
privately expressed concern over potential political fallout 
he might suffer regarding the GOH\'s introduction of a UN 
Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba.  It 
appears that Maduro has decided that any consternation in the 
U.S. over the GOH\'s decision to publicly announce a troop 
withdrawal as soon as possible is a lesser problem than 
having to explain to an increasingly skeptical electorate the 
continued need for Honduran troops in Iraq.  End Comment 
 
4. (U) Minimize considered. 
PALMER 
"
"16218","4/21/2004 21:34","04TEGUCIGALPA925","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, AND WHA/CEN 
FOR PM, WHA/PPC, AND NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, APRIL 21, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 4/21 entitled \"Retreat\"  \"The announced return of our 
troops has only confirmed a decision taken by President 
Maduro almost a month ago that he wouldn\'t request to 
Congress an extension to authorize the presence of 
additional Honduran troops in Iraq.\" 
 
\"Maduro\'s decision, which has been well received by the 
Honduran people, shouldn\'t upset any other member of the 
coalition.  Neither should it change the good relationship 
between Honduras and the U.S., as it was confirmed by 
Ambassador Palmer.\" 
 
\"Anyway, there\'s not much to rebuild in Iraq now, since most 
of the troops can\'t leave their bases to avoid any clashes 
with Iraqi insurgents.  The `peace\' mission we were told we 
would carry out has now become a very dangerous one.\" 
 
\"Considering such circumstances, there\'s still danger for 
our troops as long as they remain in Iraq.  There\'s no doubt 
that our soldiers and their relatives will be very happy 
when they finally hear the trumpet for their final retreat.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 4/21 entitled \"Rectification\"  \"Even though 
President Maduro said that the Honduran troops will return 
from Iraq `as soon as possible\' actually means about `six to 
eight weeks\' according to Minister of Defense Federico 
Breve, the decision to bring back our soldiers has fixed a 
mistake and brings tranquility to the troops, and to their 
relatives.\" 
 
\"Beyond the legal and moral objections to the war, invasion, 
and occupation in Iraq, the presence of Honduran troops has 
caused distress and uncertainty because the U.S. and its 
helpers haven\'t been able to earn the trust of the Iraqis, 
who see them as foreign enemies violating their sovereignty, 
not as their `saviors\'.\" 
 
\"We have enough social, economic and political problems to 
stick our nose in the business of others.  We\'re glad 
President Maduro has finally understood this message.\" 
 
3. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 4/21 entitled \"The return\"  \"The announcement of 
President Maduro came as a result of the aggravation of the 
situation in Iraq, as well as the declaration of the new 
Spanish President of the immediate withdrawal of their 
troops.\" 
 
\"We hope the Honduran soldiers return in a short term, 
because even though President Maduro said they will return 
`as soon as possible\', he was also referring to his previous 
intention of not requesting an authorization from Congress 
to extend the presence of our troops.  We expect that the 
coordination of the transportation from Iraq, which may be 
one of the main obstacles for their return, is done in 
relation to the safety and well-being of the troops.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"16268","4/22/2004 21:26","04TEGUCIGALPA934","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE741","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000934 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, INL/ENT, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, KCRM, EAID, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: CY-2003 END USER MONITORING REPORT FOR 
HONDURAS 
 
REF: A) STATE 741 
 
     B) 03 STATE 44195 
 
1. Since May 2000, the Political Section (POL) has 
managed and provided support for INL funded 
counternarcotics (CN) projects in Honduras.  In April 
2003, the assistance of a resident law enforcement 
advisor was added to the POL/INL section for more 
focused support of the projects.  Current operational 
projects are: 
 
1. Maritime (boat) Project 
2. Canine Project 
3. Container Freight Tracking System (CFTS) Project 
4. Elite Unit Project 
5. GOH CN agencies support 
 
2. POL/INL law enforcement advisor works as the INL 
programs coordinator and liaisons with the Government 
of Honduras (GOH).  Duties also include End Use 
Monitoring (EUM). 
 
3. Resources: POL/INL provides counternarcotics support 
directly to the following GOH agencies: 
 
A) General Directorate of Special Investigative 
Services (DGSEI) through the Frontier Police who are 
attached to the Ministry of Public Security. 
 
B) Joint Information Control Center (JICC) - attached 
to the Ministry of Public Security (MOPS). 
 
C) National Council Against Drug Trafficking - reports 
directly to the President. 
 
Project funds were disbursed to the above organizations 
for training, equipment, operations, and demand 
reduction. 
 
4. Procedures: EUM inspections are conducted on an 
annual basis with the organizations listed in paragraph 
three.  A complete inventory of donated equipment is 
also available at Post via digital photographs and a 
log of activities.  Training equipment and supplies, in 
addition to constant interaction and communication with 
referenced organizations, provides Post with the 
necessary feedback to determine that INL resources are 
being used appropriately. 
 
5. Status: CY-2003 was a project implementation year. 
Projects either entered into operation or were 
completed.  Status of projects is outlined below: 
 
A) Maritime Project:  two 36ft boats, and two 25ft 
boats are 80 percent operational.  Upon final repairs 
the boats will be assigned to the Ministry of Public 
Security.  This transfer is expected to occur during 
the second quarter of 2004. Maritime patrolling 
commenced in early February 2004. 
 
B) Canine Project (Frontier Police):  The Canine 
Project was transferred to the Frontier Police in July 
2003.  Fixed assets, such as buildings, and some mobile 
assets such as vehicles and trailers are pending final 
signature transfer.   Canines have been formally 
transferred to MOPS.  The Canine program is utilized in 
several border areas by the Frontier Police with 
positive results.  Additional training for the handlers 
and canines along with veterinary services, food, and 
supplies continue to be maintained by the INL program. 
 
C) Container Freight Tracking System Project:  This 
project is complete and has been fully operational 
since April 2003.  The Ministry of Public Security 
maintains and staffs this facility. 
 
D) Elite Unit Project:  This unit is fully operational 
and works directly with Embassy sections/agencies such 
as DEA, TAT, and POL/INL.  POL/INL and MOPS maintain 
the unit, with an office in Tegucigalpa and another in 
San Pedro Sula. 
 
E) Government of Honduras counternarcotics agencies 
support:  POL/INL assistance continues to MOPS, the 
Ministry of Defense, and the Public Ministry.  The 
level and type of assistance provided by POL/INL is 
determined by the project goals and funds available. 
Assistance includes equipment, technical assistance, 
and training. 
 
6. Problems: Post encountered problems with the DLCN, 
maritime (boat) and canine projects.  POL/INL is no 
longer supporting the DLCN, and the other two projects 
were turned over to MOPS and are currently operational 
and providing positive results. 
7. Program Changes: As previously stated, Post 
transferred the maritime (boat) and canine programs to 
the MOPS and is no longer supporting the DLCN. 
 
8. Impact: Post\'s projects have had a positive impact 
on the GOH\'s overall counternarcotics efforts.  A 
counternarcotics infrastructure is now in place capable 
of providing effective operational support.  Through 
constant monitoring and interaction, a sense of 
professionalism and accountability has been established 
with the GOH\'s counternarcotics organizations.  This 
has allowed resources to be more effectively utilized. 
 
PALMER 
"
"16319","4/23/2004 22:15","04TEGUCIGALPA943","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPATWX987DATED252248ZAPR03","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

232215Z Apr 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000943 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO SARI, OFC/MCMANUS, STEFFICK, 
HUTCHINSON, BROWN; NTRM/BERGMANN, SOD/OSA FOR HIGGENS 
DEA MEXICO FOR HOLIFIELD, ORTEGA, GARAY AND KEYS 
DEA BOGOTA PLS PASS TO CARTAGENA RO FOR FISHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: N/A 
SUBJECT: OPERATION CONTROLADO II RESULTS IN HONDURAS; 
GFTA-04-8003; 
CCX:GFAL-99-8001/OPERATION LANDBRIDGE 
    CS-02-108780 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA TWX 00987 DATED 252248ZAPR03 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA TWX 00227 DATED 301724ZJAN04 
     C. EMAIL BETWEEN DOMINGUE AND FISCHER ON 4/21/04 
 
1.  During the period of April 1, 2004, to April 12, 2004, 
Honduran law enforcement engaged in Operation Controlado II 
which was an enforcement action against all types of criminal 
activity.  This operation concentrated on human and vehicle 
movements at the borders and on all main transportation 
arteries.  This operation produced the following results in 
Honduras: 
 
FIRST EVENT 
 
2.  On April 1, 2004, a 1989 red Mazda pick-up truck bearing 
Honduran license plate PBI-6497 was stopped at a police check 
point near Progreso, Lancetilla, Tela, Atlantida, HD.  Two 
individuals were present in the vehicle as police began to 
conduct an inspection.  Police discovered 14 kilos of cocaine 
secreted in the side panels of the vehicle.  Both individuals 
 
SIPDIS 
were able to flee the scene and ultimately escaped 
unidentified. 
 
3.  Honduran police records indicate that the vehicle is 
registered to Amadeo ECHEVERRIA-Nataren who is identified in 
the indexing section. 
 
SECOND EVENT 
 
4.  On April 3, 2004, Honduran Frontier Police (FP) 
conducting routine vehicle registration operations, 
encountered a red Toyota pick-up truck bearing Honduran 
license plate PAA-1331.  The driver was identified as Rene 
Sigfredo GALINDO-Mencia and was accompanied by Denis 
PORTILLO.  The FP found each subject in possession of 
semi-automatic hand guns which were confiscated.  A short 
distance behind the Toyota approached a white Isuzu truck 
with high green wooden rear paneling bearing Honduran license 
plate PP-04322, and driven by Marco Tulio FRANCO-Carranza.  A 
third Toyota pick-up (white in color), bearing Honduran 
license plate PAM-4416 was following closely behind the 
truck.  The two subjects occupying this vehicle were also 
found to be in possession of two hand guns.  All vehicles 
were ordered to pull over for inspection. 
 
5.  The FP became extremely suspicious over four weapons 
found in two vehicles within such close proximity, possibly 
protecting the larger truck.  FP then ordered all drivers of 
the three vehicles to proceed slowly to the Police Station at 
Bonito Oriental for further inspection.  At that moment, the 
vehicles under suspicion left the area at high velocity; the 
FP conducted pursuit of the Isuzu truck and moments later 
found it abandoned by its occupant.  FP officers eventually 
located and seized the white Toyota and arrested the driver, 
Luis Armando JUAREZ-Pineda at a local residence in possession 
of a cell phone assigned telephone number (504)968-7502.  The 
red Toyota was also located and seized, but GALINDO and 
PORTILLO escaped and are at large. 
 
6.  A subsequent search of the Isuzu vehicle revealed the 
truck\'s flatbed had a false floor containing a quantity of 
108 kilos of cocaine.  The drivers license of Marco Tulio 
FRANCO-Carranza was also found in the cab of the truck. 
 
7.  A Qualcomm satelite phone was found in the possession of 
Rene Sigfredo GALINDO-Mancia. Telephone numbers 
(505)891-4870, 979-4255, and 977-2189 were found in the data 
memory of the satellite phone. 
 
8.  A telephone analysis indicated that telephone 
(504)968-7502 communicated twice with telephone number 
(504)978-6526 belonging to Jose Ivan SANABRIA-Castaneda 
(NADDIS 5666783).  In addition, a review of the electronic 
memory of (504)968-7502 revealed this number was in 
communication with telephone number (504)963-3793 and was 
assigned the name \"Wilmer\".  A review through the TCO data 
base revealed this number was in contact 18 times with 
telephone number (504) 967-3753 between October 2002 and 
January 2003.  The (504)967-3753 number is another telephone 
number associated with SANABRIA.  SANABRIA is suspected of 
receiving maritime drug shipments and transporting them 
across western HD into Guatemala (per ref A and B). 
 
9.  SANABRIA is a landbased transportation specialist that 
orchestrates the logistics of receiving maritime drug 
shipments off the north coast of Honduras, and transports 
them by land through western Honduras into Guatemala. 
SANABRIA has been implicated as conspiring with a 
Colombian-based maritime transportation specialist identified 
as Jesus Antonio MURILLO-Lenis (NADDIS 5780682) who is a 
suspect in the Cartegena RO\'s, ZU-03-0023 investigation. 
 
10.  Per ref C, SARI is requested to combine NADDIS records 
5330343 and 5758500 into NADDIS 5780682. 
 
THIRD EVENT 
 
11.  On April 6, 2004, Frontier and Honduran Police were 
conducting a combined vehicle registration operation at the 
Satuye checkpoint in Colon, HD.  At 16:20 hours, a black 
Toyota pick-up truck bearing Honduran license plate PBG-5241 
was pulled over for inspection.  Police noticed that the 
screws of the gas tank door flap had been removed and that 
the gas tank had been recently painted.  The vehicle was 
taken to the local police station (Jefatura Departamental No. 
1) for closer inspection after the driver denied that the gas 
tank had been recently painted.  Thirty-three kilos of 
cocaine were removed from a compartment within the gas tank 
after officials dropped it from the chassis; twenty-two kilos 
were wrapped in black plastic and 11 were wrapped in white 
plastic. 
 
12.  The subjects arrested in this incident were Oscar Rene 
ANDRADE and Italo Donaldo CHINCHILLA-Portillo who are further 
identified in the indexing section.  Honduran Police records 
indicate the Toyota is registered to Jose Antonio 
CHINCHILLA-Perez. 
 
13.  Pursuant to the DEA Agents Manual, section 6242.11, this 
twx is submitted in lieu of a DEA-6. 
 
14. Any questions concerning this cable can be directed to 
A/CA Ivan Rios or I/A John Domingue at (301)985-9321. 
 
 
INDEXING 
 
1. JUAREZ-Pineda, Luis Armando - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
POB: Honduras 
DOB: October 12, 1958 
Honduran ID# 0101-1958-01426 
Address: Bo. Col. Satelite 1era etapa 
Telephone Number: (504)968-7502 
Weapons serial Number: BC350, CDB-03076865 
 
2. GALINDO-Acosta, Jose Maria - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
POB: Honduras 
DOB: November 1, 1954 
Address: Bo. Las Acacias, Bonito Oriental, Colon, HD 
Telephone Number: (504) 438-9218 
 
3.  PORTILLO, Denis - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
Weapons serial Number: BER-303581 
 
4.  GALINDO-Mencia, Rene Sigfrido - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
DOB: January 3, 1979 
Honduran ID# 1501-1979-00297 
Address: Bo. Las Acacias, Bonito Oriental, Colon 
Weapons serial Number: BER-248337 
Telephone Number (505)891-4810 
 
5. SANABRIA-Castaneda, Jose Ivan - NADDIS 5666783 
 
6. MURILLO-Lenis, Jesus Antonio - NADDIS 5780682 
 
7. FRANCO-Carranza, Marco Tulio - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
DOB: November 8, 1966 
Honduran ID# 1403-1966-00096 
Address: Rio Chiquito Sur, Arizona, Atlantida 
 
8.  ECHEVERRIA-Nataren, Amadeo - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
DOB: August 10, 1972 
Honduran ID Number: 1306-1973-00022 
Address: Los Olanchitos, Jutiapa, Atlantida, HD 
VIN# JM2UF3136K07Q5409 - Red Mazda 
9.  ANDRADE, Oscar Rene - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
DOB: August 17, 1977 
Honduran ID# 0410-1977-00740 
Address: Municipio de Jutiapa, Atlantida 
 
10.  CHINCHILLA-Portillo, Italo Donaldo - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
DOB: March 28, 1975 
Honduran ID# 0410-1975-00286 
Address: Barrio Limon, Florida, Copan, HD 
 
11.  CHINCHILLA-Perez, Jose Antonio - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
Honduran license plate: PBG-5241 
PALMER 
"
"16371","4/26/2004 18:32","04TEGUCIGALPA945","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE33359","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000945 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN (TKELLY) 
FOR INR, EB, AND CA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, ECON, PGOV, SMIG, HO 
SUBJECT: PUBLIC AFFAIRS INFLUENCE ANALYSIS FOR HONDURAS 
 
REF: STATE 33359 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY. Honduras is a small country of 
approximately 6.7 million people, 72 percent of them living 
on less than two dollars a day and almost 50 percent under 
the age of 18.  A small, core group of related and 
associated economic and political elites  (see my attached 
comment)1, exercise effective control of business and 
government.  They, along with institutions such as the 
Catholic Church, the National Congress, the two major 
political parties, some academic and civil society 
institutions, the media and, increasingly, the Supreme Court 
comprise the most influential groups.  The majority of 
Hondurans have little or no influence on public policy, due 
to a lack of a democratic culture and weak civil society.  A 
well publicized transparency survey prompted the National 
Congress to address major legal reforms to improve their 
poor public image.  Hondurans are poorly educated with an 
average educational level of 5.3 grade years.  The power of 
the media is tempered because many of these major elites own 
the key media outlets.  There is an ineffective system of 
checks and balances, and laws are not applied equally or 
transparently.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (SBU) THE PLAYERS: The upper crust of this elitist 
society consists of not more than a couple hundred 
interwoven families, some of whom came to Honduras from the 
Middle East at the turn of the century or during the First 
World War.  This upper class is, for the most part, educated 
in the United States.  For instance, the largest foreign 
student association at Louisiana State University (LSU) is 
the Honduran Student Association.  Mississippi State 
University, Texas A&M, and many universities in Florida are 
favored destinations as well.  Honduran matriculation in 
elite universities, such as Notre Dame or the Ivies, is 
limited.  Honduran students prefer applied education in 
business administration or engineering to broad liberal arts 
study.  The society is divided further along ethnic, class, 
and regional lines.  The elite group of Hondurans wields the 
greatest influence in the country.  The great majority of 
the upper class of Honduras, like all classes, lacks a 
democratic culture and takes for granted that their society 
is a spoils system. The elite does not take its civic and 
social responsibilities seriously and is an important target 
audience in Embassy efforts to introduce transparency in 
government, end corruption, improve the rule of law, 
increase progressive tax revenues, reduce poverty, improve 
primary education, and encourage the development of a middle 
class. 
 
3. (SBU) The small middle class lacks the economic and 
political strength to resist the elitist policies of the 
dominant class and has in the past accommodated itself to 
upper class practices, such as nepotism, cronyism and other 
sources of corruption.  The political and economic 
development of a more activist middle class group is 
essential to democracy, economic progress, transparency, and 
social progress. For this reason, they are an important 
target audience. The middle class is diminishing as poverty 
continues to grow and income gaps widen. 
 
4. (U) Because of the high percentage of poverty throughout 
the country, there is a growing Honduran population that 
lives abroad, especially in the United States, and that 
produces more than eight hundred million dollars a year in 
remittances (remesas).  These remesas are the single largest 
source of foreign currency for the Honduran national 
economy.  For this reason, issues such as Temporary 
Protective Status (TPS) and visas are a constant concern of 
the government, the media and the general population.  The 
population living in poverty, which includes many 
minorities, such as the small but numerous indigenous 
peoples groups and the Afro-Caribbean Garifuna community, 
has the least influence and the fewest available resources 
in education, employment, or health care.  Minorities also 
suffer disproportionately from diseases such as HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis, and malaria, poor education, and under- and 
unemployment.  They are more vulnerable to issues of 
interest to the U.S. such as illegal immigration, drug use, 
and smuggling, and trafficking in persons (TIP).  The 
Mission actively works with these minority groups through 
humanitarian, education, and aid projects. 
 
5. (U) In many cases, it is more useful to deal directly 
with more responsive institutions, such as government, NGOs, 
labor unions, municipalities, universities, and the media. 
It is critical to direct significant amounts of financial 
and human resources to these alternative sources of power to 
induce change in the country.  The judiciary receives a 
great deal of attention and U.S. government resources and is 
a high priority in Mission programming.  Without a fair and 
transparent justice system, the country will remain mired in 
the corruption that has eroded confidence in the 
administration of the country regardless of the political 
party in power. 
 
6. (U) There is another important population group that 
should not be neglected.  Since half of the population is 
under 18, it is imperative to find ways to reach Honduran 
youth, many of whom are crowded into the poor urban areas of 
the country.  Urban problems and youth unemployment are at 
the heart of the country\'s high crime rates, and much public 
investment is needed in the areas of economic opportunity 
and employment, public health, education, and recreation in 
the Honduran urban areas.  The growing number of gangs is a 
reflection of the growing despair and problems confronting 
young men and women.  Gangs and gang behavior are in part a 
reaction to the lack of employment opportunities and failure 
of public education in the country.  Gangs are also part of 
the illegal immigration problem which has emerged in the 
shadow of the close ties between the United States and 
Honduras.  While job creation has come to a standstill and 
economic growth has failed to keep pace with population 
growth - a situation exacerbated by a lack of a level 
playing field, poorly targeted investment, and a poor public 
education system, American popular youth culture is highly 
valued.  Illegal immigration to the U.S. is high and is a 
serious bilateral concern, as some returning and deported 
immigrants have developed sophisticated means of organizing 
gangs while in the U.S. 
 
7. (U) This is the context in which the media of Honduras 
functions.  The media can play an important role in moving 
Honduras toward more constructive institutions and a more 
functional democracy.  Yet, many journalists are hamstrung 
by low wages, the lack of social responsibility of the 
elites, and general habits of corruption, which affect media 
owners, business elites, and the government.  Some 
journalists admit to self-censorship when their reporting 
threatens the political or economic interests of media 
owners.  There have been highly publicized firings of 
journalists who dared to challenge the existing elite power 
structure. 
 
8. (U) A small number of powerful business magnates with 
intersecting business interests, political loyalties, and 
family ties owns almost all the news media.  For example, of 
the four national newspapers, a Liberal Party Congressman 
operates one, as well as a national TV station, and a former 
President (also from the Liberal Party) runs another.  A 
wealthy businessman owns the other two.  A wealthy 
businessman and Nationalist Party supporter owns the major 
national television channel.  Besides the national TV and 
print media, there are national radio channels with large 
audiences and small independent TV stations at the local 
level.  Smaller markets are covered sparsely by the national 
news media, so audiences there have to rely on their local 
cable channels for news of their area.  Most news media do 
not maintain overseas correspondents, but there is a fair 
amount of international coverage through AP, EFE or other 
news services, and, in the case of TV, CNN Espanol. 
Finally, there is a fairly small but growing percent of the 
population that is accessing news on the Internet. 
 
9. (U) This year\'s Mission Program Plan has six goal papers, 
not including Human Resources.  We support these goals with 
appropriate resources as outlined below. 
 
Goal 1.  Democratic Systems and Practices.  The Public 
Affairs Section (PAS) supports the efforts of the Political 
Section, USAID, and the Front Office through speakers, press 
statements, conferences, and briefings to develop Honduran 
democratic institutions, create more professional and 
capable Honduran law enforcement agencies and military to 
interdict drugs, fight organized crime, combat international 
terrorism, and strengthen justice sector institutions by 
reducing corruption, improving institutional capacity of 
courts, prosecutors, and public defenders, and promoting 
criminal and civil law reform.  The primary audiences for 
programs under this goal are the government, human rights 
and other nongovernmental organizations, and the media.  The 
Ambassador undertakes frequent press statements, interviews, 
and speeches on corruption, drug trafficking, and the need 
for an active and competent justice system.  We will sponsor 
a speaker for an upcoming TIP conference, as we did last 
year.  We also use AETN/DVC programs to address important 
audiences on these issues.  We keep the Mission home page 
updated with speeches and materials on these subjects, draft 
media reactions, and use IRC outreach to target audiences, 
including media, NGOs and government officials. 
 
Goal 2.  Economic Growth and Development.  PAS provides 
assistance to USAID and the Economic Section to explain the 
importance of compliance with IMF program benchmarks and the 
poverty reduction strategy and to encourage greater 
understanding of macroeconomic stability and the need for an 
attractive investment climate, effective use of development 
finance, and the importance of the creation of a 
professional civil service.  The primary audience for these 
programs is the government, Congressional deputies, 
municipalities, labor unions, business, and the general 
public.  Program strategies include speeches by Economic 
Section officers and the Ambassador, press statements, 
briefings, Web page, outreach, and other programs, such as 
DVCs for targeted audiences. 
 
Goal 3.  Trade and Investment.  PAS supports USDA, USAID, 
and the Economic Section in promoting the successful 
completion of the U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA), the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), the 
Doha agenda of the World Trade Organization (WTO), and 
Honduran support for trade liberalization in general.  We 
have conducted and will continue to conduct a public 
diplomacy strategy to promote the benefits and opportunities 
of trade liberalization and curbing of monopolistic behavior 
through the International Visitors Program, U.S. speakers, 
outreach by the Information Resource Center, updates of the 
Mission Internet home page, speeches, and op-eds. 
 
Goal 4.  Close Ties with Allies and Friends.  The Political 
Section and U.S. Military Group work with the government and 
military of Honduras to achieve productive relations with 
Honduras\' Central American neighbors so that it can 
contribute to the international effort against terrorism, 
increase regional economic cooperation, and reach amicable 
settlement of border issues.  PAS provides assistance on 
military and counterterrorism issues through support for 
speeches or press briefings by the Ambassador or other 
officials, through the IV program, and by providing outreach 
of relevant materials. 
 
Goal 5. Assistance for U.S. Citizens Abroad.  The Consular 
Section provides support and information to U.S. citizens 
and works with government officials on anti-illegal 
immigration/anti-terrorism measures.  PAS supports Consular 
efforts to keep the Mission Web page and Consular 
Information Sheets updated.  We also support outreach 
efforts, directed to U.S. citizens and Honduran visa 
applicants, including interviews, AETN/DVC programs, op-eds, 
and by editing and placing a monthly Consular Corner article 
in a national newspaper. 
 
Goal 6.  Mutual Understanding.  PAS uses international 
exchanges to increase mutual understanding and build trust 
between Americans and Hondurans, promote understanding of 
domestic political and social realities that underpin 
American policy decision-making on issues such as 
immigration, CAFTA, homeland security, and drug 
interdiction, and encourage good governance and 
transparency.  We provide U.S. speakers on shared social and 
political issues that impact Hondurans and promote public 
discussion of the importance of civil society and media 
participation in public policy on education, HIV/AIDS, youth- 
at-risk, public health and security issues.  We support 
educational development through programs with libraries and 
museums and through cultural exchanges and grants and are 
working to establish a pilot program of teaching American 
History and American political topics to graduate students. 
We support the English language program as a means to 
economic and political development and promote educational 
exchanges throughout the country.  We have also begun to 
direct PAS programs such as speakers and book donations to 
the most ignored and isolated population groups.  In 
addition, we have been directing greater efforts to finding 
IV grantees and Fulbright students from more remote areas 
and marginalized groups such as the Garifunas and other 
indigenous and ethnic groups.  We have worked with drug 
prevention and youth-at-risk programs implemented by both 
NGOs and governmental institutions.  We will also continue 
to work closely with USAID to promote their programs that 
seek to build a democratic culture and to alleviate the 
rural poverty plaguing Honduras through good governance, 
health, education, agricultural development and 
environmental programs.  The Embassy, through PAS, can 
highlight these needs and bring attention to the more 
successful projects of the government and NGOs in this area. 
On the press side, we support the Ambassador in his 
speeches, visits, briefings, interviews, place op-eds, and 
distribute materials through our press and IRC sections.  We 
provide reporting on media trends and opinion.  We are 
working with small media organizations to offer interviews 
and programs to these outlets whenever possible.  The small 
TV stations in particular are interested in getting material 
and will run items of interest to their audiences in its 
entirety. 
 
Palmer 
 
_______________________________ 
1  I\'ve never seen this phrase before.  What is the source 
of it? 
"
"16375","4/26/2004 22:45","04TEGUCIGALPA950","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE72748","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000950 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 5102/FOREIGN TRADE ZONES (ITA/IA) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EINV, HO 
SUBJECT: INFORMATION ON FREE TRADE ZONES IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: STATE 72748 
 
1. This cable is a response to reftel and provides 
information about Honduran Free Trade Zone laws: 
 
a. Does the country have any type of customs free zone, free 
trade zone, foreign trade zone, export processing zone, 
freeport or manufacturing bonded warehouse?  How many zones 
are there currently? Are there geographic limitations as to 
where they can be located?  Are they successful? 
 
-- Honduras has a Free Trade Zone program (FTZ) that allows 
the free importation of equipment and inputs for the use of 
export-oriented industries which is free of customs and most 
taxes, excluding income tax.  There are two main components 
of the Free Zone program under Honduran law: Free Trade 
Zones and Export Processing Zones.  There are 252 companies 
in 32 FTZ zones in Honduras with 95 customs points.  There 
are no geographic limitations on free trade zones, as 
Honduran law allows a free trade zone to be formed anywhere 
in the country.  These free zones have increasingly 
developed in the last 7 years.  There were approximately 
105,000 workers in FTZ companies in 2003, a 12% increase 
from 2002.  Exports from FTZ companies generated USD 590 
million in 2003, accounting for 24% of total exports. 
 
b. How is the authority structured?  Is the zone federally 
or locally administered?  Are they considered enclaves that 
are outside of the country or are they customs-controlled? 
 
-- The free-trade zones are managed privately but have to 
comply with regulations set forth by the Ministry of 
Industry and Trade.  Municipalities locally administer FTZs 
through customs authorities throughout Honduras.  They are 
considered enclaves that are outside of the country. 
 
c. Is a license or other type of authority required for each 
manufacturing activity in the zone?  If so, roughly how long 
does the process of obtaining a license take? 
 
-- To obtain a free trade zone license, an authorization 
request must be sent to the Ministry of Industry and Trade. 
It takes 15 days for the evaluation and issue of the 
license.  The company seeking a free trade zone license is 
required to pay a fee of 2 million lempiras (USD 111,203) to 
the GOH, and must show proof of availability of real 
property and technical and financial resources required for 
the purposes of the free-trade zone. 
 
d. Can businesses manufacture products in the zone?  Can 
they manufacture using both foreign and domestic inputs? 
Can the merchandise be sold in the home market? 
 
-- Business manufacturers can produce goods in the free 
trade zones in Honduras.  Manufacturers can use domestic and 
foreign inputs to produce these goods.  Only 5% of total 
production of merchandise can be sold in the local market, 
with the payment of corresponding duties and import and 
sales taxes. 
 
e. What are the customs benefits related to manufacturing or 
processing in the zone?  Can merchandise be imported and re- 
exported duty free? Is duty payable on manufactured 
merchandise upon leaving the zone for the home market?  Is 
capital equipment used for zone manufacturing activity 
permitted entry free of duty? 
 
-- Any company located in a free trade zone, industrial park 
or export processing zone is exempt from paying import 
duties on goods and capital equipment, surcharges, selective 
consumption taxes, and sales taxes.  In addition, the 
production within these areas is exempt from Honduran 
federal and municipal taxes.  Merchandise can be imported 
and then re-exported duty-free in export processing zones 
and temporary import regimes.  Manufactured merchandise 
leaving the zone for the home market is duty free.  Any 
capital equipment that is exclusively used for zone 
manufacturing activity, providing these goods are not 
produced in the country, are exempt from duties, surcharges, 
consular fees, and other taxes. 
 
f. Are there any special provisions for small and medium- 
sized businesses?  Or, for new foreign direct investment? 
 
-- Provisions are the same for any size of business. 
Honduran law prohibits discriminatory or preferential export 
and import policies affecting foreign investors. 
 
g. Are there any tax exemptions (i.e., exemptions from tax 
on merchandise, income, real property)? 
 
-- Income tax is payable on income derived from operations 
within Honduras, except for firms operating in the 
industrial parks, located in the free tourism zones (ZOLT) 
or under the temporary import regime.  Companies in free 
trade zones, export processing zones, and temporary import 
regimes are 100% exempt from import duties for raw materials 
and inputs, export taxes, local sales and excise taxes, 
taxes on net assets, taxes on profits, and taxes on capital 
repatriation.  Companies in free trade zones and export 
processing zones are also 100% exempt from taxes on profit 
repatriation.  Tax is payable on real property found in free- 
trade zones.  Income from labor performed in free trade 
zones, export-processing zones, and temporary import regime 
are subject to income tax (for individuals earning more than 
the legally specified level. 
 
h. Are there any other financial incentives (loans, funding 
for infrastructure or facilities, subsidies on rent, 
utilities)? 
 
-- The Honduran government does not currently provide 
incentives such as subsidies and preferential loans for free 
zone companies. 
 
i. Are there exemptions from other laws or regulations 
(environmental, labor laws, nonproliferation export 
controls)? 
 
-- There are no exemptions from other laws or regulations. 
 
j. Are there any restrictions or requirements, such as 
export requirements, local content requirements, or 
ownership requirements? 
 
-- The Investment Law of 1992 largely governs investment 
conditions in Honduras, and guarantees national treatment to 
foreign private firms in Honduras with a few exceptions. 
For all investments, at least 90 percent of a company\'s 
labor force must be Honduran and at least 85 percent of the 
payroll must be paid to Hondurans.  The law does not limit 
foreign ownership of businesses, except for those 
specifically reserved for Honduran investors, i.e., small 
firms with capital less than 150,000 lempiras (approx $8,600 
dollars).  Honduras has no quota regulations for any of its 
exports. 
 
2. If there are any further questions on Honduras\'s FTZ, 
please contact Mauricio Achata (achatamb at state.gov, 504- 
236-9320, x4827) or Roy Alonzo (roy.alonzo at mail.doc.gov, 
504-236-9320, x4092). 
 
Palmer 
"
"16404","4/27/2004 19:46","04TEGUCIGALPA960","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE33359","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 000960 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN (TKELLY) 
FOR INR, EB, AND CA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, ECON, PGOV, SMIG, HO 
SUBJECT: PUBLIC AFFAIRS INFLUENCE ANALYSIS FOR HONDURAS 
 
REF: STATE 33359 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY. Honduras is a small country of 
approximately 6.7 million people, 72 percent of them living 
on less than two dollars a day and almost 50 percent under 
the age of 18.  A small, core group of related and 
associated economic and political elites1, exercise 
effective control of business and government.  They, along 
with institutions such as the Catholic Church, the National 
Congress, the two major political parties, some academic and 
civil society institutions, the media and, increasingly, the 
Supreme Court comprise the most influential groups.  The 
majority of Hondurans have little or no influence on public 
policy, due to a lack of a democratic culture and weak civil 
society.  A well publicized transparency survey prompted the 
National Congress to address major legal reforms to improve 
their poor public image.  Hondurans are poorly educated with 
an average educational level of 5.3 grade years.  The power 
of the media is tempered because many of these major elites 
own the key media outlets.  There is an ineffective system 
of checks and balances, and laws are not applied equally or 
transparently.  END SUMMARY 
 
2. (SBU) THE PLAYERS: The upper crust of this elitist 
society consists of not more than a couple hundred 
interwoven families, some of whom came to Honduras from the 
Middle East at the turn of the century or during the First 
World War.  This upper class is, for the most part, educated 
in the United States.  For instance, the largest foreign 
student association at Louisiana State University (LSU) is 
the Honduran Student Association.  Mississippi State 
University, Texas A&M, and many universities in Florida are 
favored destinations as well.  Honduran matriculation in 
elite universities, such as Notre Dame or the Ivies, is 
limited.  Honduran students prefer applied education in 
business administration or engineering to broad liberal arts 
study.  The society is divided further along ethnic, class, 
and regional lines.  The elite group of Hondurans wields the 
greatest influence in the country.  The great majority of 
the upper class of Honduras, like all classes, lacks a 
democratic culture and takes for granted that their society 
is a spoils system. The elite does not take its civic and 
social responsibilities seriously and is an important target 
audience in Embassy efforts to introduce transparency in 
government, end corruption, improve the rule of law, 
increase progressive tax revenues, reduce poverty, improve 
primary education, and encourage the development of a middle 
class. 
 
3. (SBU) The small middle class lacks the economic and 
political strength to resist the elitist policies of the 
dominant class and has in the past accommodated itself to 
upper class practices, such as nepotism, cronyism and other 
sources of corruption.  The political and economic 
development of a more activist middle class group is 
essential to democracy, economic progress, transparency, and 
social progress. For this reason, they are an important 
target audience. The middle class is diminishing as poverty 
continues to grow and income gaps widen. 
 
4. (U) Because of the high percentage of poverty throughout 
the country, there is a growing Honduran population that 
lives abroad, especially in the United States, and that 
produces more than eight hundred million dollars a year in 
remittances (remesas).  These remesas are the single largest 
source of foreign currency for the Honduran national 
economy.  For this reason, issues such as Temporary 
Protective Status (TPS) and visas are a constant concern of 
the government, the media and the general population.  The 
population living in poverty, which includes many 
minorities, such as the small but numerous indigenous 
peoples groups and the Afro-Caribbean Garifuna community, 
has the least influence and the fewest available resources 
in education, employment, or health care.  Minorities also 
suffer disproportionately from diseases such as HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis, and malaria, poor education, and under- and 
unemployment.  They are more vulnerable to issues of 
interest to the U.S. such as illegal immigration, drug use, 
and smuggling, and trafficking in persons (TIP).  The 
Mission actively works with these minority groups through 
humanitarian, education, and aid projects. 
 
5. (U) In many cases, it is more useful to deal directly 
with more responsive institutions, such as government, NGOs, 
labor unions, municipalities, universities, and the media. 
It is critical to direct significant amounts of financial 
and human resources to these alternative sources of power to 
induce change in the country.  The judiciary receives a 
great deal of attention and U.S. government resources and is 
a high priority in Mission programming.  Without a fair and 
transparent justice system, the country will remain mired in 
the corruption that has eroded confidence in the 
administration of the country regardless of the political 
party in power. 
 
6. (U) There is another important population group that 
should not be neglected.  Since half of the population is 
under 18, it is imperative to find ways to reach Honduran 
youth, many of whom are crowded into the poor urban areas of 
the country.  Urban problems and youth unemployment are at 
the heart of the country\'s high crime rates, and much public 
investment is needed in the areas of economic opportunity 
and employment, public health, education, and recreation in 
the Honduran urban areas.  The growing number of gangs is a 
reflection of the growing despair and problems confronting 
young men and women.  Gangs and gang behavior are in part a 
reaction to the lack of employment opportunities and failure 
of public education in the country.  Gangs are also part of 
the illegal immigration problem which has emerged in the 
shadow of the close ties between the United States and 
Honduras.  While job creation has come to a standstill and 
economic growth has failed to keep pace with population 
growth - a situation exacerbated by a lack of a level 
playing field, poorly targeted investment, and a poor public 
education system, American popular youth culture is highly 
valued.  Illegal immigration to the U.S. is high and is a 
serious bilateral concern, as some returning and deported 
immigrants have developed sophisticated means of organizing 
gangs while in the U.S. 
 
7. (U) This is the context in which the media of Honduras 
functions.  The media can play an important role in moving 
Honduras toward more constructive institutions and a more 
functional democracy.  Yet, many journalists are hamstrung 
by low wages, the lack of social responsibility of the 
elites, and general habits of corruption, which affect media 
owners, business elites, and the government.  Some 
journalists admit to self-censorship when their reporting 
threatens the political or economic interests of media 
owners.  There have been highly publicized firings of 
journalists who dared to challenge the existing elite power 
structure. 
 
8. (U) A small number of powerful business magnates with 
intersecting business interests, political loyalties, and 
family ties owns almost all the news media.  For example, of 
the four national newspapers, a Liberal Party Congressman 
operates one, as well as a national TV station, and a former 
President (also from the Liberal Party) runs another.  A 
wealthy businessman owns the other two.  A wealthy 
businessman and Nationalist Party supporter owns the major 
national television channel.  Besides the national TV and 
print media, there are national radio channels with large 
audiences and small independent TV stations at the local 
level.  Smaller markets are covered sparsely by the national 
news media, so audiences there have to rely on their local 
cable channels for news of their area.  Most news media do 
not maintain overseas correspondents, but there is a fair 
amount of international coverage through AP, EFE or other 
news services, and, in the case of TV, CNN Espanol. 
Finally, there is a fairly small but growing percent of the 
population that is accessing news on the Internet. 
 
9. (U) This year\'s Mission Program Plan has six goal papers, 
not including Human Resources.  We support these goals with 
appropriate resources as outlined below. 
 
Goal 1.  Democratic Systems and Practices.  The Public 
Affairs Section (PAS) supports the efforts of the Political 
Section, USAID, and the Front Office through speakers, press 
statements, conferences, and briefings to develop Honduran 
democratic institutions, create more professional and 
capable Honduran law enforcement agencies and military to 
interdict drugs, fight organized crime, combat international 
terrorism, and strengthen justice sector institutions by 
reducing corruption, improving institutional capacity of 
courts, prosecutors, and public defenders, and promoting 
criminal and civil law reform.  The primary audiences for 
programs under this goal are the government, human rights 
and other nongovernmental organizations, and the media.  The 
Ambassador undertakes frequent press statements, interviews, 
and speeches on corruption, drug trafficking, and the need 
for an active and competent justice system.  We will sponsor 
a speaker for an upcoming TIP conference, as we did last 
year.  We also use AETN/DVC programs to address important 
audiences on these issues.  We keep the Mission home page 
updated with speeches and materials on these subjects, draft 
media reactions, and use IRC outreach to target audiences, 
including media, NGOs and government officials. 
Goal 2.  Economic Growth and Development.  PAS provides 
assistance to USAID and the Economic Section to explain the 
importance of compliance with IMF program benchmarks and the 
poverty reduction strategy and to encourage greater 
understanding of macroeconomic stability and the need for an 
attractive investment climate, effective use of development 
finance, and the importance of the creation of a 
professional civil service.  The primary audience for these 
programs is the government, Congressional deputies, 
municipalities, labor unions, business, and the general 
public.  Program strategies include speeches by Economic 
Section officers and the Ambassador, press statements, 
briefings, Web page, outreach, and other programs, such as 
DVCs for targeted audiences. 
 
Goal 3.  Trade and Investment.  PAS supports USDA, USAID, 
and the Economic Section in promoting the successful 
completion of the U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA), the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), the 
Doha agenda of the World Trade Organization (WTO), and 
Honduran support for trade liberalization in general.  We 
have conducted and will continue to conduct a public 
diplomacy strategy to promote the benefits and opportunities 
of trade liberalization and curbing of monopolistic behavior 
through the International Visitors Program, U.S. speakers, 
outreach by the Information Resource Center, updates of the 
Mission Internet home page, speeches, and op-eds. 
 
Goal 4.  Close Ties with Allies and Friends.  The Political 
Section and U.S. Military Group work with the government and 
military of Honduras to achieve productive relations with 
Honduras\' Central American neighbors so that it can 
contribute to the international effort against terrorism, 
increase regional economic cooperation, and reach amicable 
settlement of border issues.  PAS provides assistance on 
military and counterterrorism issues through support for 
speeches or press briefings by the Ambassador or other 
officials, through the IV program, and by providing outreach 
of relevant materials. 
 
Goal 5. Assistance for U.S. Citizens Abroad.  The Consular 
Section provides support and information to U.S. citizens 
and works with government officials on anti-illegal 
immigration/anti-terrorism measures.  PAS supports Consular 
efforts to keep the Mission Web page and Consular 
Information Sheets updated.  We also support outreach 
efforts, directed to U.S. citizens and Honduran visa 
applicants, including interviews, AETN/DVC programs, op-eds, 
and by editing and placing a monthly Consular Corner article 
in a national newspaper. 
 
Goal 6.  Mutual Understanding.  PAS uses international 
exchanges to increase mutual understanding and build trust 
between Americans and Hondurans, promote understanding of 
domestic political and social realities that underpin 
American policy decision-making on issues such as 
immigration, CAFTA, homeland security, and drug 
interdiction, and encourage good governance and 
transparency.  We provide U.S. speakers on shared social and 
political issues that impact Hondurans and promote public 
discussion of the importance of civil society and media 
participation in public policy on education, HIV/AIDS, youth- 
at-risk, public health and security issues.  We support 
educational development through programs with libraries and 
museums and through cultural exchanges and grants and are 
working to establish a pilot program of teaching American 
History and American political topics to graduate students. 
We support the English language program as a means to 
economic and political development and promote educational 
exchanges throughout the country.  We have also begun to 
direct PAS programs such as speakers and book donations to 
the most ignored and isolated population groups.  In 
addition, we have been directing greater efforts to finding 
IV grantees and Fulbright students from more remote areas 
and marginalized groups such as the Garifunas and other 
indigenous and ethnic groups.  We have worked with drug 
prevention and youth-at-risk programs implemented by both 
NGOs and governmental institutions.  We will also continue 
to work closely with USAID to promote their programs that 
seek to build a democratic culture and to alleviate the 
rural poverty plaguing Honduras through good governance, 
health, education, agricultural development and 
environmental programs.  The Embassy, through PAS, can 
highlight these needs and bring attention to the more 
successful projects of the government and NGOs in this area. 
On the press side, we support the Ambassador in his 
speeches, visits, briefings, interviews, place op-eds, and 
distribute materials through our press and IRC sections.  We 
provide reporting on media trends and opinion.  We are 
working with small media organizations to offer interviews 
and programs to these outlets whenever possible.  The small 
TV stations in particular are interested in getting material 
and will run items of interest to their audiences in its 
entirety. 
 
Palmer 
 
_______________________________ 
1  I\'ve never seen this phrase before.  What is the source 
of it? 
"
"16407","4/27/2004 21:59","04TEGUCIGALPA966","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000966 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, AND WHA/CEN 
FOR PM, WHA/PPC, AND NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, APRIL 26, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 4/24 entitled \"Return of the troops.\"  \"President Maduro 
has recently announced the return of the Honduran troops in 
Iraq, who were supposed to carry out humanitarian and 
reconstruction works in that country.\" 
 
\"When the Honduran government took the decision to send 
troops to the Iraqi war, it was well aware of the risks 
involving this mission, because in a war everyone knows how 
it starts, but not how it ends.  Thus, no one should plead 
ignorance, and much less try to deceive others.\" 
 
\"On this issue, there should be no speculations or attempts 
to manipulate public opinion.\" 
 
2. Op-ed by Mario Argueta in Tegucigalpa-based moderate 
daily \"El Heraldo\" on 4/24 entitled \"The return.\"  \"The 
Honduran government has taken an appropriate decision by 
ordering the return of the second contingent of Honduran 
troops that was sent to Iraq in February.\" 
 
\"The decision of President Maduro, which was broadly 
supported by the national public opinion, is very 
convenient.  We should leave behind this adventure, and we 
expect our Armed Forces won\'t be required to interfere in 
the internal affairs of other countries that haven\'t 
requested our support.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"16609","5/4/2004 23:12","04TEGUCIGALPA1023","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE84543","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-O, WHA, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: CONTACT INFORMATION FOR HONDURAN GOVERNMENT 
OFFICIALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 84543 
 
1.  (SBU)  Please see below updated contact information 
regarding Honduras: 
 
President Maduro and his Senior Staff 
===================================== 
 
Post: Tegucigalpa, Honduras 
Date of Submission: May 3, 2004 
 
President Ricardo Maduro Joest 
President of Honduras (head of government and head of state) 
Office:    (504) 290-0637 
(Sonia Zepeda, Exec. Sec. to Pres. Maduro) 
Private:   (504) 978-2528 
Fax:       (504) 290-0570 
Residence: (504) 998-0003 
Cell phone:(504) 998-0931 
Coments:   President Maduro speaks fluent English. 
 
Minister Ricardo Alvarez 
Minister and Private Secretary to the President 
Office:    (504) 290-0523 
(Aida Buck, Exec. Asst. / Norma Portales, Exec. Sec.) 
Direct:    (504) 290-0571, 239-5567 (Norma answers) 
Private:   (504) 978-0392 
Fax:       (504) 235-7702 
Residence: (504) 211-8519 
Cell phone:(504) 990-0504, 992-4468 
Comments: Position is at the Minister level, fluent English 
speaker and with President Maduro during business hours. 
 
Mr. Mariano Jimenez Torres 
Executive Assistant to the President 
Office:    (504) 290-0524 (Sonia Zepeda) 
Fax:       (504) 290-0570 
Cell phone:(504) 969-5989 
Comments: Speaks English, son of Minister of Agriculture 
Mariano Jimenez Talavera 
 
Minister Dr. Luis Cosenza 
Minister of the Presidency 
Office:    (504) 221-1769, 290-0670 
(Sofia Castillo, Exec. Secretary) 
Private:   (504) 978-0390 
Fax:       (504) 220-7464 
Residence: (504) 211-8726 
Cell phone:(504) 978-0390 
Comments:  Speaks excellent English 
 
Foreign Minister 
================ 
 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Office:    (504) 234-3297, 234-1478 
(Juanita, Exec. Sec. / Amadita, Aux. Sec) 
Private:   (504) 234-3998 
Fax:       (504) 234-1922 
Residence: (504) 232-2215 
Cell phone:(504) 990-4667 
Comments:  Understands English, but not a fluent speaker; 
Spanish interpreter needed. 
 
2.  (U)  Post will notify Ops Center of any changes. 
 
 
 
PIERCE 
"
"16719","5/7/2004 15:32","04TEGUCIGALPA1050","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001050 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, AND WHA/CEN 
FOR PM, WHA/PPC, AND NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MAY 6, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 5/6 entitled \"Torture.\"  \"President Bush has been forced 
to use the Arab television network Al Arabiya in an attempt 
to quiet the wave of international indignation, especially 
in the Middle East and the U.S., that has arisen as a result 
of the disclosure of evidence that American soldiers have 
tortured and abused Iraqi prisoners.\" 
 
\"Bush has had to face this disgraceful situation, and has 
tried to appease the anger it has provoked in the Arab 
world.\" 
 
\"As we see it, the post-war problems in Iraq have proved 
much more difficult than invading, overthrowing and 
capturing Saddam Hussein.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"16720","5/7/2004 15:32","04TEGUCIGALPA1051","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES, AND WHA/CEN 
FOR PM, WHA/PPC, AND NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MAY 6, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 5/6 entitled \"Torture.\"  \"President Bush has been forced 
to use the Arab television network Al Arabiya in an attempt 
to quiet the wave of international indignation, especially 
in the Middle East and the U.S., that has arisen as a result 
of the disclosure of evidence that American soldiers have 
tortured and abused Iraqi prisoners.\" 
 
\"Bush has had to face this disgraceful situation, and has 
tried to appease the anger it has provoked in the Arab 
world.\" 
 
\"As we see it, the post-war problems in Iraq have proved 
much more difficult than invading, overthrowing and 
capturing Saddam Hussein.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"16731","5/7/2004 22:18","04TEGUCIGALPA1057","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE87181|04TEGUCIGALPA893|04TEGUCIGALPA910","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PM, PM/RSAT, AND PM/PMAT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, MARR, IZ, HA, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS REITERATES REASON FOR IRAQ WITHDRAWAL; 
EXPRESSES POSSIBLE INTEREST IN HAITI DEPLOYMENT 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 910 
     B. STATE 87181 
     C. FM ROSA BAUTISTA-SECRETARY POWELL APRIL 16 LETTER 
     D. CJCS-CHOD APRIL 15 2004 LETTER 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 893 
 
Classified By: Charge d\' Affaires Roger D. Pierce; 
reasons 1.4 (a), (b), and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  On May 4, PolCouns, DATT, and PolMilOff met 
with Minister of Defense (MOD) Federico Breve and Chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) General Jose Isaias Barahona 
to discuss Iraq and SOUTHCOM\'s proposed Regional Training 
Initiative (RTI).  During the course of conversation, both 
Government of Honduras (GOH) officials stated an interest in 
Honduran participation in the UN peacekeeping mission to 
Haiti, but indicated a period of approximately six months 
would be necessary before any troops could be deployed.  MOD 
Breve and CJCS Barahona expressed some nervousness over how 
the GOH\'s announcement to withdraw from Iraq had been 
received in Washington and again affirmed that the CJCS-CHOD 
April 15 letter (ref D) was the main reason for Honduras\' 
decision to leave Iraq.  The GOH also stands ready to move 
forward on RTI in principle, but it is awaiting a formal 
request from SOUTHCOM and further details on how to proceed. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (C) MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona stated the GOH chose to 
leave Iraq before completing their one-year obligation due to 
the substance of the CJCS-CHOD April 15 letter (ref D).  They 
stated the Honduran constitution prohibits the GOH from 
participating in offensive combat operations and that the 
Honduran National Congress had explicitly stated the GOH 
deployment was intended for the sole purpose of humanitarian 
assistance.  The GOH felt that any modification of the 
original mission was beyond the scope envisioned when the GOH 
agreed to deploy troops to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi 
Freedom. 
 
3. (C) MOD Breve stated that the GOH had agreed previously 
with the U.S. not to share the contents of the CJCS-CHOD 
letter publicly.  The GOH remains concerned, however, that 
the reason for the Honduran troops\' withdrawal is not 
entirely understood in Washington and they are concerned that 
the GOH\'s decision could negatively affect the bilateral 
relationship. 
 
4. (C) MOD Breve stated he expected Honduran troops to be out 
of Iraq and into neighboring Kuwait by May 21.  The final 
details of how to return the troops from Kuwait are still 
being coordinated.  CJCS Barahona said he remains concerned 
about force protection issues as GOH forces withdraw from 
Iraq as they will be vulnerable once outside their protected 
compound. 
 
5. (C) During the course of conversation on Iraq and 
international peacekeeping missions in general, DATT queried 
MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona on the GOH\'s willingness to 
consider participating in UN authorized peacekeeping 
operations in Haiti. (Note:  Previously, MOD Breve had asked 
the U.S. informally not to formally request a Honduran 
deployment to Haiti due to the GOH\'s obligations in Iraq. End 
Note).  Both GOH officials stated an interest in a Honduran 
deployment, but indicated a period of approximately six 
months would be necessary before any GOH troops could again 
be sent abroad.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs Director General 
for Foreign Policy Ambassador Mario Fortin told Acting 
PolCouns May 6 that the GOH might be interested in assisting 
in Haiti, but noted that the current political climate was 
not good.  Fortin said that absent a clearer United Nations 
Security Council resolution that covered peacekeeping instead 
of stabilization, the GOH would not be able to participate. 
He said the GOH understood that Brazil was pushing for such a 
resolution.  Fortin noted that the MFA had also talked to the 
French about possibly sending Honduran troops to Haiti. 
 
6. (U) On the evening of May 6, President Ricardo Maduro 
announced that his government was analyzing a UN request for 
Honduran participation in peacekeeping operations in Haiti. 
He added, however, that the Congress might not view the 
request favorably because the Honduran troops will just be 
returning from Iraq. 
 
7. (SBU) MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona stated the GOH was ready 
to move forward in principle on SOUTHCOM\'s RTI proposal but 
the GOH was still waiting for a formal request from the 
United States.  (Note: MILGP is preparing a formal RTI letter 
on SOUTHCOM\'s behalf requesting a GOH response.  This letter 
should be delivered to the GOH shortly. End Note)  Both 
officials also indicated they are very interested in 
receiving more details from SOUTHCOM on exactly how RTI will 
function. 
 
8. (C) Comment:  MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona remain concerned 
about the GOH\'s planned withdrawal from Iraq and how it will 
affect Honduras\' relationship with the United States.  As a 
result, Post believes the GOH might now be willing to deploy 
peacekeeping troops to Haiti, if requested, as a means of 
demonstrating Honduras\' continued interest in international 
peacekeeping operations.  However, such a request would have 
a higher chance of success after Honduran troops in Iraq have 
returned to Honduras and the UNSC passes another resolution 
on Haiti that addresses the GOH\'s concerns.  End Comment. 
 
9. (U) Minimize considered. 
PIERCE 
"
"16732","5/7/2004 23:11","04TEGUCIGALPA1060","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04State6234|04Tegucigalpa2713","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001060 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/T/SV (HSEBSOW); IIP/G/WHA (JMANES; CBARONE); 
WHA/PDA (OHILTON) 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/CAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: EVALUATION OF SPEAKER ON HIV/AIDS PREVENTION: 
NICOLE CHEETHAM, TRACKER #20444 
 
REF: (A) State 06234 (B) Tegucigalpa 02713 
 
SUMMARY: Nicole Cheetham, Director, International Division, 
Advocates for Youth, a Washington-based NGO, conducted an 
intensive and very successful U.S. Speaker program on the 
prevention of HIV/AIDS from February 22-27.  Her 
presentation on \"Communities and Youngsters Taking Action to 
Prevent HIV,\" reached young audiences in Tegucigalpa, La 
Ceiba, Tela and the Afro-Honduran (Garifuna) communities of 
Sambo Creek, Corozal, Trujillo, Santa Fe, Truinfo de La 
Cruz, and Tornabe, on the northern coast of Honduras.  She 
reached many more through media events.  END SUMMARY. 
 
A.  Dates:  February 22-27, 2004. 
    Fiscal year: FY-04, Q2 
 
B.  Objective: Post fully met its objective to reach young 
audiences, especially the high-risk population in Garifuna 
communities, with a message on HIV/AIDS prevention.  The USG 
has identified Honduras as a priority country for HIV/AIDS 
funding. The program enabled the post to address how 
community-based programs work in the U.S. to promote change. 
MPP Strategic Goals: Human Rights, HIV/AIDS, Strengthening 
Democracy, Economic Development, and Mutual Understanding. 
 
C.  Activities to reach the objective: During her visit, 
Nicole Cheetham met in informal settings with young 
Hondurans working on prevention programs, discussing her 
theme of \"Communities and Youngsters Taking Action to 
Prevent HIV.\"  In Tegucigalpa, she met with a group from the 
Honduran Scouts Association working on prevention programs, 
representatives from the Garifuna community, participated in 
a representational luncheon hosted by the PAO for NGO 
leaders who work on HIV/AIDS prevention. During the 
remainder of her program, which took place in local schools 
and community and cultural centers in the cities of La 
Ceiba, Tela, Trujillo and Garifuna communities along the 
north coast of Honduras, she engaged in open discussion with 
groups of students, teachers, parents, and community leaders 
and engaged in open discussion about the issues confronting 
youth and adults in preventing infection. The Press Section 
arranged a roundtable discussion with print media and local 
TV channels covered the program in La Ceiba and Tela, taking 
Ms. Cheetham\'s message to many thousands more. 
 
D.  Evaluation/Impact: Excellent. 
Nicole Cheetham, Speaker on HIV/AIDS prevention, takes 
message to most vulnerable audiences. 
 
Nicole Cheetham\'s program enabled Post to reach out to a 
diverse group of young people and adults with the message 
that HIV/AIDS is here to stay, but that the good news is 
that we know how to prevent getting it and Hondurans can 
avoid reaching the high infection rates that exist in other 
countries. Through this program, the post reached the young 
Afro-Honduran (Garifuna) population where the disease is the 
major cause of death.  Ms. Cheetham\'s program provided an 
opportunity to reiterate the message the entire community 
needs to get involved in preventing the disease and the 
danger of ignoring its existence. It is evident that people 
have the information on how to prevent the disease from 
speading, but they need to work on changing social patterns 
to avoid spreading it. 
 
Post highly recommends Ms. Cheetham for programs on HIV/AIDS 
prevention.  She has ample hands-on experience and adapts 
her presentations to her audience.  Her excellent Spanish, 
warmth, and pleasant personality facilitated an immediate 
rapport with her audience.  Ms. Cheetham conducted an 
intensive program with back-to-back presentations from one 
community to another, whether in a classroom, a gathering on 
a cool spot out in the open, or an air-conditioned municipal 
hall, always encouraging the participants to open up and 
conducting the participants to an honest information 
exchange. She is a true trooper. 
 
E.  Quality of U.S. Support and IIP Offices Involved: Very 
Good.  IIP/T/SV Helen Sebsow proposed an excellent candidate 
for this program. 
 
Pierce 
"
"16778","5/10/2004 21:03","04TEGUCIGALPA1067","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001067 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND DRL/PHD 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN, SOCI, PHUM, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: LIMITED OPPORTUNITY EXISTS FOR WOMEN TO PARTICIPATE IN 
HONDURAN POLITICAL PROCESS 
 
 
1. Summary: Opportunities for women to participate in Honduran 
politics remains quite limited, particularly for those seeking 
elected office.  While women account for well over half of the 
Honduran population, they hold only a fraction of elected 
positions, both on the national and local level.  Despite limited 
attempts at reform to boost the number of women holding elected 
office, Honduran politics remains a male-dominated hierarchy 
inherently resistant to change.  End Summary. 
 
2. Although women secured the right to vote in Honduras in 1954 
and account for an estimated 57 percent of the Honduran 
population, few have made it past the ballot box when it comes to 
elected office.  In the Honduran National Congress, nine out of 
128 representatives are women, a mere 7 percent.  On the local 
level, only 27 of 298 mayors are women.  In contrast to 
congressional representatives, however, the number of women 
mayors has steadily increased through the past three elections. 
Despite these improvements, when electoral law reform was enacted 
during the 2001 elections fewer women overall were elected to 
office.  (On a positive note, even though the overall number of 
female judges remains small, due to a modified selection process, 
nine of 15 members of the Supreme Court are women, including the 
Chief Justice.) 
 
3. Current Honduran law stipulates that 30 percent of government 
jobs (including elected offices) should go to women, although 
this has never been enforced.  Political parties, for instance, 
have a 30 percent requirement for women to be placed on their 
party list.  However, political parties can easily put women at 
the bottom of the list, giving them a minimal chance to be 
selected.  This situation may change with the introduction of 
direct election of congressional representatives, as a result of 
electoral law reform passed in March 2004 (which has still yet to 
be officially published).  Photos will be placed on ballots 
encouraging the electorate to change its political party 
patronage perspective to focusing on individual candidates. 
Nevertheless, while many women do work in government jobs, the 
\"glass ceiling\" remains low, generally limiting them to non- 
decision making positions.  Also, women tend to be paid less than 
men for the same type of work even in government jobs. 
 
4. On March 31, a motion in Congress, supported by women\'s rights 
groups that would have mandated equal representation between men 
and women in high-level political office, was soundly defeated, 
gaining only 46 votes.  While the motion was never expected to 
pass, those campaigning for change considered the fact that it 
was even brought up for a vote a victory. 
 
5. On the local level, an event was held February 26 by the 
National Association for Municipal Women of Honduras (ANAMMUH) in 
order to appeal for increased women\'s participation in the 
political process.  On March 8, the National Institute of the 
Woman (INAM), a cabinet-level women\'s ministry, commemorated 2004 
as the \"Year of the Political Rights of Honduran Women.\"  While 
women\'s groups would like to see greater participation by women 
in government, many Honduran women are apathetic about pursuing 
greater political participation. 
 
6. Comment:  Although women\'s groups in Honduras are pushing for 
change and some strides have been made, deeply ingrained Honduran 
cultural norms continue to severely restrict opportunities for 
women in politics, particularly at higher levels.  Many women not 
only continue to view their role in traditional ways, accepting a 
male-dominated hierarchy with little dissent, but also are 
constrained by a political system influenced by personal 
interests and not deeply rooted in democratic values.  This 
barrier to participation is further aggravated by an ineffective 
public educational system that has not been able to create 
opportunities and instill one\'s sense of choices and 
responsibilities.  Thus, expanded grassroots training and 
increased educational opportunities, particularly in rural areas, 
will be necessary before Honduran women can be expected to assume 
greater influence over political decisions that affect their 
daily lives.  Recent electoral law reform passed in March 2004 
may provide the opportunity for significant change; however, this 
will take time since both the electorate and politicians are not 
yet familiar with the law.  End Comment. 
 
 
Pierce 
"
"16799","5/11/2004 14:31","04TEGUCIGALPA1073","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, AND IIP/T/ES 
FOR PM, NEA/NGA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MAY 7, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 5/7 entitled \"Bush in trouble.\"  \"Things are 
turning out for the worse for President Bush, more than a 
year after the Iraqi invasion and after having declared the 
end of the military actions.  However, the Iraqis are still 
resisting, causing the death of thousands of American 
soldiers.\" 
 
\"He\'s not only swamped with an eroding war, getting more and 
more enemies as time goes by.  He has even been forced to 
apologize for the documented human rights abuses his troops 
have caused to several Iraqis who are prisoners in their own 
country, among an avalanche of criticism and condemnation in 
the whole world.\" 
 
\"Things aren\'t going well for the man who decided to skip 
the U.N. regulations to invade another fellow U.N. member, 
despite the fact he hasn\'t been able to properly justify his 
actions and the growing opposition around the world.\" 
 
\"In fact, it\'s evident the main reasons to attack Iraq under 
the campaign to fight terrorism were false.  Perhaps Ted 
Kennedy is right when he said that Iraq is Bush\'s Vietnam.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"16814","5/11/2004 22:31","04TEGUCIGALPA1079","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, AND IIP/T/ES 
FOR PM, NEA/NGA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MAY 11, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 5/11 entitled \"Beyond 9/11\"  \"If the `war on 
terrorism\' carried out by Bush and his oil-thirsty `falcons\' 
has been really caused by the devastating attacks on 
September 11, 2001, there\'s no doubt that the damage caused 
to the U.S. by Osama bin Laden has exceeded what Bush\'s 
right-wing extremism had ever expected.\" 
 
\"More than the loss of civil liberties and even the 
xenophobia of the antiterrorist policy within the U.S., now 
the dramatic images of the Iraqi prisoners have been much 
more effective than all Al Qaeda bombs, which have 
demolished the faade of the U.S. as the prototype of 
democracy, the respect of human rights, and liberty.\" 
 
\"Osama bin Laden must be laughing in his hiding place, just 
like all anti-U.S. extremists.  No terrorist attack could 
cause greater harm than those terrible images that are being 
seen around the world.\" 
 
\"Iraq is proving itself to be George W. Bush\'s political 
epitaph, and he\'s also breeding his own Vietnam.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"16892","5/13/2004 23:01","04TEGUCIGALPA1106","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE102042","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001106 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, AND INR/AN/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/13/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, PINR, KDEM, CU, HO, CHR-1 
SUBJECT: CUBAN AMBASSADOR TO HONDURAS ALLEGES COMING U.S. 
INVASION OF CUBA 
 
REF: STATE 102042 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires, a.i.; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) Cuban Ambassador to Honduras Alberto Gonzalez Polanco, 
in public statements May 12, claimed that the GOC was at 
military alert for a potential U.S. invasion.  He told 
reporters that the GOC feared such an attack was \"closer than 
ever.\"  He added that Cuban citizens were well prepared to 
resist an American attack and would make it very costly for 
U.S. troops.  He also criticized the recent Report of the 
Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba and Radio Marti. 
The Cuban Ambassador\'s comments were reported in all four of 
Honduras\' daily newspapers. 
 
2. (U) Note:  Acting PolCouns delivered the fact sheet on the 
Report of the Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba 
(reftel) to Honduran MFA Director General for Foreign Policy 
Ambassador Mario Fortin May 13.  End Note. 
 
3. (C) Comment:  Ambassador Gonzalez Polanco has been the 
GOC\'s point man in Tegucigalpa over the last several months 
regarding hot issues such as the GOH\'s drafting of a UN 
Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba, a 
proposed (and then withdrawn) Cuban-drafted UNCHR resolution 
on Guantanamo detainees, and the resulting ramifications for 
Honduran-Cuban relations.  He had been quiet for the last 
couple weeks until his comments May 12.  End Comment. 
PIERCE 
"
"16893","5/13/2004 23:04","04TEGUCIGALPA1109","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/IL, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
TAGS: ELAB, PHUM, PGOV, EAGR, HO 
SUBJECT: 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF HISTORIC BANANA STRIKE IN HONDURAS 
 
1. Summary: A series of events sponsored by the Ministry of Labor 
and the International Labor Organization (ILO) took place from 
May 3-5 in Tegucigalpa to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the 
historic May 1954 banana strike in Honduras.  President Ricardo 
Maduro, President of the National Congress Pepe Lobo, Minister of 
Labor German Leitzelar Vidaurreta, DCM, AID Director, and LabAtt 
attended the opening commemoration, along with several 1954 
banana strikers, as well as leaders from labor unions and the 
private sector.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
2. The 1954 strike began at United Fruit Company (Tela Railroad 
Company/Chiquita) and quickly spread to Standard Fruit Company 
(Dole) and then across the country before being resolved in July 
1954.  It would mark the beginning of a labor union movement and 
organized working class in Honduras.  On May 1, 1954, workers 
from United Fruit went on strike after demanding double pay for 
working holidays.  Two days later, 7,000 workers went on strike 
at installations in El Progreso, Yoro.  The strike continued 
among banana companies, a tobacco plant, a mining company, and 
some textile factories. 
 
3. Rafael Alberty, a teacher who went to work for United Fruit as 
office manager of the machinery department, became one of the 
negotiators in the strike on behalf of workers.  He and Ventura 
Ramos, among others, had received orientation on strike movements 
in Guatemala during the Jacobo Arbenz government and allegations 
of outside influence were circulating. (Comment: A Guatemalan 
group that entered Guatemala from Honduras overthrew the Arbenz 
government in June 1954.  End Comment.) 
 
4. Before any mediation was able to take place, some 2,000 
workers extended the movement to Cortes.  Shortly thereafter, the 
numbers of workers on strike reached 12,000.  In response, 
Standard Fruit, unlike United Fruit, negotiated with workers 
under governmental arbitration.  These negotiations would be the 
first of its kind in Honduran history.  After 67 days on strike, 
the workers, the government, and United Fruit reached an 
agreement that ended the strike in early July. 
 
5. As a result of the banana strike, the Letter for Worker 
Guarantees of 1955 established the application of the Labor Law, 
the creation of the Ministry of Labor, the establishment of the 
Honduran Institute for Social Security (IHSS), and the Agrarian 
Reform Law.  In addition, on August 28, 1954, the Tela Railroad 
Company Workers Union (SITRATERCO) was formed, one of the most 
powerful and influential unions of the past 50 years.  Today, it 
is down to approximately 2,000 members and is part of the United 
Confederation of Honduran Workers (CUTH) led by Israel Salinas. 
 
------------------------------ 
50th Anniversary Commemoration 
------------------------------ 
 
6. On May 3, 2004, the commemoration began with opening remarks 
from President Ricardo Maduro, Minister of Labor German 
Leitzelar, a representative of ILO, as well as Honduran Workers 
Federation (CTH) Secretary General Dinora Aceituno.  Following 
these remarks, recognition was awarded to several aging leaders 
of the 1954 banana strike.  A forum followed that mainly 
addressed the need to reform certain aspects of Honduran labor 
law.  In addition to this forum, a number of conferences were 
held during the week to address international norms, social 
responsibility, child labor, and the U.S.-Central America Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA). 
 
7. During the forum, the Minister of Labor Leitzelar expounded 
his views on modernizing Honduran labor law in certain areas. 
Leitzelar also spoke of the need to effectively enforce existing 
laws.  Supreme Court Justice Lidia Cardona argued that instead of 
using the courts to settle labor concerns, mediation should be 
utilized as a mechanism for conciliation.  President of the 
Honduran Manufacturing Association (Honduran Maquila Association) 
Jesus Canahuati and President of the National Congress Pepe Lobo 
reiterated Leitzelar\'s concerns about the inefficiency of current 
labor law.  In response, workers complained about the constraints 
to the effective freedom of association and collective 
bargaining. 
 
Pierce 
"
"16993","5/17/2004 22:53","04TEGUCIGALPA1141","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA1742","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, INL/LP, INR, CA, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/17/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, CASC, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: SAN PEDRO SULA PRISON FIRE KILLS 103 INMATES; 
SECOND DEADLY PRISON FIRE IN LITTLE OVER A YEAR 
 
REF: A. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1742 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 861 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1309 
 
Classified By: DCM Roger D. Pierce; Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) A fire allegedly caused by an electrical short circuit 
in a refrigerator for soft drinks in a cell block for gang 
members killed 103 inmates in a prison on the outskirts of 
San Pedro Sula.  Approximately 25 injured prisoners were 
treated at a nearby hospital.  (Two other injured prisoners 
died at the hospital.)  The vast majority of the victims were 
members of the gang \"Mara Salvatrucha,\" AKA \"13.\"  The 
incident caused President Ricardo Maduro to cut short his 
trip to Europe and announce he plans to return to Honduras. 
 
2. (U) The prison, reportedly built to hold 800 prisoners, 
housed approximately 1,960 prisoners at the time of the fire 
according to the GOH.  San Pedro Sula is Honduras\' second 
largest city and economic capital, but is plagued by gang 
violence and an extremely high murder rate. 
 
3. (SBU) Police are speculating that Mara Salvatrucha\'s 
rival, the \"M-18 (diez y ocho)\" gang, may have deliberately 
set the fire.  Others are sure to soon blame the GOH for the 
fire given what happened in April 2003 at the El Porvenir 
prison near La Ceiba.  While at least one inmate claimed that 
prison guards shot at prisoners, prison authorities said that 
the only shots fired were into the air to prevent a mass 
escape.  Currently, there is no evidence that any of the 
victims were shot. 
 
4. (U) Note:  On April 5, 2003, 68 persons, 61 of them gang 
members, were killed in a violent incident at El Porvenir 
prison near La Ceiba.  Reports produced by the Public 
Ministry, a Special Commission of the Honduran National 
Council for Internal Security (CONASIN), and the Human Rights 
Commissioner placed the blame for the vast majority of the 
deaths on government security forces (police and military 
under police command) and non-gang member inmate trusties. 
(See refs A-C for background and septel for an update.)  End 
Note. 
 
5. (U) There are two American citizen prisoners at the 
prison, but the Embassy\'s Consular Agent in San Pedro Sula 
has confirmed that neither was injured in the fire. 
 
6. (U) Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez told Embassy 
Law Enforcement Advisor that the GOH would thoroughly 
investigate the incident.  EmbOff offered the assistance of a 
law enforcement consultant currently working with the Police 
Internal Affairs Unit if needed. 
 
7. (C) Comment:  Especially given the April 2003 incident at 
the El Porvenir prison, there are likely to be allegations 
that the GOH is either (a) responsible for setting the fire, 
(b) negligent in letting a fire be started, and/or (c) 
negligent for allegedly not assisting the inmates in their 
burning cell block immediately.  However, as noted above, it 
is quite possible that gang rivalries could have led to this 
incident.  Violence between gang members (both inside and 
outside the prisons) is common.  Past violent incidents have 
occurred at this San Pedro Sula prison, including grenades 
thrown over the prison walls.  The San Pedro Sula prison has 
less controls than the main Tamara prison outside of 
Tegucigalpa.  Post will closely follow the investigation of 
this incident and urge the GOH to conduct a complete and 
transparent investigation.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"17090","5/19/2004 23:05","04TEGUCIGALPA1160","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPA1141","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001160 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, INL/LP, INR, CA, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, CASC, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH BRIEFS DIPLOMATIC CORPS ON SAN PEDRO SULA 
PRISON FIRE; PLEDGES FULL INVESTIGATION 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1141 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1742 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 861 
     D. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1309 
 
1. (U) Honduran Vice President (and Acting President) Vicente 
Williams and Minister of Government and Justice Jorge Ramon 
Hernandez Alcerro on May 18 briefed the diplomatic corps, 
including DCM and PolOff, on the May 17 fire in a cell block 
for gang members that killed 103 inmates in a prison on the 
outskirts of San Pedro Sula.  (Some press reports indicated 
that 104 inmates died.)  Approximately 25 injured prisoners 
were treated at a nearby hospital.  (Two other injured 
prisoners died at the hospital.)  The GOH confirmed that no 
foreigners were among those killed in the fire.  The vast 
majority of the victims were members of the gang \"Mara 
Salvatrucha,\" AKA \"MS-13.\"  The incident caused President 
Ricardo Maduro to cut short his trip to Europe and return to 
Honduras.  The GOH said that preliminary reports indicated 
that the fire was allegedly caused by a short circuit of air 
conditioning wiring (some press reports had indicated an 
electrical short circuit in a refrigerator for soft drinks 
had caused the fire). 
 
2. (U) Vice President Williams said that once the fire 
started, it spread to the mattresses and curtains which 
apparently caused the toxic gases that killed most victims. 
Firemen who arrived at the prison were able to put out the 
fire before it spread to other cell blocks.  Preliminary 
reports indicate that while some inmates burned to death, the 
vast majority died from asphyxiation. 
 
3. (U) Williams said that the GOH was doing everything 
possible, from helping the families, to conducting an 
investigation, to seeking international assistance for 
improving the poor Honduran prisons.  The GOH was paying for 
all costs (medical treatment, return of the bodies to the 
prisoners\' home towns for burial, etc.).  Williams pledged 
that there would be a complete investigation, and that if any 
Honduran security officials were found to have been involved 
in the incident, through action or negligence, they would be 
held accountable.  The state-owned electricity company ENEE 
would help firemen conduct the investigation of how the fire 
started.  Currently, there is no evidence that any of the 
victims were shot.  Nevertheless, the GOH has seized the 
prison guards weapons and handed them over to the Public 
Ministry for ballistics testing, something the GOH did not do 
immediately after the April 2003 incident which caused 
ongoing evidence problems in that investigation.  According 
to Williams, although shots were reportedly fired, initial 
investigation results showed no bullet holes in the walls or 
dead bodies. 
 
4. (U) Williams noted that a commission formed after the 
April 5, 2003, incident at El Porvenir prison near La Ceiba, 
in which 68 persons, 61 of them gang members, were killed, 
had recommended a series of reforms.  The GOH was seeking to 
implement these reforms, but needed financial and technical 
assistance from international donors.  Williams said the GOH 
was considering as possible options prison privatization or 
granting concessions to operate prisons to private companies, 
and told DCM that the GOH had discussed the idea prior to the 
May 17 fire with a U.S. company.  In any event, the prison 
system needed to be modernized with new legislation and new 
facilities.  The GOH said that plans had been made for a 
replacement prison in San Pedro Sula for 1,500 inmates and 
would cost USD 10-12 million to build. 
 
5. (U) Press reports noted that seven gang members were 
killed March 21, 2003, at the same prison under mysterious 
circumstances.  Some prisoners compared the fire to the April 
2003 incident at La Ceiba and the May 3, 2002, prison 
uprising in Choluteca that left four inmates dead and 21 
injured. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment:  The GOH acted prudently by immediately 
recognizing the seriousness of this incident and pledging to 
hold accountable any GOH official that may bear some 
responsibility for the incident.  While there were vague 
offers of technical assistance from a few countries, it is 
doubtful if the GOH will be successful in obtaining the 
needed funds for prison construction from international 
donors.  Another reform under consideration is to separate 
oversight of the penal system from the Ministry of Public 
Security (the Ministry that also includes the police). 
However, the prisons are one of the most lucrative potential 
corruption opportunities in the Honduran government.  Any 
proposed changes to their administration is likely to be very 
controversial, and to meet with considerable opposition.  End 
Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"17175","5/21/2004 17:19","04TEGUCIGALPA1169","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, AND IIP/T/ES 
FOR PM, NEA/NGA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MAY 20, 2004 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Ramon Villeda Bermudez (current Liberal Party 
Congressman and former presidential candidate) in 
Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" on 5/20 
entitled \"The war in Iraq: was it worth it?\"  \"Senator 
Edward Kennedy has called the war in Iraq The Bushes\' 
Vietnam, and his definition has definitely hit the mark, 
because among the historical mistakes to go to war, Vietnam 
has been the most disgraceful mistake of the U.S., which has 
now been surpassed by Iraq.\" 
 
\"The release of the images of the Iraqi prisoners being 
tortured in Abu Ghraib proved the lack of military 
leadership and the ignorance of U.S. troops about the Vienna 
and Geneva Conventions.  They also uncovered a strange 
combination of sadism and homosexuality practiced by U.S. 
soldiers with the support of their superiors.  The scandal 
of the new Nazis has gone beyond our imagination.\" 
 
\"Had the Bushes expected so many problems in their Vietnam 
of 2004?  Evidently, they believed that, after the invasion, 
after the justifiable lie of the presence of weapons of mass 
destruction (which were never found), it was all going to be 
a piece of cake.  I believe their advisors didn\'t expect or 
care about polarizing the world or motivating a religious 
hatred as we\'ve never seen before.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"17223","5/24/2004 22:12","04TEGUCIGALPA1197","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE96070|04TEGUCIGALPA1951|04TEGUCIGALPA224|04TEGUCIGALPA2880|04TEGUCIGALPA374|04TEGUCIGALPA542|04TEGUCIGALPA883","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR DS/IP/FPO FREDERICK GARDNER, IP/WHA CRAIG MASS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ABUD, AFIN, AMGT, ASEC, KESS, KICA, KSEP 
SUBJECT: TEGUCIGALPA FY 2004 AND FY 2005 LGP REDUCTIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 096070 
     B. POST HARDSHIP DIFFERENTIAL REPORT CRIME SECTION 
        ATTACHMENT A 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 00883 QUARTERLY STATUS REPORT 1 
        QUARTER 2004 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 00542 SECURITY ENVIRONMENT PROFILE 
        QUESTIONNAIRE 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 00224 QUARTERLY STATUS REPORT 4 
        QUARTER 2003 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 00224 ANNUAL CRIME EVALUATION 
        QUESTIONNAIRE 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 00224 ANNUAL CRIME SAFETY REPORT FOR 
        OSAC 
     H. TEGUCIGALPA 02880 QUARTERLY STATUS REPORT 3 
        QUARTER 2003 
     I. TEGUCIGALPA 01951 QUARTERLY STATUS REPORT 2 
        QUARTER 2003 
     J. TEGUCIGALPA 00374 QUARTERLY STATUS REPORT 4 
        QUARTER 2002 
 
1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Post carefully reviewed and is modifying 
the Local Guard Program (LGP) contract in order to meet the 
requested 3.3 percent LGP reduction goal (approximately 
$18,000) for FY 2004.  RSO is currently working with the GSO 
contracting office to negotiate a reduction in contract 
vehicles cost as a result of these modifications.  This 
reduction could result in an additional 4 percent to the FY 
2005. The total reduction to Post LGP will equal 7.5 percent 
(dependent on the reduction in contract vehicle cost).  Post 
EAC has carefully reviewed these modifications/cuts and 
unanimously agree that no further reductions can be absorbed 
given the current security environment.  The initial reaction 
by members of the EAC was to find a way to maintain the 
current program.  Five Agency heads individually supported an 
increase in ICASS cost to counter the budget cut (This idea 
was researched but was found not to be feasible.  Tegucigalpa 
is a high crime threat post (borderline critical) with 
ever-increasing real crime.  Many EAC members questioned why 
the Department was requesting funding cuts at a high crime 
post.  End summary. 
 
2.  (SBU)  Since the third quarterly status report in 2002, 
every subsequent report (QSR) submitted has contained 
incidents of Mission employees being victimized - most events 
occurring in and around the Chancery, USAID building and 
residential areas of Mission employee housing.  The following 
list highlights specific examples of assaults that have been 
on the increase during the last 18 months.  During this same 
time period, RSO issued more than twenty Mission-wide 
security advisories via e-mail to employees and family 
members.  This list notes only the more egregious crimes 
against Mission members and does not include harassment, 
conventional thefts or crimes against Mission locally 
employed staff (LES) outside of their official duties: 
 
     (Reftel J) The Milgroup Commander was assaulted by 
three robbers outside a local pizza take-out store.  He was 
struck on the head with a brick, threatened with more severe 
injury and robbed. 
 
     (Reference B) An EFM was robbed at gunpoint near a 
bakery frequented by U.S. Mission families close to the 
Embassy. 
 
     (Reference B) A USAID Honduran employee was robbed and 
threatened by a motorcycle robber (Note - Robbers, often as 
two-man teams, utilize medium-sized motorcycles.  This MO is 
so common that Mission security advice warns that any two men 
on a medium-sized motorcycle should be considered armed and 
dangerous until proven otherwise.) as she walked from her 
parked vehicle to the USAID entrance (The USAID building is 
directly across the street from the Chancery). 
 
     (Reftel H) Twelve Honduran Embassy employees were held 
hostage and robbed at gunpoint while preparing a residence 
for an incoming Mission family.  Two employees suffered 
injuries requiring medical attention.  There were four 
additional home invasions during the quarter against 
non-Mission residences but they occured close or adjacent to 
Mission residences. 
 
     (Reftel H) Three American TDY employees were threatened 
and robbed at gunpoint by motorcycle robbers close to an 
embassy perimeter entrance.  One female was assaulted, beaten 
and required medical attention. (10 stitches) 
 
     (Reftel E) An MSG was robbed at gunpoint by three men 
traveling in a taxi close to the MSG house. 
 
     (Reftel C) The visiting mother of the MilGroup 
Commander was robbed by a motorcycle robber as she exited her 
vehicle. 
 
     (Reftel C) Another USAID Honduran employee was robbed 
and threatened by an armed motorcycle robber as she walked 
from her parked vehicle to the USAID entrance. 
 
     (Reference B)  Peace Corps Country Director\'s home was 
invaded by three armed men.  The Director, his spouse and 
daughter, and 6 Honduran house guests were held hostage, 
assaulted and robbed at gunpoint as three men threatened 
murder, kidnapping, and further reprisals if they reported 
the attack. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Additional circumstances affecting the Post 
security program: 
 
Honduras is the third most violent country in Latin America 
and one of the most corrupt.  These facts, combined with the 
lowest per capita ratio of police in Latin America (5400 
police for a population of 6 million and 1100 police in 
Tegucigalpa for a population of 1 million - gang members 
outnumber the police in the capital by 18:1.) exacerbate a 
dangerous, multi-faceted criminal threat to Mission 
employees, family members, and the resident American 
community.  Police response to emergencies is problematic and 
unpredictable.  During the recent home invasion of the Peace 
Corps Country Director, the response time of the local police 
was more than an hour - this, after nine people were 
threatened and held at gunpoint by armed men. 
 
Another example of the inability of the local police to 
respond to an emergency occurred when the neighbor (they have 
a shared wall) of the DCM (also the landlord of the current 
DCM residence) was shot in the face inside his residence in 
an assassination attempt.  Fortunately, the victim fled to 
the street and was spotted by an alert Embassy guard at the 
DCM residence.  The guard immediately notified the LGF 
Command Center which in turn notified the local police and 
dispatched the LGF residential sector mobile patrol to the 
area.  Upon arrival, the mobile patrol guards administered 
first aid and took the victim to the hospital, saving his 
life.  Local Police arrived at the scene more than 45 minutes 
later and only after being brought there by the Embassy 
roving patrol. 
 
In effect, the Post LGF is the Mission\'s police force and 
first and last line of defense.  The much-needed residential 
security program is critical to maintaining Mission security, 
morale, and an environment where American employees and their 
families can feel safe.  In times of emergencies, the only 
help is the LGF which responds within minutes - minutes that 
can save lives.  The Embassy LGF accounts for more 
apprehensions and detentions of criminals near Mission 
facilities and residences than the local police.  At any 
given time during non-business hours, the local police have 
only one patrol vehicle dedicated to an area greater than all 
Mission residential sectors combined. 
 
Currently, the Mission LGF is managed by InterCon, which has 
operations worldwide.  Since April of 1998, InterCon has had 
19 guard deaths in Honduras.  In Colombia during the same 
time frame, InterCon has had 1 guard death.  While InterCon 
Honduras represents only 4 percent of InterCon\'s worldwide 
operations, the Honduras operation has accounted for 40 
percent of InterCon \"line of duty\" guard deaths and has had 
more guards killed than all of InterCon\'s other overseas 
operations combined, including Africa.  This fact, combined 
with a Honduran murder case closure rate of less than 1.5 
percent, creates a dangerous environment where murder is 
commonplace and crime pays well. (35 American citizens have 
been murdered since 1997 and all but 3 cases remain open.) 
 
In view of the information above, RSO has evaluated the local 
guard contract and proposes the following deductions to 
accommodate, as fully as possible, the mandated cuts. 
 
4.  (SBU)  FY 2004 LGP reductions:  The following is an 
itemized list of reductions and cost savings. 
 
Position    Function Code  Hours Cut    Dollar Value 
SD-3         9912          eliminated    $1,094 
M-9          5822          976           $1,288 
M-10         5822          976           $1,181 
M-11         5822          eliminated    $3,865 
M-12         5822          eliminated    $3,543 
C-11         5826          eliminated    $1,096 
G-2          5826          eliminated    $767 
CA-2         5826          255           $696 
C-1          5826          2,078         $5,673 
 
A total of $19,204 in savings equaling a 3.5 percent 
reduction for FY 2004. 
 
5.  (SBU)  FY 2005 reductions:  RSO, in cooperation with GSO 
contracting office, is working to negotiate a reduction in 
vehicle cost as a result of a decrease in roving patrols from 
six to five.  While it is estimated that this could result in 
a savings of nearly $16,000 per year, multiple issues 
(dealing with local laws and regulations that are arcane, 
complex and skewed in the interest of the GOH) could factor 
into the final reduction figure. 
 
6.  (SBU)  Post EAC concurs with the above planned guard 
cuts.  Any further reduction in guard force could have a 
serious negative impact on Post morale.  The home invasion 
mentioned earlier has left many families feeling vulnerable 
and has spawned numerous requests for static guard positions 
at residences in addition to the roving patrols.  The RSO 
office is continuing an aggressive security awareness program 
to counter threats faced by personnel and re-enforcing the 
theme that security is a shared responsibility. 
 
7.  (U)  POC for this cable is ARSO Dennis LeBow. 
IVG-539-4504. 
Palmer 
"
"17226","5/24/2004 22:50","04TEGUCIGALPA1200","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04State88764","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL/PHD (KCUMBERLAND), WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, EAID, KDEM, KCRM, KJUS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT:  EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY FUND 
PROPOSAL: INVESTIGATING/PROSECUTING EXTRAJUDICIAL KILLINGS 
 
REF: A) State 88764 
 
     B) State 65803 
 
1. Post believes that the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights 
and Labor initiative to address programs that promote human 
rights and democracy can greatly aid Mission efforts to 
strengthen the human rights practices in Honduras, 
particularly in the area of investigating and prosecuting 
extrajudicial killings. 
 
2. Our proposal seeks to improve the Government of Honduras\' 
ability to investigate and prosecute suspected extrajudicial, 
summary, and arbitrary executions, particularly of youth. 
This issue is one of the most serious human rights problems in 
Honduras right now.  Post\'s project is designed to produce 
immediate tangible results and builds on existing POL/INL and 
USAID criminal justice sector strengthening and training 
programs. 
 
3. At Post, POL/INL and USAID provide training to Honduran 
prosecutors and law enforcement personnel on issues of 
internal affairs investigations that focus on suspected 
extrajudicial killings.  In 2003, Post provided technical 
assistance to the Ministry of Public Security (police 
investigators) and Public Ministry (prosecutors) on a specific 
case that allegedly may have involved human rights violations. 
Historically, POL/INL has directed training efforts toward 
prosecutors, investigators, and police at all levels in 
Honduras in the area of law enforcement investigations.  USAID 
has been responsible for training of prosecutors and judges. 
 
4. USAID has worked closely with the Honduran Attorney 
General\'s office providing significant technical assistance in 
the development of a new oral, adversarial criminal justice 
system under the new Criminal Procedure Code.  USAID has 
developed an excellent working relationship with the Public 
Ministry in the process.  USAID can utilize this current 
relationship and would be responsible for training prosecutors 
and judges on human rights issues such as extrajudicial 
killings. 
 
5. Post is convinced that a country-based and well-coordinated 
approach on the investigations and prosecutions of 
extrajudicial killings is the key to helping Honduras develop 
a more effective, indigenous human rights law enforcement and 
prevention strategy.  In other words, we believe this project 
will yield ancillary benefits in other human rights efforts. 
 
6. Goal:  Post will provide two courses to include training 
and technical assistance that will facilitate strengthened 
institutionalization of the Ministry of Public Security 
Internal Affairs Unit working in cooperation with prosecutors 
and judges focused on human rights-related crimes. 
 
7. Objectives:  This project will provide for one objective 
that will positively impact three separate government offices: 
the internal affairs investigators, prosecutors for human 
rights violations, and judges in human rights cases.  The 
strengthening of investigative and prosecutorial abilities to 
address these crimes as well as the abilities of judges to 
properly convict human rights crimes is an important objective 
that will work toward a more clear initiative against human 
rights violations such as extrajudicial killings. 
 
8. Activities:  The Ministry of Public Security (MoPS - 
police) and the Public Ministry (prosecutors) as well as the 
mission have acknowledged a need to focus specific attention 
on alleged extrajudicial killings.  In furtherance of this 
acknowledgement, Post, through its INL program, proposes to 
provide training and technical assistance to the Ministry of 
Public Security to strengthen the Special Investigative Unit 
that will also work closely with POL/INL and other U.S. law 
enforcement agencies in the investigation of suspected 
extrajudicial killings.  Training and technical assistance 
will be provided by USAID to prosecutors and judges to form a 
countrywide group of prosecutors and judges that will work 
closely with investigators to prosecute these crimes. 
 
9. Timeline:  The project as a whole should be completed 
within one year.  Using Post resources, POL/INL and USAID can 
begin the program within 90 days of receiving funds. 
 
10. Sustainability:  At the completion of this plan to 
strengthen the capabilities of the (GOH), the GOH will be 
expected to fund the infrastructure and necessary budget to 
ensure continued success in the investigation and prosecution 
of suspected extra judicial killings.  The Ministry of Public 
Security has already demonstrated a commitment to resolving 
these types of crimes by providing for the Special 
Investigative Unit and Internal Affairs Unit in the proposed 
five-year budget.  The Public Ministry continues to support 
its Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, as well as it Special 
Prosecutor for Children\'s Issues, which is made up of 
prosecutors that have worked closely with POL/INL and other 
U.S. agencies on suspected crimes involving human rights 
violations. 
 
11. Performance Indicators:  This three-pronged project will 
produce strengthened capabilities of the Special Investigative 
Unit and prosecutors as well as the increased prosecution of 
human rights violations and extrajudicial killings. 
 
12. Evaluation Plan/Process:  The three portions of this 
project will be discussed on a monthly basis at Post\'s 
Democracy Working Group.  In addition, on a quarterly basis 
Embassy officials will meet with Honduran counterparts to 
discuss and review statistics gathered on arrests, 
prosecutions, and reports of suspected extra judicial 
killings. 
13. Cost:  The cost estimate for the first year of this 
proposed project is $50,000.00 as follows: 
 
Investigative support (POL/INL) 
    a. Training $10,000.00 
    b. Technical assistance and operational support $10,000 
 
Prosecutorial and Judicial Support (USAID) 
    a. Training $20,000 
    b. Technical Assistance $10,000 
 
14. Points of contact are Law Enforcement Advisor Sharon Parks- 
Banda, phone: (504) 236-9320, x4787, IVG: 539-4787, fax: (504) 
236-9462, e-mail: parksbs(at)state.gov, and Human Rights 
Officer Derrick M. Olsen, phone: (504) 236-9320, x4394, IVG: 
539-4394, fax: (504) 238-4446, e-mail: olsendm(at)state.gov. 
 
15. Per para. 7 in reftel B, post\'s Public Affairs Officer 
Melissa Cooper has grant signing authority for only $10,000. 
 
Palmer 
"
"17259","5/25/2004 21:50","04TEGUCIGALPA1207","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001207 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, AND IIP/T/ES 
FOR PM, NEA/NGA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MAY 25, 2004 
 
 
1.  Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" of 5/23 entitled \"At home.\"  \"The members of 
battalion Xatruch returned home last Friday after spending 
almost five months in Iraq working to support the 
consolidation of peace and democracy in that country.\" 
 
\"The performance of the Honduran troops was positive, and 
their experience has grown by being in contact with other 
cultures, by having to respond to emergency situations, and 
by serving in the cause of peace.\" 
 
\"Will there be more Honduran soldiers in Iraq?  We\'ll get 
the answer after July 1 when the new Iraqi government will 
be installed in office.  Moreover, as many other countries 
have proposed, the U.N. may set up an international 
peacekeeping force which could include Honduran troops.\" 
 
\"The work done by the Honduran soldiers in Iraq has been 
admirable.  It\'s gratifying that they have all returned 
prepared to continue to contribute to international peace.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"17435","6/2/2004 15:20","04TEGUCIGALPA1258","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA1309|03TEGUCIGALPA1742|03TEGUCIGALPA861|04TEGUCIGALPA1141|04TEGUCIGALPA1160","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, INL/LP, INR, CA, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: LA CEIBA PRISON MASSACRE UPDATE; PUBLIC MINISTRY 
ALLEGES VIOLENCE WAS PLANNED AND INDICTS 51 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1160 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1141 
     C. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1742 
     D. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 861 
     E. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1309 
 
1. (U) On April 5, 2003, 68 persons, 61 of them M-18 gang 
members, were killed in an incident at El Porvenir prison 
near La Ceiba.  Reports produced by the Public Ministry, a 
Special Commission of the Honduran National Council for 
Internal Security (CONASIN), and the Human Rights 
Commissioner put the blame for the vast majority of deaths on 
government security forces and non-gang member inmate 
\"trusties.\"  PolOff met May 28 with Aida Romero, Special 
Prosecutor for Human Rights at the Public Ministry, who is 
leading the GOH\'s prosecution of these cases, to discuss the 
status of the case.  (See refs C-E for background on this 
case.) 
 
2. (U) Romero told PolOff that on May 3 the Public Ministry 
filed criminal charges against 51 people for alleged 
involvement in the deaths.  Those charged included 19 
Preventive Police, including eight Cobras (specially trained 
police), nine Prison Police, two Army soldiers, one Air Force 
soldier, 19 prison \"trusties\" (non-gang member inmates who 
enforced discipline within the prison), and one regular 
prisoner.  On May 8, the judge in the case approved \"watched 
freedom\" (akin to a mild version of office or house arrest) 
for 39 people, provisionally dismissed cases against five 
people (two Preventive Police, two soldiers, and the regular 
prisoner) with the Public Ministry\'s concurrence, and closed 
a case against one \"trusty\" who had been murdered.  The 
judge, Rommel Ruiz Guillen, also issued arrest warrants for 
six people who failed to present themselves in court to face 
the charges. 
 
3. (U) Those involved were charged with crimes ranging from 
abuse of authority to attempted and actual murder to 
attempted and actual aggravated murder.  None of those 
charged, save for the \"trusties\" already in jail, were 
ordered jailed by the judge, a decision being appealed by the 
Public Ministry.  Prosecutors argue that given the gravity of 
the alleged crimes and the possibility that the defendants 
may further tamper with evidence, the defendants should be 
jailed.  (Note:  Among the problems the Public Ministry has 
encountered during this investigation are missing evidence, 
shell casings found at the crime scene that do not match the 
weapons later given to the Public Ministry by police, 
allegations that prison records have been altered, etc.  End 
Note.) 
 
4. (U) Romero highlighted a troubling aspect of the cases, 
namely that many of the M-18 gang members had been 
transferred on February 5, 2003, to the La Ceiba prison from 
Tamara Prison, the principal Honduran prison located outside 
of Tegucigalpa.  The then-Director General for Prisons, Luis 
Beltrand Arias Ramos, ordered approximately 205 M-18 gang 
members disbursed from the main prison at Tamara to various 
prisons, sending 30 to El Porvenir.  The stated reason for 
this transfer was the conflict between M-18 and non-gang 
prisoners at Tamara, including the alleged murder of a Prison 
Policeman by a M-18 gang member and seizures of weapons held 
by the M-18.  Arias wrote a memo to Minister of Public 
Security Oscar Alvarez requesting permission to transfer the 
prisoners.  Romero said Alvarez wrote on the corner of the 
memo that Arias should follow the law.  (Note: Both the Code 
of Criminal Procedure and the Law of Rehabilitation of 
Criminals have provisions (reportedly conflicting) with 
regard to transfers of inmates from one prison to another by 
prison authorities.  End Note.)  The law required that the DG 
seek judicial approval for such a transfer.  Romero indicated 
that Alvarez\'s intention appeared to be that Arias should 
follow this proper legal procedure, but Arias failed to take 
this step.  Romero also noted there were inconsistencies in 
Arias\' statements regarding the reason for transferring the 
M-18 prisoners. 
 
5. (U) Another troubling aspect, said Romero, is that on 
January 5, 2003, a Prison Police instructor named Oscar 
Reyneira Sanchez, who is allegedly close to Arias, was 
transferred from Tamara to El Porvenir.  Reyneira then 
allegedly became close to the M-18 prisoners and eventually 
provided the weapon used by M-18 gang leader Mario Roberto 
Cerrato, AKA Boris, to kill Jose Alberto Almendarez and 
injure Jose Edgardo Coca (the two top \"trusty\" leaders), 
which started the April 5, 2003, incident.  Both Arias, who 
has been suspended, and Reyneira have been charged with 
various murder counts, and Arias has also been charged with 
abuse of authority. 
 
6. (U) The Public Ministry is also concerned about 
allegations that La Ceiba Preventive Police patrol cars were 
at the prison prior to the phone call (made by a prisoner) 
requesting that the Preventive Police come to the prison to 
help deal with the incident.  Carlos Esteban Enriques 
Alvarez, Commander of the Preventive Police in La Ceiba, was 
one of those indicted, but the judge ruled that he can 
continue in his post, pending the start of the trial.  There 
are also allegations that large quantities of highly 
flammable paint thinner were stored at the prison in the days 
prior to the incident. 
 
7. (SBU) Romero said that the Public Ministry is alleging 
that these suspicious events were linked, and that there was 
a plan to cause an incident that would lead to the killing of 
M-18 gang members.  Romero said she knew this theory would be 
difficult to prove in court, especially given the 
implications of involvement by both the then-DG for Prisons 
and the Commander of Police in La Ceiba, but said that the 
Public Ministry planned to press ahead.  She said the Public 
Ministry expected the case to go to trial this fall. 
 
8. (SBU) Comment:  The Public Ministry\'s allegations are 
troubling, but there has been speculation from the start that 
there was a possible conspiracy to kill M-18 gang members, 
especially given the fact that many unarmed M-18 prisoners 
were shot or beaten to death as they fled their burning cell 
block.  With the May 17 fire at the San Pedro Sula prison 
that killed 105 Mara Salvatrucha gang members (refs A-B and 
septel), the Honduran prison system and the GOH\'s tough 
anti-gang law is drawing intense scrutiny.  The trials will 
be seen by many observers as a key indicator of the ability 
of the Honduran legal system to hold police who commit 
criminal acts responsible for their crimes.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"17441","6/2/2004 15:55","04TEGUCIGALPA1259","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR JWOLFE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JUNE 1, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 5/29 entitled \"Towards an uncertain future.\" 
\"CAFTA took a step ahead after being signed by the Central 
American trade ministers and the U.S. Trade Representative, 
even though it has an uncertain future because it depends on 
the results of the upcoming U.S. elections in which 
President Bush attempts to be reelected.\" 
 
\"It\'s expected that CAFTA will be ratified without much 
complications in Central America, although it may have some 
difficulties in El Salvador and Costa Rica.  Its main 
problem will be to pass the U.S. Congress, when President 
Bush presents it, if he gets reelected.  Although the U.S. 
presents itself as a promoter of free trade, left and right 
wing groups have agreed to oppose CAFTA, mainly because they 
fear it would increase unemployment up North.\" 
 
\"Perhaps the closer relationship between Latin America with 
Europe, and even with China, might convince the Americans 
that the snow ball they created themselves has grown too 
much for them to try to stop it.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"17485","6/3/2004 22:08","04TEGUCIGALPA1280","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE55415","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001280 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NP/RA (JSMITH), PM, EB, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/03/2014 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, KNNP, EWWT, EAIR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS - KEY QUESTIONS ON CARGO HANDLING 
 
REF: STATE 55415 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; reason 1.4 (h). 
 
1. (C) Per reftel, answers to the key questions on cargo 
handling are provided below.  Where appropriate, Post has 
provided clarification and context. 
 
2. (U) Answers are listed in Q and A format: 
 
I. Shipping/Cargo Manifests 
 
Q. Are cargo manifests (or similar documentation) required in 
connection with the shipment of goods on board ships and 
aircraft: 
 
i.   departing Honduras; 
ii.  entering Honduras; 
iii. transiting Honduras, territorial sea and/or airspace? 
 
A. Manifests must be filed with the Honduran Port Authority 
and Honduran Customs for all cargo departing, entering, or 
transiting Honduras via ship or aircraft. 
 
Q. Are cargo manifests required to be completed by sea and 
air carriers registered within Honduras, even if they are 
engaged in trade outside of the country? 
 
A. Yes (Comment:  This system is entirely dependent upon the 
shipping agent and there appears to be little GOH oversight 
in this process.  End Comment). 
 
Q. When completing manifests, what level of detail is 
required in describing cargo being carried, including type 
and quantity? 
 
A. The following manifest information is required by the GOH: 
 Order/shipment number; type of cargo; quantity of cargo; how 
it was packed; weight of cargo; destination; cargo 
description; (if arriving by container) container number and 
dimension. 
 
Q. What, if any, civil and/or criminal penalties exist in 
connection with the following (and do they allow for seizure 
of cargo as one potential penalty): 
 
i.   failing to prepare a manifest; 
ii.  failing to properly complete a manifest; 
iii. misrepresenting items listed on, or fraudulently 
completing, a manifest? 
 
A. Normally, the GOH would give the importer an opportunity 
to correctly prepare the manifest.  Criminal penalties do 
exist, however, for misrepresentation and fraud, including 
the seizure of cargo. 
 
Q. Does Honduran law permit officials from another country, 
with the consent of Honduras, to detain individuals on 
vessels operating under the Honduran flag in international 
waters, based upon suspected violations of (a) Honduran law?; 
(b) the other country\'s law? 
 
A.  a) yes; b) only if the other country has requested, and 
been granted, formal permission from the GOH.  All such cases 
are handled on an ad hoc basis. 
 
Q. In cases where such detentions occur, are there any 
specific requirements concerning how Honduras, or the other 
country, could assume jurisdiction over such individuals 
(e.g., would extradition or similar formal transfer process 
required)? 
 
A. Extradition would be necessary to assume jurisdiction over 
detained individuals.  Of note is that the extradition of 
Honduran nationals is prohibited by the Honduran constitution. 
 
Q. What limitations exist in the Honduran criminal justice 
system on the introduction at trial against an accused of 
evidence that has been gathered by officials of another 
country?  (e.g., are there situations in which officials of 
the other country would be required to testify or submit 
affidavits in order for such evidence to be admissible?) 
 
A. Honduran law does allow for the testimony and/or evidence 
collected by officials of another country to be included in 
court proceedings, but it would first have to be allowed by a 
judge.  However, the foreign official would have to testify, 
as affidavits are not accepted. 
 
II. Hazardous Cargo Requirements 
 
Q. Is Honduras implementing and enforcing mandatory 
international standards for cargo handling, stowage, marking, 
placarding, and labeling related to the shipment of dangerous 
goods by sea or air? 
 
A. Yes 
 
Q. What reporting requirements exist in Honduras to report 
hazardous cargo on board vessels entering Honduran 
ports/airports/territory? 
 
A. Depending upon the classification of the cargo and its 
destination, certain specific reporting requirements exist. 
All hazardous cargo entering Honduras must be reported using 
IMO and UN authorized forms, and IMDG codes, including 
identification numbers, product classification, destination, 
weight, and who in Honduras is responsible for the cargo. 
Q. What types of cargo are covered by such reporting 
requirements? 
 
A. In general, any cargo potentially dangerous to human 
health is considered hazardous by the GOH, including: 
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, petroleum, other fuel products 
and lubricants, and their derivatives, or anything associated 
with firearms and ammunition.  Other specific items are also 
required to be reported depending on the end-user, such as 
hospital supplies. 
 
Q. What, if any, reporting requirements exist in Honduran law 
for vessels transiting the territorial sea, airspace, or 
territory to report hazardous cargo? 
 
A. All hazardous cargo transiting Honduras must be reported 
in advance to Honduran Customs including cargo manifest 
information.  Cargo not cleared in advance by Honduran 
Customs is delayed until the proper paperwork has been 
filled. 
 
Q. What penalties exist for failure to report such cargo when 
entering Honduran port/airport/territory (e.g., seizure of 
the vessel, seizure of the cargo, criminal penalties against 
the ship\'s Master or crew, etc)? 
 
A. Honduran authorities would normally detain the cargo and 
crew until the proper procedures are followed for importing 
hazardous cargo.  Any party to the transaction, including the 
Honduran importer, booking agent, and the ship\'s captain/crew 
can be held responsible for failure to report hazardous 
cargoes entering Honduran ports.  Honduran law does permit 
for the seizure of the cargo and criminal penalties against 
those involved in the transaction. 
 
3. (C) Comment:  Because of its geographic location and weak 
law enforcement, Honduras remains a major transshipment zone 
for illegal narcotics and other contraband.  People are 
smuggled or trafficked through Honduras, and there are 
regular reports of stowaways trying to immigrate illegally to 
the U.S. on ships.  Also, due to a lack of sufficient 
resources/training for customs officials, endemic corruption, 
and considerable impunity for members of the economic, 
military, and official elite, customs fraud is believed to be 
widespread in Honduras.  Honduran law and regulations do 
allow for civil/criminal proceedings against customs fraud, 
however, for the reasons outlined above, perpetrators have 
little to fear from GOH officials.  End Comment 
Palmer 
"
"17630","6/8/2004 20:56","04TEGUCIGALPA1308","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR FOR JWOLFE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JUNE 8, 2004 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Ramon Villeda Bermudez (current member of the 
Foreign Affairs Committee in Congress and former Liberal 
Party presidential candidate) in Tegucigalpa-based liberal 
daily \"La Tribuna\" on 6/5 entitled \"Two lies in three 
letters.\"  \"Representatives of several unions from Central 
America and the Dominican Republic met in San Jose, Costa 
Rica to study what in Spanish is known as the TLC, or CAFTA 
in English.  The first contradiction they found is in regard 
to the words used in the official text of the agreement, 
since the Spanish version refers to it as a `treaty\' and the 
English as an `agreement\'.\" 
 
\"This difference is crucial.  A treaty is a compulsory pact 
for all parties, but an agreement it\'s much less complex, 
and if CAFTA is a fast-track agreement, it would be in 
effect immediately.  Thus, it wouldn\'t have to go through 
the long process of ratification by Congresses, which may 
also be used to avoid changes to the final text.  That\'s why 
both documents should use the same wording, because if it 
remains as it is, it could produce different obligations 
that any party could use for its own benefit.\" 
 
\"Although the governments have kept in secret the last- 
minute changes they made, ignoring the small entrepreneurs, 
members of Congress and unions, there are several elements 
that have aggravated our skepticism on what they\'ve done.\" 
 
\"It\'s been said that TLC are three letters that contain two 
lies: it\'s not a treaty (it\'s an agreement) and it isn\'t 
about free trade either, it\'s about free investment.\" 
 
\"The unions have also concluded that there are two strange 
and hidden commitments that shouldn\'t be part of CAFTA: the 
protection of intellectual property and patents.  The 
irresponsibility of including those provisions in CAFTA has 
been possible because only the government and some 
privileged businessmen have participated in the 
negotiations.\" 
 
\"If we\'re actually talking about a treaty, it\'ll eventually 
come to Congress, and the government will have to spend the 
remainder of 2004 trying to convince all Hondurans on 
CAFTA\'s benefits, especially those of us who have serious 
doubts about it.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"17684","6/9/2004 19:58","04TEGUCIGALPA1322","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001322 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON); WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN\'S 
PASSING, JUNE 9, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 6/9 entitled \"The legacy.\"  \"The passing of Ronald Reagan 
has brought back the controversy of the time of civil war in 
Central America.  Considering where these countries are now, 
opposed to the crisis they were going through and the bloody 
battles they had to endure during the lost decade, the 
American policy toward the region was significant for the 
region\'s current political landscape.\" 
 
\"Our present situation could have been much different if we 
hadn\'t been influenced by the obstinate determination of 
President Reagan who, by defending his country\'s own 
interests of national security, pushed for the consolidation 
of the democratic liberties we enjoy today.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"17687","6/9/2004 22:34","04TEGUCIGALPA1325","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/C , DS, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KJUS, SNAR, PGOV, PHUM, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: ALLEGED TEGUCIGALPA LEADER OF MARA SALVATRUCHA 
GANG CAPTURED 
 
1. On June 8, in what local residents described as a \"war 
zone\" reminiscent of a wild west shoot-out, Honduran 
authorities captured the alleged Tegucigalpa leader of the 
infamous Mara Salvatrucha (MS) gang, Wilmer Joel Cruz Coello, 
alias \"El Micro,\" only two blocks from the U.S. Embassy 
compound.  PolOff happened to be near the scene of the arrest 
during the gun battle and sought refuge in a local mall. 
Cruz, who was on Honduras\' \"most wanted\" list, was sought by 
authorities for homicide, drug trafficking, car theft, and 
other activities related to organized crime. 
 
2. Cruz was spotted by undercover police agents leaving a 
local shopping mall.  As agents approached, he fled by car 
with two other suspects down one of Tegucigalpa\'s busiest 
avenues with police in pursuit.  After the vehicle\'s 
occupants opened fire, a small gun-battle ensued in which 
police were able to immobilize the suspect\'s vehicle.  Cruz 
and another alleged MS member, Walter Antonio Chavez, alias 
\"El Blacky,\" were injured in the gun exchange and were 
arrested on the spot.  Another suspect escaped on foot and is 
still being sought by Police.  No other injuries were 
reported. 
 
3. Comment:  Mara Salvatrucha is one of the most extensive 
and violent street-gangs in Honduras.  The Government of 
Honduras has been waging an extensive campaign to stem the 
growth of gangs, going so far as to make gang membership a 
crime in a controversial anti-gang law.  Cruz\'s capture will 
bolster this effort.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"17740","6/10/2004 22:39","04TEGUCIGALPA1339","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa926","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001339 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, DRL/IL, DRL/PHD, AND INL/LP 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
DOJ FOR OPDAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, SMIG, KWMN, ELAB, PGOV, PREL, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT:  Honduras TIP Update: EmbOffs Meet with Attorney 
General and Supreme Court President on Prosecutions 
 
REF: (A) Tegucigalpa 926 
 
     (B) Tegucigalpa 576 
     (C) Tegucigalpa 382 
     (D) Tegucigalpa 116 
     (E) Tegucigalpa 70 
     (F) 03 Tegucigalpa 2965 
 
1.  Summary: EmbOffs met recently with the Honduran Attorney 
General and the Supreme Court President to emphasize the 
critical nature of successful prosecutions as part of an 
overall GOH strategy to combat trafficking in persons. 
Honduras has also been active in recent months on a number of 
trafficking in persons (TIP) fronts.  This cable provides an 
update on these efforts.  End Summary. 
 
EmbOffs Meet With AG and SC President 
------------------------------------- 
 
2. PolCouns and PolOff met June 2 with Attorney General (AG) 
Ramon Ovidio Navarro and his assistant Jaime Banegas 
(subsequently sworn in as Director of Prosecutors June 9), 
and June 7 with Supreme Court (SC) President Vilma Morales to 
emphasize the critical nature of successful prosecutions as 
part of an overall GOH strategy to combat trafficking in 
persons.  PolOffs gave both copies of the 2003 TIP, Human 
Rights, and Supporting Human Rights and Democracy reports in 
Spanish.  PolOffs emphasized that the 2004 TIP report would 
be released shortly and UNDERSCORED the importance of TIP in 
the bilateral agenda. 
 
3. The AG said the Public Ministry, which he heads and 
includes all prosecutors, is committed to combating TIP and 
to sharing information with the Embassy.  PolOff noted the 
close contact between EmbOffs and the Special Prosecutors for 
Organized Crime, Children\'s Issues, and Women\'s Issues.  The 
AG agreed this was important, and subsequently held a meeting 
June 7 with prosecutors from the Organized Crime and 
Children\'s Issues offices to discuss Public Ministry efforts 
against TIP and commercial sexual exploitation (CSEC) crimes. 
He welcomed G/TIP-funded training via DOJ/OPDAT planned for 
later this year.  He pledged that the GOH would make a 
concerted effort this year to prosecute TIP cases more 
aggressively. 
 
4. The Supreme Court President, who oversees the entire 
judiciary, said there is a growing knowledge of TIP crimes 
among judges, and the links to other crimes such as document 
fraud and money laundering.  She also pledged to raise the 
importance of combating TIP and TIP-related crimes at the 
next meeting of the GOH\'s inter-agency committee on the 
application of the new Code of Criminal Procedure.  She 
explained that a revision of the Penal Code is under 
consideration and suggested that it would be an opportunity 
to strengthen laws against TIP.  Post subsequently provided 
her with a copy of the USG\'s model TIP law for consideration. 
 
5. Morales said she understood the importance of following 
cases all the way through to the end.  She noted that in some 
instances, there were alleged threats against judges involved 
in TIP-related cases.  (Note:  Post notes that there was also 
speculation about possible corruption by judges in those 
cases.  End Note.) 
 
6. PolOffs discussed with both the AG and SC President the 
importance of the Chinese cases, particularly the December 
2003 arrests of Chinese naturalized Hondurans Hu Weng Rong 
and He Jia Bin in San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa, 
respectively, for involvement in an alien smuggling ring for 
PRC nationals using fraudulent documents.  Both are still in 
jail.  (See refs D-F and septel for more information on the 
various Chinese smuggling cases.)  The AG and SC President 
have discussed these cases together and have been very 
responsive to U.S. interest in these cases. 
 
GOH Continues Raids of Massage Parlors 
-------------------------------------- 
 
7. Honduran authorities continue to take action against the 
commercial sexual exploitation of children in Honduras.  Most 
recently, on May 1 three owners of massage parlors were 
arrested (two Hondurans and one Nicaraguan) and seven of 
these establishments were closed.  Three of the seven had 
minor children working at the time they were raided.  The 
Special Prosecutor for Children has been and continues to 
conduct operations jointly with the police, the Honduran 
Institute for Children and the Family (IHNFA), judges, and 
Casa Alianza, to rescue CSEC victims and arrest and prosecute 
those responsible for these victims\' exploitation. 
 
Casa Alianza Signs Agreement with Immigration 
--------------------------------------------- 
8. The NGO Casa Alianza signed an agreement with the Ministry 
of Government and Justice and the Directorate of Immigration 
on April 22 to protect children that are TIP/CSEC victims 
outside Honduras.  As part of the agreement, the GOH 
committed to informing Casa Alianza about any repatriation of 
minors. 
 
TIP Seminars Planned for August 
------------------------------- 
 
9. The Honduran government is planning seminars for late 
August in the Caribbean coast cities of Tela (a tourist 
destination) and Puerto Cortes on the prevention and 
eradication of the CSEC and trafficking in women and 
children.  The seminars are modeled after seminars held in 
Tegucigalpa and La Ceiba in 2003, and in San Pedro Sula and 
Santa Rosa de Copan in January 22-23, 2004.  The Embassy 
brought in first a U.S. NGO expert and then G/TIP Senior 
Reporting Officer Phil Linderman (ref C) to be keynote 
speakers at the seminars.  The Embassy is working with IIP to 
arrange to bring in the same NGO expert in August (ref A and 
subsequent e-mails). 
 
Palmer 
"
"17794","6/14/2004 21:24","04TEGUCIGALPA1355","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPA751","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP AND WHA/CEN 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SOCI, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SEIZES 1,460 MORE KILOS OF COCAINE; 
2004 TOTAL UP TO APPROXIMATELY 3,694 KILOS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 751 
 
1. (SBU) With DEA assistance, on June 9, 2004, Honduran 
authorities seized approximately 1,460 kilos of cocaine 
and arrested four suspects near Puerto Cortes on 
Honduras\' Caribbean coast.  The cocaine which 
originated in Colombia was seized at a property in a 
zone known as La Laguna de Alegria Wednesday afternoon 
after DEA agents alerted Honduran authorities to the 
movement June 6. 
 
2. (U) The following suspects were arrested by Honduran 
authorities: Faustino Ramos Colon (57); Francisco 
Rivera Guzman (44) and Melvin Francisco Amaya (22). 
Ramos Colon purportedly owned the property where the 
shipment was found.  Later in the day, authorities 
apprehended Jorge Rodriguez Lozano (36), after a chase 
from his property involving a helicopter and land 
vehicles, which reportedly involved exchange of 
gunfire.  Rodriquez Lozano, the proprietor of the 
George de Omoa hotel in the area, allegedly 
commissioned the shipment and contracted the three 
other men to guard it. 
 
3. (SBU) This seizure, combined with past seizures this 
year (reftel), brings the total amount of cocaine 
seized in Honduras in 2004 to approximately 3,694 
kilos.  An INL-funded unit carried out this seizure 
without any assistance from any other GOH police unit. 
 
PALMER 
"
"17874","6/16/2004 22:15","04TEGUCIGALPA1372","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001372 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM, INL/LP AND WHA/CEN 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, SNAR, SOCI, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: NATIONAL ARMS REGISTRY BEGINS 18 MONTHS AFTER 
MANDATE 
 
 
1. (U) On June 14, the Honduran Ministry of Public Security 
officially inaugurated a national firearms registry in the 
cities of Tegucigalpa, San Pedro Sula, and La Ceiba.  The 
opening of the registry comes some 18 months after the 
Honduran National Congress approved legislation to regulate 
the sale, carrying, use, modification, repair, and 
accumulation of firearms and munitions in addition to the 
storage and transport of explosives. Under the law, all 
commercial arms in the country, estimated at approximately 
400,000, should be registered in the next six months.  A 
maximum of five weapons are permitted per person. Arms that 
must be registered include revolvers, pistols, shotguns, and 
semiautomatic weapons. 
 
2. (U) Minister of Public Security (MOPS) Oscar Alvarez 
indicated to the Honduran press that he expected the 
government of Honduras (GOH) to open registries in Santa 
Rosa de Copan, Comayagua, and Jutcalpa. The national arms 
registry is intended to document all legal commercial 
firearms in Honduras.  Under the law, registrants are 
required to provide the GOH with identifying information 
including a physical description, address, and fingerprints. 
Owners must also register the serial numbers of each firearm 
they own.  A ballistics test will be conducted to further 
identify the weapon for law enforcement purposes.  Citizens 
are required to pay approximately USD 41 per weapon, of 
which USD 30 will go to the registry and USD 11 for 
municipal taxes. 
 
3. (U) Under the new program, firearm owners are allowed a 
six-month period to register their firearms with the GOH 
which will end in December 2004. After that, GOH authorities 
will be authorized to confiscate unregistered firearms and 
owners will face fines and/or imprisonment.  Starting in 
2005, the GOH has also indicated its intent to confiscate 
all firearms banned for private use, including prevalent 
automatic assault weapons such as the Uzi, AK-47, M-16, and 
M-1. 
 
4. (SBU) Comment: Honduras is awash in firearms and almost 
all businesses of any significance hire private armed guards 
to provide security.  Criminals are generally armed and 
organized criminal groups have access to powerful automatic 
weapons.  There is also a market in Honduras for illegal 
arms trafficking.  While some gun owners will dutifully 
comply with this new legislation, it is doubtful that the 
majority of firearm owners will. Moreover, the GOH\'s ability 
to enforce this mandate remains quite limited.  As such, 
Post believes this program will have limited impact on 
rising crime rates in Honduras or on illegal gun ownership 
in general.  Police ministry officials continue to be 
concerned about any importation of additional weapons into 
Honduras. End comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"17963","6/18/2004 17:24","04TEGUCIGALPA1384","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001384 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, EB/EPPD 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, SMIG, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT, 
JUNE 18, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on June 18 entitled \"Trafficking in Persons.\" 
\"Trafficking in persons is a source of innumerable 
violations to human rights, a profitable activity for 
organized crime, and even a means to spread AIDS and other 
sexually transmitted diseases.\" 
 
\"In the latest Department of State report, Honduras has been 
placed in Tier 2, which means that our government doesn\'t 
comply with the minimum standards but is making significant 
efforts to bring itself into compliance with those 
standards.\" 
 
\"The fight against trafficking in persons, who are used 
either for sexual exploitation or forced labor, must be 
addressed by our government, not only because we may lose 
some of the cooperation we get from the U.S. but because 
it\'s their legal and moral obligation.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"17964","6/18/2004 17:24","04TEGUCIGALPA1385","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001385 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA STRATEGY FOR MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION 
VISIT, JUNE 17, 2004 
 
 
1. As part of a PAS media strategy for the Millennium 
Challenge Corporation (MCC) team visiting Honduras, PAS 
arranged a press conference for President Ricardo Maduro and 
John Hewko, Vice-President for Country Relations at the MCC, 
to address the Millennium Challenge Account(MCA) importance 
for poverty reduction in Honduras on June 14. 
 
2. The second component of PAS\' strategy involved a one-on- 
one 45-minute interview with John Hewko and Renato Alvarez, 
anchor of the morning television talk show \"Frente a 
Frente\", the highest-rated and most influential talk show on 
the Honduran media.  The interview gave Hewko a chance to 
elaborate on key MCA principles and explain to a large 
audience the five essential points that will enable Honduras 
to access MCA funds. 
 
3. The final component of PAS\' strategy entailed a press 
conference, where Hewko explained the basic requirements and 
conditions to enable Honduras to access MCA funds. 
 
4. Hewko said, \"The fact that Honduras has been selected as 
one of the first 16 countries eligible for MCA funds proves 
the confidence the U.S. has in Honduras, and we acknowledge 
the efforts the country has made to improve its social and 
economic condition.  To be able to access MCA funds, 
Honduras has to take on the responsibility and commitment to 
put forth its own proposals for development.  In addition, 
these proposals must reflect the needs and opinions of all 
sectors of society, and they need to include rigorous 
mechanisms of transparency and accountability to ensure the 
funds are being utilized properly.  Finally, we must point 
out that there are no guarantees that Honduras will receive 
MCA funds.  The MCC cannot promise it will sign an agreement 
with all 16 countries.  It will analyze the proposals from 
each country based on their own merits.\" 
 
5.  Media coverage was extensive.  Most radio and television 
stations, and all national newspapers, had positive 
coverage.  The majority of them highlighted the fact that 
there are no guarantees that Honduras will have access to 
MCA funds and the responsibility of the Honduran government 
to present feasible proposals to benefit from the MCA. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18016","6/21/2004 19:02","04TEGUCIGALPA1395","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
POSTS FOR DHS, CONS AND POL 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, CA/FPP, G/TIP, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PHUM, KFRD, CVIS, KHLS, ASEC, KCRM, EFIN, HO 
SUBJECT: PROSECUTION OF CHINESE ALIEN SMUGGLERS ARRESTED IN 
HONDURAS PROCEEDS WITH DIFFICULTY 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 002878, 
 
Tegucigalpa 00116, 
Tegucigalpa 00070 (NOTAL) and previous 
 
1. SUMMARY:  Prosecution of Chinese illegal alien smugglers 
arrested in Honduras in late 2003 on charges of people 
smuggling, money laundering, possession of instruments for 
the forgery of public documents, and forgery of public 
documents, has turned into a very difficult task for the 
Honduran Public Ministry.  The fact that the illegal 
activities of these smugglers point to possible trafficking 
in people (due to probable forced labor of those smuggled 
into the U.S.) has raised serious concerns by post officials 
on the performance of the judicial system in Honduras. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. CHEN Ke Jung.- Belizean and Taiwanese national, was 
released on bail in January 2004 based on medical problems. 
CHEN fled to Belize in February 2004.  The two young 
citizens of the People\'s Republic of China (PRCs), escorted 
by CHEN through Honduran territory with forged Belizean 
passports, were sentenced to four years of incarceration. 
These PRCs have since exchanged their prison term for a fine 
payable to the judicial system.  However, they are still 
waiting for authentic PRC passports to be deported. 
 
3. LIN Wei Chung.- Taiwanese national, released on bail in 
late March 2004.  The three PRCs that he was escorting were 
released with him.  The group fled in mid April 2004. 
Taiwanese authorities in Honduras issued an alert to all 
Central American countries to prevent LIN from obtaining a 
passport.  Taiwan consular officials report that LIN applied 
for and was denied a passport in Guatemala in May 2004. 
 
4. HE Jia Bin.- naturalized Honduran citizen, remains in 
custody although close to being released.  Defense attorneys 
pointed to mistakes by Prosecution as the basis for his 
release.  The case is currently under the analysis of the 
Supreme Court.  A sentence in this case is essential for the 
Ministry of the Interior to revoke HE\'s Honduran citizenship 
and order his expulsion from the country.  The DCM and other 
Embassy officials have repeatedly raised this case with the 
Public Ministry and the Supreme Court to ensure that HE is 
not prematurely released. 
 
5.  HU Weng Rong.- naturalized Honduran citizen, remains in 
custody.  HU requested his release on bail; however, the 
court of appeals in San Pedro Sula denied his request.  HU 
appears to be the only Chinese smuggler who will undergo 
full trial, and the reason appears to be his arrest in San 
Pedro Sula.  The Ministry of the Interior intends to revoke 
HU\'s naturalization as well. 
 
6.  Noteworthy is the fact that one judge, German Vicente 
Garcia, has been assigned all Chinese cases in Tegucigalpa. 
Judge Garcia has approved all requests for release on bail 
regardless of the flight risk that these smugglers posed. 
The Public Ministry has appealed all decisions, however, the 
Court of Appeals in Tegucigalpa has turned down all appeals 
by the Prosecution.  Another important fact is that the 
defense attorney of the three smugglers mentioned in 
paragraphs 2-4 above is German Salomon Amador-Berrios. 
Amador-Berrios was the former Chief of Investigations at GOH 
Migration in the late 1990s.  Amador-Berrios and other 
colleagues at GOH Migration were fired due to their 
participation in the issuance of legal Honduran visas to 
countless ineligible PRCs. 
 
7.  COMMENT: Post has elevated inquiries regarding these 
cases to the President of the Supreme Court and the Attorney 
General.  The regional U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement Attache in Tegucigalpa plans to meet with these 
officials in an effort to increase awareness of trafficking 
in persons and alien smuggling.  The judge\'s decisions on 
these cases are highly questionable.  END COMMENT. 
 
PALMER 
"
"18057","6/22/2004 22:33","04TEGUCIGALPA1411","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE129789","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 001411 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR H PASS TO CODEL SHELBY 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, DRL/PHD, EB AND CA 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP, ECON, ETRD, EFIN, PREL, PGOV, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR CODEL SHELBY\'S JUNE 28 - 30 VISIT 
TO HONDURAS 
 
REF: STATE 129789 
 
1. (U) Summary: Post welcomes the visit of CoDel Shelby to 
Honduras June 29-30.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, 
two-and-a-half years through his constitutionally-mandated 
single four-year term, faces a difficult task leading one of 
the poorest countries in Latin America.  However, there have 
been several positive economic developments in recent months, 
including the signing of an agreement with the IMF in 
February, the negotiation of $147 million of debt forgiveness 
from Paris Club creditors in April, and Honduras\' selection 
as one of sixteen countries eligible for assistance under the 
USD 1 billion Millennium Challenge Account. 
 
2. (SBU) Bilateral relations between the U.S. and Honduras 
are excellent.  Honduras\' support for the Global War on 
Terrorism is steadfast, and the Government of Honduras (GOH) 
is among the group of nations that sent troops to Iraq in 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, although these troops 
have since returned.  Honduras was the first country in the 
Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an ICC Article 98 
Agreement with the United States.  Honduras also introduced a 
UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba, 
which passed April 15.  End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
Economic Overview 
----------------- 
 
3. (U) Honduras, with a per capita income of USD 950, is the 
third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, ahead of 
only Nicaragua and Haiti.  The economy is growing, at an 
estimated 3.2 percent in 2003, but only slightly faster than 
the rate of population growth.  Social indicators are 
improving, but two-thirds of all Hondurans live in poverty, 
and average education levels are very low. 
 
4. (U) Historically, industrial development in Honduras has 
been limited, and the economy has been dependent on exports 
of coffee and bananas.  In the past fifteen years, however, 
the economy has been diversified, with the development of 
non-traditional exports such as cultivated shrimp, melons, 
tourism, and the establishment of a booming maquila industry 
(primarily, assembly for re-export of textiles and apparel). 
Investment incentives aimed at attracting foreign capital in 
export industries have been introduced.  In recent years, the 
coffee industry has suffered from low world prices, and the 
banana industry was severely damaged by Hurricane Mitch in 
1998.  Banana production has yet to reach pre-Mitch levels, 
and coffee and bananas now account for less than 15 percent 
of Honduran export earnings. 
 
5. (SBU) Despite the recent economic diversification, there 
continues to be a large subsistence farmer population with 
few opportunities other than illegal immigration to the U.S. 
Furthermore, the Honduran government\'s desire to attract new 
types of foreign investment has been hindered by the stagnant 
economy and a wide range of investment climate and 
competitiveness problems. 
 
6. (U) Family remittances from Hondurans living abroad, 
particularly the U.S., grew by 19 percent to USD 860 million 
in 2003, and will soon pass the maquila sector as the 
country\'s largest source of foreign exchange.  The U.S. is 
Honduras, largest trading partner.  The roughly 150 U.S. 
companies that do business in Honduras constitute the largest 
block of foreign direct investors. 
 
----------------------------- 
IMF Agreement and Debt Relief 
----------------------------- 
 
7. (U) In February, after almost two years of negotiations, 
the Maduro Administration signed a Letter of Intent with the 
International Monetary Fund, which was later approved by the 
IMF\'s Executive Board, for a new three-year arrangement for 
Honduras under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility 
(PRGF).  The IMF expects the GOH to reach its Heavily 
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) completion point by 2005 with 
good PRGF implementation.  In April, Paris Club participating 
creditors and a Honduran delegation led by the Minister of 
Finance Arturo Alvarado reached agreement on a restructuring 
of approximately USD 360 million of Honduran debt.  The deal 
leads to the immediate cancellation by Paris Club creditors 
of USD 147 million in payments falling due from January 1, 
2004 to June 30, 2005 (the consolidation period), consistent 
with the implementation of the enhanced HIPC Initiative. 
This treatment is expected to reduce debt service owed to 
Paris Club creditors from USD 405 million to USD 49 million 
during the consolidation period, once additional payment 
deferrals are added to the cancellations.  Honduras has 
committed to devote resources freed by this treatment to 
priority areas outlined in the country\'s poverty reduction 
strategy. 
 
----------------------- 
The Importance of CAFTA 
----------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) The Honduran government, along with El Salvador, 
Guatemala, and Nicaragua, reached agreement on the terms of 
the U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) in 
December 2003; Costa Rica closed its negotiations in January 
and the Dominican Republic negotiated its market access 
chapters in March.  The agreement was signed by trade 
ministers of the participating countries (Ambassador Zoellick 
of USTR signed for the U.S.) in Washington on May 28.  The 
agreement now awaits ratification by the Congresses of the 
participating countries.  The Honduran government and private 
sector are disappointed that the U.S. Congress will not 
ratify the agreement before the U.S. elections, and are 
nervous that a prolonged delay may follow the elections as 
well. 
 
9. (SBU) Maduro\'s team is hoping that CAFTA will lead to 
faster economic growth and serve as a catalyst to spur 
regional economic cooperation and integration.  The CAFTA 
agreement is strongly supported by the Honduran private 
sector, especially the textile and apparel industry, where 
CAFTA is perceived to be absolutely vital to the survival of 
the sector in Honduras after worldwide quotas are eliminated 
in 2005.  The CAFTA agricultural chapter will liberalize 
agricultural trade gradually while protecting Honduran 
farmers from sudden disruptions caused by subsidized imports. 
 The agreement also will spur modernization in government 
procurement and services, and will help lock in the GOH\'s 
structural reforms in areas such as telecommunications.  So 
far in 2004, Honduras has already received about USD 200 
million in new foreign investment as a result of CAFTA. 
While the agreement will require some politically sensitive 
changes to legislation and there is a small, but vocal, 
leftist opposition led by the Popular Block, which includes 
NGOs, unions, and a leftist political party, Honduran 
ratification is expected to be relatively easy. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Millennium Challenge Account Eligibility 
---------------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) In May, Honduras was chosen as one of sixteen 
countries eligible (out of 75 considered) to receive 
assistance under the USD 1 billion Millennium Challenge 
Account (MCA).  Countries were selected based upon past and 
current policy performance in the areas of governing justly, 
investing in their own people and promoting economic freedom. 
 In early June, representatives from the Millennium Challenge 
Corporation (MCC) visited Honduras and met with top GOH 
officials, members of civil society, and the private sector. 
The GOH is already actively involved in the MCC process, 
having formed a top-level team and prepared a draft proposal 
for USD 200 million, focusing on highway infrastructure and 
integrated rural development.  President Maduro is fully 
engaged on this issue and has made it clear that negotiation 
of a compact with the MCC is a top priority in the months 
ahead.  MCC representatives were impressed with the Honduran 
efforts so far and are optimistic that Honduras may be one of 
the first countries to receive MCA assistance. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Terrorist Financing and Money Laundering 
---------------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Honduran cooperation on counter-terrorism finance 
is strong.  The Honduran Banking and Insurance Commission 
(CNBS) promptly sends freeze orders to the entire regulated 
financial sector each time the U.S. Executive Order lists are 
amended.  The financial sector, particularly the commercial 
banks, promptly undertake the requested searches for accounts 
by terrorist entities.  To date, no terrorist funds have been 
found in the Honduran financial system, and Post believes 
this is the sole reason that the Government of Honduras has 
not yet frozen any funds. 
 
12. (SBU) The GOH has made considerable progress in the fight 
against money laundering since the implementation of a 
much-improved law against money laundering, approved in early 
2002.  The GOH established a Financial Information Unit (FIU, 
similar to our FinCEN), soon after the law came into effect. 
A small U.S. Treasury Department project provides technical 
assistance to this unit and to the police units responsible 
for investigating and prosecuting financial crimes.  This 
work has already resulted in strengthened accountability by 
the banking sector in identifying and reporting suspicious 
transactions, and the first conviction and forfeiture under 
the new money laundering law, which took place in April. 
 
------------------------- 
Political/Military Issues 
------------------------- 
13. (U) Honduras has a civilian Minister of Defense (MOD) and 
a Chief of the Joint Staff who heads the Honduran Armed 
Forces (HOAF). In January of 1999, the constitution was 
amended to abolish the position of military 
commander-in-chief of HOAF, thus codifying civilian authority 
over the military.  Civilian control over the HOAF is 
complete and civil/military relations are good.  This 
transition has resulted in greater transparency and fiscal 
accountability. The HOAF has a new focus on trans-national 
threats, including counter-terrorism, narcotrafficking, and 
combating international criminal organizations.  The HOAF is 
interested in establishing an ability to further increase its 
participation in international peacekeeping operations. 
Honduras also stands ready to participate in a regional arms 
\"rationalization\" process, but has announced that it will not 
negotiate on a bilateral basis. 
 
14. (SBU) President Maduro is a solid supporter of the U.S. 
on the Global War on Terrorism.  The GOH has responded 
quickly to all USG requests regarding terrorist threats and 
financing, although to date, no terrorist assets have been 
found in Honduran financial institutions.  Honduras is a 
party to all but three UN and OAS counter-terrorism 
conventions (the remaining three are awaiting publication in 
the Honduran federal register) and has also been aggressive 
in upgrading port security.  Honduras was also the first 
country in the Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an 
Article 98 Agreement with the United States. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Iraq, Haiti, and Other Key Foreign Policy Goals 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
15. (SBU) The GOH is very supportive of U.S. foreign policy 
goals, including the reconstruction of Iraq.  In support of 
OIF, the GOH deployed some 370 troops to the vicinity of An 
Najaf as part of the Spanish Brigade operating under the 
Polish Division.  However, following Spain\'s decision to 
withdraw its troops, Honduras did likewise.  The GOH has 
stated this decision was based on a U.S. request that 
Honduras consider expanding its troops\' mandate in Iraq to 
participate in offensive combat operations.  Secretary 
Powell, CJCS GEN Myers, and Secretary Rumsfeld all visited 
Honduras last year to thank the GOH for its support of OIF. 
Their visits were well received and provided important 
political support for Maduro\'s Iraq policy.  As in most of 
the region, the general public overwhelmingly opposed the 
Honduran deployment.  While Honduras has left Iraq, the GOH 
is considering deploying troops to Haiti in support of UN 
peacekeeping operations there.  Honduras is also very 
supportive at the UN, sharing our views on resolutions 
covering such key issues as human rights, human cloning, and 
the Middle East.  Honduras also introduced a UN Commission on 
Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba, which passed April 
15. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Soto Cano Air Base - Joint Task Force Bravo 
------------------------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) About six hundred U.S. service men and women and 
fourteen civilian DOD employees are currently stationed at 
Honduras\' Soto Cano Air Base under the command of the 
Combatant Commander, U.S. Southern Command (SOUTHCOM) as 
Joint Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the Western Hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly important 
accomplishment and enables our military forces to continue to 
work together in such areas as disaster relief, joint 
training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
 
---------------- 
Counternarcotics 
---------------- 
 
17. (U) Honduras\' geography places it squarely in the middle 
of a major illegal drug trans-shipment zone, and the 
trans-shipment of cocaine through Honduras by air, land, and 
maritime routes continues.  However, this trade has now begun 
to face significant disruptions.  In 2003, overall seizures 
in Honduras of approximately 6,000 kilos were higher than the 
past five years combined, and in 2004 Honduras has already 
seized some 3,854 kilos of cocaine. 
 
18. (SBU) Corruption within the police, Public Ministry 
(prosecutors), and the judiciary remain a primary impediment 
to successful law enforcement cooperation.  However, the GOH 
has moved forward with the implementation of new units in 
support of the strengthened Money Laundering Law, which was 
passed in 2002.  The National Council for the Fight Against 
Drug Trafficking (CNCN) has renewed its commitment to lead 
the country\'s counternarcotics efforts.  Available funds to 
implement a government approved master counternarcotics plan, 
though, remain severely limited. 
 
---------------- 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
19. (SBU) Honduras has land border disputes with El Salvador 
and Nicaragua and some of its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro has been personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  The Gulf of Fonseca on 
the Pacific coast has been a particularly difficult point.  A 
1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruling laid out a 
shared area of control in the Gulf of Fonseca and established 
the land border between Honduras and El Salvador, although El 
Salvador has been slow to implement the ruling.  In September 
2002, El Salvador requested a revision of the 1992 ICJ 
ruling.  In December 2003, the ICJ ruled against the 
Salvadoran appeal, bringing an end to the case.  The 
Organization of American States (as a neutral third party) is 
providing both nations technical assistance to help them 
implement the non-disputed elements of the ICJ\'s ruling. 
 
20. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua have 
a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.  In the past, the dispute has threatened to derail 
trilateral counternarcotics operations.  In 1999, Honduras 
provoked Nicaraguan retaliation when it signed a maritime 
treaty with Colombia recognizing the 15th parallel as its 
maritime border.  Nicaragua subsequently filed an ICJ case 
over the maritime border and, more importantly, in 1999 
slapped a punitive 35 percent tariff on Honduran goods.  This 
tariff remained in place until April 2003 despite a Central 
American Court of Justice ruling that it was illegal.  Only 
after Honduras responded with a retaliatory tariff, 
threatening Nicaraguan exports, did Managua rescind the tax. 
Cuba also recently announced it would suspend negotiations 
with Honduras over a maritime boundary agreement near 
completion due to the GOH\'s introduction of the UNCHR 
resolution on Cuba. 
 
------------- 
Port Security 
------------- 
 
21. (U) The GOH has taken a very pro-active stance in 
addressing port security issues and is poised to meet the 
International Maritime Organization\'s (IMO) July 1, 2004, 
deadline to certify its ports as meeting the new, more 
stringent port security standards under the International 
Ship and Port Facility Security Code (ISPS) and Maritime 
Transportation Security Act of 2002.  Puerto Cortes is the 
largest port on the Caribbean side of the Central American 
isthmus and currently provides container service to the U.S. 
market, not just for Honduran exports, but also for goods 
from Guatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua.  The National 
Port Authority (ENP) has invested almost $10 million in port 
security enhancements (the bulk of the sum was in severance 
payments to its aged and unqualified union security 
workforce). 
 
22. (U) The GOH hosted a successful visit (the first in the 
Western Hemisphere) of a U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) port 
security program team in mid-June.  The team came to assess 
Honduras\' implementation of the ISPS.  It reviewed security 
practices at five national ports, met with the national 
commission on port security, and discussed Honduran port 
security regulations with the newly created (per the ISPS) 
national port security authority.  The USCG team reported 
that it had identified several very innovative and efficient 
security practices that it would carry back to the port 
facilities in the U.S. as \"best security practices\".  The 
USCG team also lauded Honduras for being a port security 
leader for hosting the first USCG verification visit in the 
region. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Supreme Court and Judicial Reform 
--------------------------------- 
 
23. (SBU) In 2000, the GOH initiated substantial judicial 
reforms intended to allow the Supreme Court to develop into 
an independent branch of power, unlike any of its predecessor 
courts since democracy was restored in 1982.   While the new 
court is pro-reform in orientation and has fought for its 
prerogatives, its performance of late under the leadership of 
its President, Vilma Morales, has been a disappointment. 
There continues to be a high level of political manipulation 
in the court\'s proceedings and the issue remains open as to 
whether or not it can become a fully independent and co-equal 
branch of political power, consistent with the separation of 
powers provision in the Honduran Constitution.  The 
established political order is fighting that prospect with 
vigor.  In fact, the National Congress seized the political 
opportunity to introduce legislation that would amend the 
constitution to give itself the power to interpret the 
constitutionality of the laws it passes.  The Supreme Court 
ruled in May 2003 that the proposed amendment was 
unconstitutional, which sparked a tense confrontation between 
the Supreme Court and Congress.  The issue receded until 
recently when Congress passed a new amendment to the 
Constitution again granting Congress the right to interpret 
the constitutionality of laws it passes.  A legal challenge 
to this amendment is expected in the near future, although 
the amendment has yet to be printed in the federal register 
and therefore is not yet law.  Judicial corruption remains an 
ongoing problem and the President of the Court has not acted 
decisively to root out and punish bad judges. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Public Security and Human Rights 
-------------------------------- 
 
24. (SBU) Upon taking office on January 27, 2002, President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
intolerably high crime situation.  He deployed more than 
5,000 soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The 
public responded enthusiastically.  However, after initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides, continued at a high rate, 
although there is evidence that the murder rate has 
marginally fallen in the last six months.  The U.S. is 
helping the Maduro government establish an anti-kidnapping 
unit, increase intake/training of police recruits, create a 
model tourist police force, boost its counternarcotics 
efforts, expand the Frontier Police, and improve 
prosecutional and forensic capacities.  The country\'s 
geographic position makes it an obvious strategic transit 
point for narcotics trafficking, alien smuggling operations, 
trafficking in persons, and other organized crime activities. 
 
25. (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of 
children/young adults since 1998, have been a source of 
serious concern and only recently has the GOH begun to take 
steps to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases.  Human 
rights groups regularly accuse former security force 
officials and the business community of colluding to organize 
\"death squads\" to commit these summary and arbitrary 
executions.  On April 5, 2003, 68 persons, 61 of them gang 
members, were killed in a violent incident at El Porvenir 
prison near La Ceiba.  Reports produced by the Public 
Ministry, a Special Commission of the Honduran National 
Council for Internal Security (CONASIN), and the Human Rights 
Commissioner put the blame for the vast majority of deaths on 
government security forces (police and military under police 
command) and non-gang member inmate trusties.  On May 17, 
2004, a fire at the Granja Penal prison in San Pedro Sula 
claimed the lives of another 104 gang members.  Although it 
appears GOH authorities were not complicit in this event, 
timely assistance to inmates was withheld over security 
concerns that could have prevented many deaths. 
 
26. (SBU) While Honduran labor law is deficient in some areas 
with respect to International Labor Organization core 
conventions, the main issue for the protection of labor 
rights, including freedom of association and collective 
bargaining, is the effective enforcement of existing laws. 
There are serious problems with child labor in several 
industries, particularly melon, coffee, and sugar cane (but 
not in the maquila sector), as well as in the informal 
economy, and trafficking in persons of women/children for 
commercial sexual exploitation in the U.S., Central America, 
and Mexico.  USAID and Peace Corps have both been involved in 
HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
--------------------------- 
Corruption and Rule of Law 
--------------------------- 
27. (SBU) Honduras remains one of the most corrupt countries 
in the Western Hemisphere and was recently ranked 106 out of 
133 countries surveyed by Transparency International, an NGO 
that tracks international corruption issues.  Only Ecuador, 
Haiti, and Paraguay scored lower in the Western Hemisphere. 
U.S. policy to combat endemic corruption has struck a nerve 
in Honduras, especially any mention of our visa revocation 
authorities.  Maduro has stated he is willing to address 
corruption, even if it will cost him political support within 
his party, but real achievements to date have been lacking. 
Of particular concern are individual judges and prosecutors 
who solicit and/or remain open to offers of bribes.  The 
Attorney General\'s office has been unwilling, or unable, to 
prosecute high-profile cases, with the notable exception of 
several sitting congressmen recently accused of drug 
trafficking and other offenses.  The selection of Ovidio 
Navarro as the new Attorney General was also a clear 
political move orchestrated by those with a direct interest 
in the status quo.  Given the scope of the problem, any 
public discussion about the country\'s pervasive corruption is 
a positive development. 
 
-------------- 
USAID Programs 
-------------- 
 
28. (SBU) The Central America and Mexico (CAM) Regional 
Strategy focuses bilateral and regional USAID investment on 
the three performance \"arenas\" of Ruling Justly, Economic 
Freedom, and Investing in People, and is closely aligned with 
the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA).  USAID supports the 
Ruling Justly objective by increasing the responsiveness and 
accountability of public institutions, while also building on 
successful municipal development programs to create better 
models for governance, justice reforms, and transparency and 
participation.  In the arena of Economic Freedom, there is a 
concerted focus on trade policy and preparations to ready 
Honduras\' participation in the CAFTA and FTAA.  USAID strives 
to bridge agricultural production in rural areas with 
relatively higher value processing and marketing enterprises 
in urban centers.  The integrated natural resource management 
program emphasizes sustainable land and water-use, 
biodiversity, and reduced disaster vulnerability.  Also, to 
support the Investing in People objective, the health program 
aims toward improving reproductive health, family planning, 
child survival, prevention of HIV/AIDS and other infectious 
diseases, and household food security.  Seeking a 
better-educated Honduran work force through expanded access 
at the pre-school, middle school, and upper secondary levels 
(grades 10-11) is done using alternative delivery systems and 
implementing the Centers for Excellence in Teacher Training 
(CETT) Presidential Initiative.  USAID is also assisting GOH 
efforts to develop quality education standards, testing, and 
evaluation. 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
29. (SBU) Approximately 800,000 Hondurans live in the U.S., 
both legally and illegally, a fact that places immigration 
issues high on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of 
Honduras is approximately 6.5 million.)  There is deep 
appreciation for the U.S.\'s extension of Temporary Protected 
Status (TPS) in the U.S. and interest in possible 
congressional action on the proposed Nicaraguan Adjustment 
and Central American Relief Act (NACARA), which would give 
immigration parity for Hondurans.  With approximately 11,000 
American citizens residing in Honduras (this includes 
American citizens that also hold Honduran citizenship) and 
many thousands visiting Honduras annually for tourism and 
business, American Citizen Services are a key part of the 
Embassy\'s work. 
 
30. (SBU) Since 1995, 35 American Citizens have been murdered 
in Honduras.  There was not much progress on most of these 
cases until 2003, but there have now been 20 convictions in 
nine cases.  Some progress has been made on extradition cases 
involving American Citizens residing in Honduras who are 
wanted for felonies in the United States. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
31. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 140 U.S. citizens and 300 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  The Peace Corps program, with more than 245 
volunteers, is one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID 
mission has a FY04 budget of USD 45 million.  The Mission 
maintains a Consular Agent in Honduras\' second city and 
industrial center, San Pedro Sula. 
Palmer 
"
"18134","6/24/2004 17:09","04TEGUCIGALPA1434","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA DAS DAN FISK, WHA/CEN AND INR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, PREL, PHUM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PROTESTS BEGIN TO CREATE CONCERNS ABOUT 
POLITICAL STABILITY 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY:  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro is facing 
an increasingly challenging domestic political situation. 
United teachers\' unions are entering their fourth week on 
strike and have rejected offers from the government to 
resolve its wage dispute.  President Maduro personally joined 
the negotiations during the week of June 14-19 and was unable 
to get the teachers to return to the classrooms or enter into 
direct negotiations with the government.  Meanwhile, a 
widening corruption scandal at the Forestry Service involving 
logging permits and illegal logging has galvanized public 
support for the nascent environmental movement in Honduras. 
On June 24, the March For Life (Marcha Por La Vida) will 
begin from multiple points in Honduras and culminate in 
Tegucigalpa on June 30th in front of the Casa Presidencial. 
The marchers are protesting the government\'s complicity in 
and inaction against threats to the environment and human 
life, especially ongoing deforestation, illegal logging and 
hard world trade, deterioration of water sources, poorly 
regulated mining, and national hunger.  The President asked 
the marchers on June 22 to postpone their march and open a 
dialogue with him.  While the President is directly engaged 
in his government\'s response to both of these challenges to 
its authority, he has not been able resolve them.  Political 
missteps by Maduro and his team have exacerbated the 
situation.  His inability to exert effective leadership is 
creating some uncertainty about the stability of the 
political situation.  To date, the Embassy firmly believes 
that President Maduro remains in control of the situation and 
there has been no coalescing of opposition forces which would 
threaten the government in the near immediate future. 
However, given this climate, a single catalytic event, such 
as a violent confrontation between police and protesters, 
could create a more volatile situation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
SUSTAINED POLITICAL CHALLENGES CREATE PUBLIC CONCERN 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
2. (C)  During the past month, Honduran President Ricardo 
Maduro has been confronting an ongoing series of political 
challenges, including a teachers\' strike and a national 
pro-environment march, which his government has not been able 
to resolve easily.  Political opponents are making the 
situation more difficult by suggesting that the country is 
entering a period of ungovernability.  While the President is 
directly engaged in his government\'s response to these 
challenges, his involvement has not advanced the settlement 
prospects.  Also according to a Minister, a congressional 
leader, and other non-governmental sources, political 
missteps by Maduro and his Ministers have exacerbated the 
situation. 
 
3. (C)  With President Maduro\'s popularity at its lowest 
point in his presidency, his government does not have a 
reservoir of political capital or support to draw upon in 
dealing with these issues.  Consequently, the President has 
only been able to rally limited public support for his 
positions.  Private sector umbrella organizations have taken 
out full page ads in the newspapers supporting the government 
and, privately, the military is steadfast in its support. 
Both groups would like to see the government act more 
decisively and forcefully to bring order to the current 
uncertain atmosphere. 
 
4. (C)  Finally, the government, citing intelligence sources, 
expressed publicly its concern that the groups opposing it 
are being externally funded in an effort to destabilize the 
country.  Maduro also announced that as a demonstration of 
his commitment to resolve the internal problems in the 
country, he was suspending all trips abroad, including 
canceling a planned trip to the U.S.  According to one 
political analyst, both statements created a higher level of 
public uneasiness, not just about the source and legitimacy 
of the current protests, but also about the possibility that 
a larger confrontation may be in the offing. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
TEACHERS\' STRIKE INTO FOURTH WEEK AMID SIGNS 
UNIONS PREFER CONFRONTATION TO NEGOTIATION 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) Honduras\' February 2004 IMF agreement included 
controversial, but needed and IMF required, fiscal provisions 
to bring the government\'s total public sector wage bill under 
control.  Teachers\' salaries represented the largest part of 
the bill.  After almost two years of negotiation, Congress 
passed legislation in December freezing teacher pay and 
benefits at 2003 levels and repealing the economic provisions 
of the existing 1996 teacher salary law after intensive 
negotiations between the government, congressional leaders, 
and the unions.  The President of Congress Pepe Lobo 
announced that the new law was part of a deal between the 
government and the teachers to bring the spiraling teacher 
wage bill under control. 
 
6. (C) However, two months into the school year (February to 
November in Honduras), the teachers decided to strike after 
efforts to negotiate a smaller wage increase within the IMF 
program framework stalled.  The Minister of Labor told PolOff 
that the teachers\' demands turned quickly to trying to 
restore wages and benefits lost under the December agreement. 
 In addition, President Maduro failed in January to dismiss 
the Minister of Education and other ministers as part of the 
government\'s end of the December deal.  According to labor 
leaders and congressional sources, this breach of faith 
enraged the leadership of the two teachers\' unions, which 
previously had been divided over how to confront the 
government\'s fiscally limited wage offer. 
 
7. (C)  Determined, and now united, the teachers\' unions have 
demonstrated strong solidarity in their fourth week on strike 
and have rejected multiple fiscally-viable offers from the 
government to resolve the issues at the core of the dispute. 
President Maduro personally entered the negotiations during 
the week of June 14-19 and proved unable to get the teachers 
to return to the classrooms and/or join the government for 
direct negotiations.  The teachers\' response this week has 
been to escalate their demands.  Many Embassy interlocutors 
note that the unions appear to prefer a confrontation with 
the government rather than a willingness to utilize the 
traditional Honduran option of seeking a consensus agreement 
through extended negotiation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
ORGANIZERS INSIST MARCH FOR LIFE WILL BE PEACEFUL; 
REJECT PRESIDENT\'S CALL TO POSTPONE IT FOR TALKS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
8. (U)  On June 24, the March For Life (Marcha Por La Vida) 
will begin from four cardinal points in Honduras (including 
Olancho), culminating in Tegucigalpa on June 30th at the Casa 
Presidencial.  The March is in protest of the government\'s 
complicity in and inaction against threats to the environment 
and human life, especially ongoing deforestation, illegal 
logging and hard wood trade, deterioration of water sources, 
poorly regulated mining, and national hunger.  It is also 
fueled by a widening corruption scandal at the Forestry 
Service involving logging permits and illegal logging.  The 
scandal has galvanized broader public support for the 
environmental movement in Honduras. 
 
9. (U)  Father Andres Tamayo, a Salvadoran Catholic priest 
who resides in Olancho and heads the Olancho Environmentalist 
Movement (MAO), is leading the March.  Organizers have told 
the Honduran press that this will be a peaceful march with 
the goal of awakening public consciousness about the 
deteriorating environmental situation in the country.   They 
expect ten thousand people to participate, including members 
of the Catholic Church, public institutions, civil society, 
teachers, and campesinos.  A small delegation sponsored by 
the Center for International Policy and organized by former 
U.S. Ambassador Bob White will participate in the March as a 
sign of international support and solidarity.  The delegation 
may include Representative Maurice Hinchey (D-NY), former 
Maryland lieutenant governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, 
Robert Edgar (Secretary General of the National Churches 
Counsel), and actor Mike Farrell (Co-president of Human 
Rights Watch). 
 
10. (C)  The government\'s response to the March has been 
disjointed.  On June 10, President of Congress Lobo stated 
that under Honduran law foreigners who participate in public 
demonstrations could be expelled from the country.  If true, 
this law would have prevented Tamayo from participating in 
his own march.  Subsequently, a Honduran immigration official 
stated that, according to the Constitution, foreigners 
residing in Honduras have the same rights as any Honduran to 
demonstrate.  On June 22, President Maduro, who has said that 
he supports the objectives of the march, requested that it be 
postponed because of confidential information indicating that 
certain groups hope to use the March to create an environment 
that will destabilize his government.  He invited the march 
organizers to begin an immediate open dialogue with him. 
 
11. (C) March organizers responded that the march would go 
on.  MAO and Cofadeh (Committee of Relatives of 
Detained-Desaparecidos) leaders told the Honduran press that 
because the march has been announced since March of last year 
it could not postponed at this late date.  They reiterated 
that the protest is peaceful and denied that they were 
seeking to destabilize the government.  The Catholic Church 
withdrew support for the march, despite typically being a 
strong advocate of the defense of the forests, warning the 
public through the media that it would not be involved in 
acts intended to destabilize governments that have been 
elected by the will of a majority. 
 
12. (C) COMMENT:  To date, the Embassy firmly believes that 
President Maduro remains in control of the situation and 
there has been no coalescing of opposition forces which would 
threaten the stability of the government in the immediate 
future.  However, a statement by the leftist Bishop of Copan 
Luis Alfonso Santos on June 22, warning the government the 
goal of the March was to destabilize and attack the GOH, was 
cited by senior level Casa Presidencial officials to POLCOUNS 
that the March was being manipulated by elements with a more 
confrontational agenda.  They also pointed out that Bishop 
Santos said the march organizers may ask for President 
Maduro\'s resignation.  President Maduro\'s inability to exert 
effective leadership and some of his government\'s 
contradictory public statements have helped to create some 
uncertainty about the stability of the political situation. 
Given this climate, a single catalytic event, such as a 
violent confrontation between police and protesters, could 
create a more volatile situation.  However, we doubt a call 
for the President\'s resignation by the marchers would be 
widely supported.  END COMMENT. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18136","6/24/2004 20:43","04TEGUCIGALPA1437","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, INR, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS, PREL, MOPS, ES, HO 
SUBJECT: OAS ENVOY JOHN GATES TO ISSUE HONDURAS/EL SALVADOR 
BORDER DEMARCATION PROCESS 
 
 
1. On June 20, OAS envoy, National Geospacial-Intelligence 
Agency (NGA) Specialist, John Gates completed his survey of 
the six disputed land border areas between Honduras and El 
Salvador.  Gates, who began the project on August 18, 2003, 
was tasked (as an honest broker), with assisting Honduras and 
El Salvador to mark their respective border areas as directed 
by the September 11, 1992, International Court of Justice 
(ICJ) decision demarcating the border between Honduras and El 
Salvador.  Both Honduras and El Salvador have agreed to abide 
by all decisions made by Gates and, apart from a November 11, 
2003, decision to award El Salvador approximately one square 
kilometer of territory due to a technical error in the 
original ICJ decision, Gates has not deviated from the ICJ\'s 
determinations. 
 
2. Mr. Gates is expected to deliver his findings to the OAS 
by August 12.  The OAS will then prepare a final report, 
based on Gates\' input, that will be presented to both 
Honduras and El Salvador sometime in October.  This report 
will form the basis of a legally binding document, to be 
signed by both countries, to finally complete the border 
demarcation process. 
 
3. Comment:  The Government of Honduras (GOH) is anxious to 
conclude the demarcation process a soon as possible.  In the 
past, GOH angst over perceived Government of El Salvador 
foot-dragging on demarcating the respective border region has 
caused some friction in the bilateral relationship.  With all 
technical and legal barriers expected to be completed this 
year, the GOH hopes the actual border marking process can be 
entirely completed sometime in 2005.  End Comment. 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"18137","6/24/2004 22:21","04TEGUCIGALPA1439","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1434","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001439 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, DS/OP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, ELAB, PHUM, SOCI, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: TEACHERS\' PROTEST FAILS TO SHUT DOWN HONDURAN 
CAPITOL AS TENSIONS RUN HIGH 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1434 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: On June 24, approximately 5,000 striking 
Honduran teachers temporarily blocked the four main arteries 
connecting Tegucigalpa with the rest of the country, bringing 
traffic to a standstill and disrupting commerce.  Teachers 
also blocked traffic in other parts of the country, primarily 
near San Pedro Sula.  The teachers\' strike is entering its 
fourth week and tensions are running high.  Honduran police 
and military units, deployed to all four locations, moved 
against one group of protesters blocking the southern 
entrance to the city, launching tear gas to disperse the 
protesters.  Police opened all entrances to the city by 
mid-day.  This action marked the first time the Government of 
Honduras (GOH) has moved forcefully against protesting 
teachers blocking highways during the month-long work 
stoppage.  Preliminary reports indicate there were no 
injuries.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On June 24, approximately 5,000 striking Honduran 
teachers blocked the four main arteries connecting 
Tegucigalpa with the rest of the country, temporarily 
bringing traffic to a standstill and disrupting commerce. 
Teachers were also blocking traffic in other parts of the 
country, including highways connecting Puerto Cortez and La 
Lima to San Pedro Sula.  POLOFFs visited all four locations 
in Tegucigalpa to meet with protesters and local 
police/military units.  While three of the four 
demonstrations we witnessed were peaceful, POLOFF was present 
when police decided to launch tear gas against protesting 
teachers to open the southern route out of Tegucigalpa. 
Chaos ensued as protesters fled the scene.  Police then 
opened the road.  POLOFF did not witness any violent 
confrontations between protesters and police/military units 
and preliminary reports indicate that no injuries occurred. 
Protest leaders, in communication via cell phone, apparently 
decided to disband the group blocking the Tegicigalpa-San 
Pedro highway after learning of police action against their 
colleagues in the south.  The other two groups, (which were 
also the largest) marched toward the center of the city with 
the intention of converging on the Casa Presidencial.  Police 
condoned off access to the Casa Presidencial as of 1600. 
Post understands the teachers will seek to protest tomorrow 
at the Casa Presidencial during a meeting between union 
leaders and the GOH, when President Maduro apparently will 
make another offer to resolve the wage dispute. 
 
3. (U) The teachers\' strike, now entering its fourth week, 
has the GOH concerned (reftel).  The teachers\' unions have 
alienated much of Honduran society and little sympathy exists 
among the populace in support of their demands which are 
deemed excessive.  Although it appears they do not enjoy much 
popular support, they remain a powerful special interest 
group.  Other groups, primarily doctors/nurses, are following 
the GOH\'s response to their demands closely.  They could also 
call a general strike if they perceive the teachers were able 
to coerce the GOH into meeting their terms. 
 
4. (C) The GOH also remains nervous about the March for Life 
(Marcha por la Vida) that commenced June 24 (reftel).  The 
March\'s organizer, Father Andres Tamayo, a Salvadoran 
Catholic priest who resides in Olancho and heads the Olancho 
Environmentalist Movement (MAO), estimates that eventually, 
ten thousand people will participate in the march.  The march 
was organized to draw attention to the GOH\'s inability to 
protect Honduras\' environment; however, there are indications 
that participants may also demand President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
resignation.  As it did on June 24 with the teachers, it 
appears the GOH may take a more aggressive approach toward 
further disturbances in Tegucigalpa. 
 
5. (C) Comment:  While disruptive, the Embassy believes these 
protests will not destabilize the government.  However, if 
these movements are able to coalesce, and draw from the 
overall general discontent with Maduro\'s administration, the 
political situation could begin to worsen for the GOH.  End 
Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"18248","6/29/2004 22:57","04TEGUCIGALPA1461","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE135512","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/29/2014 
TAGS: ETTC, PREL, CU, HO 
SUBJECT: TEGUCIGALPA RESPONSE TO NSC-DIRECTED REVIEW 
REGARDING WAIVER OF TITLE III OF THE LIBERTAD ACT 
 
REF: STATE 135512 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) The Government of Honduras (GOH) has actively worked 
to advance democracy, human rights, and fundamental freedoms 
in Cuba.  On April 15, the UN Commission on Human Rights 
(UNCHR) passed a Honduran-sponsored resolution calling for 
greater respect for human rights in Cuba.  The Government of 
Cuba responded to the GOH\'s action by suspending pending 
maritime boundary negotiations with Honduras, something that 
has been a foreign policy priority of President Ricardo 
Maduro\'s administration.  Also, while the GOH does have 
formal diplomatic relations with Cuba, Honduras has not named 
an Ambassador to Cuba, partly out of deference to U.S. 
wishes.  However, the GOH consistently and publicly states 
that concern over Cuba\'s human rights policies is a 
fundamental tenet of its policy toward the Castro regime. 
 
2. (C) If the Title III waiver were not renewed for Honduras, 
it could undermine clear GOH support for pressuring Cuba to 
improve its human rights record, undermine general GOH 
support for U.S. Cuba policy, and unnecessarily punish a 
supportive regional ally. 
Palmer 
"
"18283","6/30/2004 22:59","04TEGUCIGALPA1466","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1439","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DS/OP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/30/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, ELAB, PHUM, SOCI, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MULTIPLE PROTESTS CONVERGE, MADURO\'S REACTION IS 
SKITTISH 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1439 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1434 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On June 29 Honduran President Ricardo Maduro 
went on national television to explain the Government of 
Honduras\' (GOH) position after teachers\' unions rejected the 
latest government offer.  Protests continue (refs A and B) 
and both sides are at loggerheads. Also, the March for Life 
(Marcha por la Vida) culminated in Tegucigalpa on June 30, as 
marchers/protesters arrived from four points from across the 
country to draw attention to the GOH\'s inability to protect 
Honduras\' environment.  To date, all protests have been 
peaceful and there are no reported confrontations between 
police and protesters.  On July 1, anti-globalization 
protesters will march in conjunction with the second largest 
labor federation in a separate protest. The Maduro 
government\'s skittish reaction to this convergence of popular 
protests has not helped to reassure the public, which 
increasingly disapproves of the President\'s job performance. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On June 29 Honduran president Ricardo Maduro, with 
some 200 prominent political and business supporters behind 
him, went on national television to explain the GOH\'s 
position after teachers\' unions rejected the latest 
government offer to end their five-week long strike.  The GOH 
offered the teachers a USD 11.5 million settlement package. 
Because of its agreement with the IMF, the GOH will not meet 
the teachers\' core demand to restore wage increases under the 
previous compensation law.  When that was rejected, the GOH 
offered to enter into arbitration with the teachers\' unions, 
an alternative which was also rebuffed.  Both sides are now 
at loggerheads and it is unclear how the standoff will end. 
On June 29, some 3,000 teachers marched peacefully on the 
Casa Presidencial. 
 
3. (SBU) The GOH also remains nervous about the March for 
Life (Marcha por la Vida) which commenced June 24 and 
culminated in Tegucigalpa today (refs A and B).  The March\'s 
organizer, Father Andres Tamayo, a Salvadoran Catholic priest 
who resides in Olancho and heads the Olancho Environmentalist 
Movement (MAO), estimated that eventually ten thousand people 
would participate in the march, although the actual figure 
was between 500 and 1500.  As of 1500 local time, these 
marchers were joined by approximately 2,500 supporters in 
Tegucigalpa.  The marchers have gathered peacefully in front 
of the National Congress and are seeking an audience with GOH 
officials to present their list of grievances.  The march was 
organized to draw attention to the GOH\'s inability to protect 
Honduras\' environment.  Previous rumors that the marchers 
might demand President Ricardo Maduro\'s resignation have thus 
far not panned out.  As an example of the government\'s 
skittishness, the Casa Presidencial was evacuated as a 
precautionary measure late in the afternoon.  A number of 
prominent U.S. VIPs are participating in the march, including 
Representative Maurice Hinchey (D-NY) in an unofficial 
capacity. 
 
4. (U) The General Federation of Workers (CGT), the second 
largest labor federation in Honduras, and Popular Block 
(BP-Bloque Popular) are planning additional demonstrations 
against the Honduran government for July 1 and 2.  Their 
agenda is aimed to support their more traditional political 
demands.  They plan to protest against globalization, 
privatization of government services, the CAFTA, foreign 
debt, and the IMF and World Bank.  The CGT chose July 1 for 
its protest because it is 60 days after its May Day (May 1) 
march where they presented their original declaration.  The 
July 1 protest is scheduled for Tegucigalpa, while on July 2 
they hope to expand the protest to other cities in Honduras, 
such as San Pedro Sula.  CGT President, Daniel Duron, told 
PolCouns that the march would be peaceful but is designed to 
keep pressure on the government.  The CGT has 20,000 teachers 
in its federation and also represents other public sector 
unions.  Duron said that the IMF agreement is a serious 
problem for all public sector unions because of the stringent 
caps it places on the public sector wage bill.  Duron claimed 
that if the government keeps to those caps, the unions would 
not see significant wage increases for some years into the 
future.  He indicated that the CGT plans to keep the pressure 
on the government to force greater salary concessions for all 
its members, not just the teachers. 
 
5. (C)  Of some additional concern is the decision by the BP 
to move up a separate protest scheduled for next week to join 
the CGT marches this week.  The leftist BP, which most likely 
receives funding from international sources such as Cuba, has 
been historically more willing to employ confrontational 
tactics.  Duron acknowledged there was a greater risk of 
violence with the BP,s participation, but said that the 
CGT,s agenda was peaceful and that it would not seek to 
provoke the government. 
 
6. (C)  Comment:  President Maduro and his government remain 
very concerned about the situation, hence his national 
television address on June 29 flanked by the nation\'s 
governmental, political and economic elites.  They are 
particularly skittish about the plurality of &popular8 
protests and the possibility that these forces could come 
together in a meaningful way to threaten the government\'s 
stability.  To date, these groups do not appear to be 
effectively coordinating their activities, according to labor 
and NGO sources.  However, these groups do appear to be 
gaining confidence from each others\' events.  Finally, 
independent political analysts and a pollster concur that the 
President\'s popular support is extremely week ) less than 
20% of the population approve of his job performance.  His 
political capital is low, with some of his own party 
unwilling to support him publicly.  Given his private 
reaction and his administration\'s concerns about this modest 
but increasing level of popular discontent, we are also 
beginning to wonder about the President\'s resolve to manage 
this situation to a successful conclusion. End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"18284","7/1/2004 0:19","04TEGUCIGALPA1467","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","04PANAMA1372","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001467 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FBI FOR SIOC AND ITOS/TGU 
STATE FOR S/CT, INR/IAA, NEA, AND CA 
STATE FOR INR/TIPOFF 
STATE FOR DA/IP/WHA AND DS/ICI/ITA 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/05/2029 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, KVPR, PINR, KJUS, KCRM, PGOV, CVIS, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN SECURITY MINISTER ALLEGES SENIOR AL-QAIDA 
OPERATIVE VISTED HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. PANAMA 1372 
 
     B. PANAMA 1515 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1046 
     D. 06/09/04 RSO TEGUCIGALPA-PANAMA LEGATT-DS/IP/WHA 
        EMAIL 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (S) Summary: On June 29, Honduran Minister of Public 
Security (MOPS) Oscar Alvarez told the Honduran press senior 
Saudi Al-Qaida operative, Adnan Gulshair El-Shukrijumah, had 
been spotted in Honduras but has since left the country. 
MOPS Alvarez alleged that El-Shukrijumah was seen in an 
internet cafe before heading to Panama.  These reports are 
uncorroborated and premature, although Post believes there 
may exist a possibility that El-Shukrijumah recently visited 
Honduras.  In conjunction with Honduran authorities, RSO has 
been tracking the internet cafe lead and a separate possible 
sighting, in an effort to confirm El-Shukrijumah had, in 
fact, been to Honduras.  However, MOPS Alvarez\'s public 
comments, partly based on a Panamanian newspaper report he 
had recently read, will complicate this effort.  End Summary 
 
2. (S) On June 29, Honduran Minister of Public Security 
(MOPS) Oscar Alvarez told the Honduran press that senior 
Saudi Al-Qaida operative, Adnan Gulshair El-Shukrijumah had 
been spotted in Honduras but has since left the country. 
MOPS Alvarez alleged that El-Shukrijumah was cited in an 
internet cafe before heading to Panama, where he allegedly 
might be working on a plan to attack the Canal.  Prior to 
these allegations, El-Shukrijumah\'s presence in Panama had 
been highly suspected (ref A and B). 
 
3. (S) RSO has been tracking two separate possible sightings 
(ref D) of El-Shukrijumah in Honduras.  The first report 
concerned two American TDYers who had a possible sighting of 
El-Shukrijumah on June 2, 2004.  The reported sighting 
occurred at approximately 12:15 pm when both TDY personnel 
were eating lunch at a Subway sandwich shop located a few 
blocks from the Embassy.  While eating, they noticed two men 
enter the shop.  Both men appeared to be of Arab extraction. 
The men had entered together and appeared to be friends. 
According to the TDY personnel, while standing in the 
sandwich line both men noticed the American sitting in the 
nearby booth eating.   At this point, both subjects started 
whispering amongst themselves and looking at the Americans. 
The older subject seemed very nervous and impatient.  The TDY 
personnel noted that both subjects were carrying laptop bags 
strapped over their shoulders. The older subject\'s bag had a 
Microsoft emblem, plus he was wearing a fanny pack in front. 
(Note: These TDY personnel were both technicians who work 
with computers and other related equipment. End Note.) 
 
4. (S) The TDY personnel stated that neither subject appeared 
to be fluent in Spanish when ordering their food, appearing 
to struggle a little with the language.  As the Americans 
were leaving the sandwich shop, they noticed the older 
subject was paying for his food with a grayish silver-colored 
visa card and also appeared to have some form of Honduran ID 
in his other hand.  The TDYers came back to the Embassy and 
reported to their supervisor that they had seen two Arab 
males acting strangely in the Subway sandwich shop.  At the 
time they reported this contact, neither was aware of the 
look-out for El-Shukrijumah.  The two then reported to the 
RSO after they saw the photo of El-Shukrijumah in the local 
paper.  They both believed that the younger subject had a 
strong resemblance to El-Shukrijumah. 
 
5. (S) The second incident allegedly occurred at an 
unidentified internet cafe in Tegucigalpa soon after the FBI 
poster identifying El-Shukrijumah as a wanted terrorist 
suspect was released. This is the report that MOPS Alvarez 
shared with the Honduras press.  While it should not be 
dismissed out of hand due to the nature of the incident, RSO 
has not/not been able to confirm or corroborate any of the 
details of this alleged incident.  RSO notes, however, that 
the physical description of the internet cafe sighting of the 
two suspects resembles the description of the individuals 
seen at the Subway shop by the American TDYers 
6. (S) Comment:  MOPS Alvarez\'s remarks regarding 
El-Shukrijumah\'s presence in Honduras are premature and 
unsubstantiated.  He acknowledged later that his comments 
that El-Shukrijumah was en route to Panama and might be 
planning to attack the Canal, were based on a newspaper 
article he read last weekend while visiting Panama.  While it 
is possible El-Shukrijumah visited Honduras recently, Post 
can not/not confirm this.  RSO is continuing to investigate 
and Post will report via septel any further confirmed 
evidence of El-Shukrijumah\'s alleged presence.  MOPS 
Alvarez\'s public comments, however, were unconstructive and 
could possibly hamper this effort. End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18345","7/1/2004 22:20","04TEGUCIGALPA1472","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1466","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001472 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DS/OP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, ELAB, PHUM, SOCI, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: MADURO STIFFENS RESOLVE AS PEACEFUL PROTESTS 
CONTINUE 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1466 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1439 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1434 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Peaceful protests continued in Tegucigalpa 
on July 1 as the Government of Honduras (GOH) rejected the 
latest counter-proposal from the teachers\' unions, calling it 
\"absurd\" and launching a media campaign in the newspapers 
against the teachers.  The March for Life (Marcha Por La 
Vida) climaxed on June 30 when some 3,000 people gathered in 
front of the National Congress seeking GOH action on 
environmental issues.  Contrary to the Casa Presidencial\'s 
dire predictions, the event passed without incident.  On July 
1, anti-globalization protesters joined a planned labor 
federation march to press the government on another political 
front.  To date, there have been no reported incidences of 
violence between police and protesters; however, the GOH 
remains skittish and tense.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) The teachers strike continues with no end in sight. 
On June 30, the Government of Honduras (GOH) rejected a 
counter-proposal from teachers\' unions, calling it \"absurd.\" 
The teachers are calling on the GOH to abrogate its prior 
agreement with the IMF (which requires fiscal restraint) thus 
allowing the government to significantly increase teachers\' 
salaries.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro reiterated his 
desire to enter into arbitration with the teachers, something 
their unions have thus far rejected.  The teachers have vowed 
to continue their strike until the GOH accepts their demands. 
 Meanwhile, the government launched a media campaign in the 
national newspapers accusing the teachers of denying students 
their school lunches, warning that their demands would result 
in another tax increase, and laying out the mathematics of 
the teachers\' runaway salary increases if the government 
accepts their demands.  Both sides appear to have dug in 
their heals and a realistic compromise seems distant. 
 
3. (C) The March for Life (Marcha por la Vida) which 
commenced June 24, ended June 30 in Tegucigalpa without 
incident.  Some 3,000 people gathered in front of the 
National Congress to support Father Andres Tamayo\'s effort to 
call attention to environmental abuses in Honduras.  The 
protest was peaceful and rumors that the marchers might 
demand President Maduro\'s resignation did not come to 
fruition.  The Casa Presidencial had warned the Embassy 
multiple times that these marchers were planning to engage in 
violent actions and represented a threat to the government\'s 
stability.  According to a minor party congressman and 
multiple political commentators, the dignified, but 
insistent, approach of the marchers seemed to have awakened a 
renewed interest in the general public to seek greater 
government accountability of its ineffective efforts to 
protect the environment.  The President of Congress, Pepe 
Lobo, attended a reception for the Marcha Por La Vida hosted 
by the visiting Center for International Policy (CIP) 
delegation, which has led by Ambassador Bob White, Kathleen 
Kennedy Townsend and Rep. Maurice Hinchey (D-NY).  In 
addition, President Maduro received the CIP group at the Casa 
Presidencial on July 1. 
 
4. (C) As promised, the General Federation of Workers (CGT), 
the second largest labor federation in Honduras, and Popular 
Block (BP-Bloque Popular) joined forces to demonstrate 
against the GOH on July 1.  The group marched peacefully from 
the southern part of the city into the city center and 
assembled at the National Congress.  Estimated participation 
ranged from 3,000 to 10,000 protesters.  The CGT will try to 
expand the protests to other cities around the country on 
July 2.  It will also lead another march again in the capital. 
 
5. (C)  Comment:  President Maduro and the GOH stiffened 
their resolve today in the face of the protests.  Their media 
campaign against the teachers was lauded by supporters as 
finally getting out the \"truth\" about the economic impact of 
the teachers\' salary demands.  Conversely, it was roundly 
criticized as antagonistic and a demonstration of negotiating 
in bad faith by opponents.  Fortunately, the Casa 
Presidencial\'s dire predictions about the violent nature of 
the marches is not being borne out at all.  The Minister of 
Public Security also confided that the GOH had expected the 
July 1 union and BP march to result in a violent 
confrontation with the police.  It appears that the GOH\'s 
intelligence network is over-hyping the threat of violence 
which is having the effect of distracting the President and 
his advisors from developing their political strategy to end 
the teachers\' strike and dealing with the people\'s business. 
End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"18433","7/6/2004 16:17","04TEGUCIGALPA1490","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa1385","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 001490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN and WHA/EPSC 
TREASURY FOR EIlzetzki 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID 
STATE PASS OPIC, EXIM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, EINV, SOCI, PREL, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Millennium Challenge Corporation Visit to Honduras 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 1385 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  Representatives from the Millennium 
Challenge Corporation (MCC), visiting Honduras from June 8- 
16, held a productive set of meetings with Honduran 
government officials, members of civil society and the 
private sector, and representatives of other donor 
organizations and nations.  The GOH has assigned a four- 
person team to work on a proposal for the MCA (Millennium 
Challenge Account), under the leadership of the Minister of 
the Presidency Luis Cosenza.  The government has begun to 
reach out to the private sector and civil society to 
participate in the development of the proposal, which is 
likely to focus on highway infrastructure (the Logistical 
Corridor or Dry Canal), integrated rural development, and 
development of marginalized urban areas.  The MCC team did 
not react to the preliminary proposal outline, but did 
provide further guidance on the format and expected detail 
of the country\'s proposal. 
 
2. (SBU) The MCA, with its emphasis on economic growth, 
comes at a particularly opportune time for Honduras, which 
recently adopted a number of critical structural reforms 
that have facilitated a new 3-year IMF program, Paris Club 
interim debt forgiveness, and international donor agreement 
on the poverty reduction strategy.  President Maduro made it 
clear that he is fully engaged and has made negotiation of a 
compact with the MCC a top priority for his Cabinet.   End 
Summary. 
 
3. (U) MCC Vice President for Country Operations John Hewko, 
Vice President/General Counsel John Dyck, Director for Latin 
America John Wingle, and Program Officer Katie Uhre visited 
Honduras June 8-16.  In addition to meetings in Tegucigalpa 
on the MCA itself, the group attended the June 10-11 
Consultative Group meeting and traveled to Comayagua to 
visit USAID rural development projects, to San Pedro Sula to 
meet with private sector representatives, and to Puerto 
Cortes to see the port facilities. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Overview of the Millennium Challenge Account Initiative 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
4. (U) In each meeting, MCC Vice President for Country 
Operations John Hewko started by introducing the team, 
congratulating Honduras on being selected as one of the 16 
countries eligible to provide proposals for funding from the 
FY 2004 appropriation, emphasizing the MCA\'s goal of 
spurring poverty reduction through economic growth, and then 
discussing the five key principles behind the MCA 
initiative. 
 
-- First, the program will be a partnership between the 
compact country and the MCC. 
 
-- Second, country ownership of the program is essential. 
The MCC hopes that each eligible country will look hard at 
the key obstacles to economic growth, choose the most 
important one or two, and propose projects and policy 
reforms that will address these impediments.  The ball is 
firmly in the eligible countries\' court to prepare a 
proposal that best meets its needs. 
 
-- Third, an inclusive consultative process is required.  It 
will be vital for the Honduran government to work closely 
with members of civil society and the private sector to 
develop and discuss the proposal. 
-- Fourth, transparency and accountability are key aspects 
of the proposal.  The proposals should lay out clear 
indicators of success and mechanisms for ensuring that the 
funds are used as they are intended and have the intended 
effect. 
 
-- Finally, there are no guarantees that individual 
countries will actually sign a compact and receive MCA 
funds.  This will depend on the quality of the proposals and 
the ensuing negotiations.  Once a compact is signed, there 
are no guarantees that funding will continue.  The countries 
will need to meet their commitments under the compact, and 
sustain good performance as measured by the 16 eligibility 
criteria. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
The Honduran Government\'s Preliminary Approach 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5. (U) The Honduran government\'s effort to develop and 
negotiate a compact with the MCC is led by Minister of the 
Presidency Luis Cosenza.  Cosenza has designated a working 
level team, led by former Central Bank President Victoria 
Diaz, and including economic advisors Manuel Ramirez, Ian 
Walker, and Dante Mossi, as well as Honduran Embassy 
Counselor Sergio Membreno.  Other key members of the GOH 
team include Minister of Transportation Jorge Carranza, 
Minister of Finance Arturo Alvarado, Minister of Agriculture 
Mariano Jimenez, Minister of Industry and Trade Norman 
Garcia, and Presidential Advisor for Projects and 
Modernization of the State, Mauro Membreno.  President 
Ricardo Maduro met with the MCC delegation for over an hour 
to emphasize the importance that he attaches to the MCA 
effort. 
 
6. (U) The GOH is using as its starting point the 
implementation plan for the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 
for 2004-2006, just recently developed for the June 10-11 
Consultative Group meeting with key donors.  The key pillars 
of the Poverty Reduction Strategy are growth with equity, 
reduction in rural poverty, reduction in urban poverty, 
development of human capital (particularly education and 
health), emphasis on vulnerable groups, and sustainability 
of the strategy, including strengthening of the government 
institutions and ability to govern justly.  The principal 
goals for 2004-2006 are to accelerate economic growth, 
strengthen the link between the growth and poverty 
reduction, widen programs for the poorest families in 
society, undertake policy reforms in the areas of education, 
health and nutrition, water and sanitation, and 
agriculture/forestry, and finally, improve governance and 
transparency, improve protection of the environment, and 
implement a system of tracking and evaluating poverty 
reduction programs. 
 
7. (U) In its introductory meeting with the MCC staff, the 
GOH provided an overview of its work in recent years in 
improving the macroeconomic framework, making structural 
reforms that will improve competitiveness, working toward 
improved infrastructure, and the targeting of three key 
sectors - agriculture, tourism, and light manufacturing. 
They identified several obstacles to economic growth: poor 
road infrastructure (particularly in rural areas), lack of 
irrigation, poor titling and registry of property, 
inadequate support to rural farmers and businesses, and the 
need for improvements in urban areas which will help foster 
continued economic growth in the municipalities as well. 
 
8. (SBU) The Honduran government is considering a proposal 
to use MCA funds for three key types of activities.  On road 
infrastructure, the current thinking is to request funds for 
three segments of the Logistical Corridor highway project: 
(a) partial financing for a new road from the Salvadoran 
border to Comayagua which connects to the highway to Puerto 
Cortes, (b) partial financing for improvements on the 
Villanueva-La Barca section of the highway to Puerto Cortes, 
and (c) full financing for improvement of the road from 
Choluteca to Guasaule on the Nicaraguan border. 
 
9. (SBU) Together with the improvements already underway on 
the road between Puerto Cortes and Guatemala, these road 
projects would tie Central America\'s principal Atlantic port 
more closely to the neighboring countries, improving the 
region\'s ability to increase integration as envisioned under 
Plan Puebla Panama, and take full advantage of the recently 
signed Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA).  The 
projects will allow the four countries to cut transport 
costs for exports to the U.S. and Europe and among 
themselves, and build upon the efforts to obtain rapid 
certification of Puerto Cortes and modernization of the 
port.  The improvement of this road corridor will also allow 
Honduras to make additional areas of the country attractive 
for investment in light manufacturing, which traditionally 
has been located close to the port of Puerto Cortes and the 
city of San Pedro Sula. 
 
10. (SBU) A second prong of the proposal would target 
obstacles to growth in rural areas, and would involve: 
development of rural roads to feed into the Logistical 
Corridor, irrigation, rural credit, land titling and 
registration, and support to small businesses in rural areas 
in the western and southern parts of the country (which are 
traditional areas of the worst poverty). 
 
11. (SBU) The final prong would involve investments in urban 
areas that will help build a productive labor market in the 
cities.  These would include land titling and registry in 
marginal urban areas to promote more construction of low- 
income housing, expansion of the USAID-supported pilot 
program to develop community-based kindergarten programs, 
and micro-lending. 
 
12. (U) The GOH emphasized that all these elements are in 
the Poverty Reduction Strategy, and thus a result of lengthy 
and exhaustive consultation with all members of civil 
society.  The GOH also emphasized its commitment to clear 
indicators and targets, and effective accountability 
mechanisms for project expenditures. 
 
-------------- 
Policy Reforms 
-------------- 
 
13. (SBU) The MCC noted that the program proposal should 
focus on removing impediments to economic growth, and this 
would likely require significant policy changes as well as 
projects.  GOH Economic Advisor Ian Walker noted that some 
of the policy changes included in the Poverty Reduction 
Sector Credit (PRSC) that is being proposed to the World 
Bank board at the end of June may be included as part of an 
MCA proposal. 
 
14. (SBU) The first set of 14 policy reforms/actions (prior 
conditions) in the PRSC include several that directly 
address key obstacles to economic growth in Honduras, for 
example: a sound macroeconomic framework, the reduction of 
time needed to register a business to 62 days, amendment of 
the airport concession with stakeholder involvement, 
improvement in telecommunications through the award of 
private interconnection contracts and a new cellular phone 
operator, adoption of a property law which establishes a 
unified property registry and facilitates land titling, 
decentralization of education oversight, and introduction to 
Congress of a law creating a professional civil service. 
 
15. (SBU) To continue the program in the second year, the 
GOH would need to fulfill 11 more policy reforms, including: 
maintain an adequate economic framework, pass a competition 
law which reduces collusive practices and constraints to 
firm entry and exit, improve the legislative framework for 
ports, plan and begin restructuring of the national electric 
power company ENEE, pass legislation creating a professional 
civil service, create an electronic government procurement 
system, and create and implement the protected areas trust 
fund. 
 
------------------------------ 
Meeting with Political Leaders 
------------------------------ 
 
16. (SBU) The MCC team also met with congressional and 
political party leaders, including the Vice President of 
Congress, the Secretary (Majority Whip) of Congress, the 
Nationalist Party Majority Leader, and members of four of 
the five national parties, as well as foreign policy and 
assistance advisors for the leading presidential candidates 
for the Nationalist and Liberal parties.  As in other 
meetings, the MCC team outlined the MCA initiative and 
stressed the importance of a fully consultative process in 
identifying projects for MCA funding.  They also began to 
engage opposition political leaders to ensure continuity of 
support for the MCA effort in Honduras after the 2005 
national elections.  The briefing was well-received, and 
participants raised several interesting ideas, including the 
need for greater municipality involvement in the process and 
the need for greater access to micro-credit lending to 
support small business development. 
 
---------------------- 
NGOs and Civil Society 
---------------------- 
 
17. (U) The MCC delegation met with a group of 29 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) doing development work 
throughout Honduras, and with FONAC (Fora Nacional de 
Convergencia), the official umbrella organization for 
Honduran civil society groups.  After an overview of the MCA 
initiative, John Hewko asked the participants their opinion 
about the level of participation in the Poverty Reduction 
Strategy.  Several participants noted reservations about the 
consultative process used during the development of the PRS: 
that the government tended to provide a finished product for 
reaction without including civil society from the beginning, 
that some communities and organizations were more adept and 
prepared at participating than others, leaving some voices 
heard and others not, and that many comments and suggestions 
were not adopted. 
 
18. (U) Several project ideas were also forwarded during 
these meetings, including: financing micro- and small 
enterprises to generate greater employment and income 
growth, education, and municipal infrastructure.  They also 
expressed their concern about the importance of including 
civil society representatives in the design and 
implementation of the MCC compact with the GOH. 
 
19. (SBU) The MCC delegation emphasized the importance of 
forwarding any proposals to the GOH team, working together 
across sectors to develop a focused approach in dealing with 
the GOH, focusing on economic growth, and having 
participation in the design and implementation of the 
proposal. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
International Financial Institutions and Donors 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
20. (SBU) IMF resident advisor Ana Lucia Coronel and 
visiting IMF Mission Director Adrienne Cheasty provided an 
overview of the two years leading up to the IMF\'s third 
program in Honduras, and the importance of the policy 
measures the government finally took in December 2003.  They 
expressed support for the MCC and willingness to cooperate 
in any way possible.  The IMF representatives confirmed that 
even the HIPC completion point will provide little in the 
way of new funds for vitally needed government investment. 
Cheasty also indicated that the GOH is on track with its 
financial sector and anticorruption/transparency reforms. 
 
21. (SBU) World Bank resident advisor Joe Owen discussed the 
Bank\'s ongoing work in providing budget support requiring 
policy changes (the Poverty Reduction Sector Credit is 
scheduled to go to the Board in June) and in strengthening 
institutional capacity in areas as far ranging as the 
financial sector, transparency and anticorruption, the 
judicial sector, land administration, and integrated rural 
development (health, education, nutrition, microfinance and 
technical assistance).  Owen said that a recent Development 
Policy Review showed that the key factors impacting growth 
in Honduras are infrastructure, education coverage and 
quality, and financial sector deepening.  In the rural 
areas, key issues are access to capital and access to 
markets. 
 
22. (SBU) The Interamerican Development Bank representatives 
explained the IDB\'s process for assuring adequate 
consultation on its projects, and an overview of potential 
mechanisms for accountability over grants and loans. 
 
23. (SBU) In a meeting at the Central American Bank for 
Economic Integration (CABEI), bank President Harry Brautigam 
explained that CABEI has provided the GOH with a USD 125,000 
grant to help fund the cost of the government\'s MCA proposal 
team, and expressed interest in partnering with the MCC to 
co-finance parts of the MCA proposal, particularly the 
highway infrastructure.  The MCC delegation indicated that 
there were possible obstacles to this kind of co-financing, 
as CABEI\'s funding is provided as market-rate loans.  There 
will be further discussions in Washington about whether this 
would be feasible and desirable, in the context of Honduras\' 
IMF agreement and HIPC status, and given the MCC\'s own 
legislative mandate to provide funds only in the form of 
grants. 
24. (U) The meeting with bilateral donors included 
representatives from the World Bank, CABEI, UNDP, SIDA 
(Sweden), CIDA (Canada), JICA (Japan), DFID (U.K.), AECI 
(Spain), and the EU (European Union).  After hearing John 
Hewko\'s presentation on the five principles of the MCA, 
bilateral donors expressed concerns over how to assure civil 
society participation in the design of the compact, 
transparency in the implementation of the compact, and the 
coordination of the MCC in the PRSP and with the G-17 group 
of donors.  They were also interested in learning more about 
the government\'s proposal to achieve faster economic growth 
to alleviate poverty.  Victoria Diaz explained her team\'s 
preliminary thinking with respect to the preliminary 
proposal outline that the government presented to the MCC 
Team (discussed above). 
 
----------------------- 
Private Sector Meetings 
----------------------- 
 
25. (SBU) Private sector leaders in San Pedro Sula and 
Tegucigalpa provided additional ideas for projects that 
would spur economic growth, including: flood control 
projects in the Sula Valley, low-cost housing, education 
projects, microfinance, and improved highway infrastructure 
serving Tegucigalpa.  The MCC delegation encouraged the 
businesspeople to provide their input to the GOH team, 
understanding that the GOH\'s eventual proposal to the MCC 
will have the best chance if it is well targeted and 
focused, and the result of a consultative process. 
 
-------------- 
Press Coverage 
-------------- 
 
26. (U) PAS press strategy included the following media 
events using all national media.  The delegation held a 
press conference with President Maduro on June 14 and a 
second one at the embassy on June 16 at the end of the visit 
in the PAS conference room.  PAS arranged for Hewko to 
participate in a 45 minute interview on the most widely 
viewed morning television talk show \"Frente a Frente.\" 
Press coverage was extensive, and served the intended 
purpose of highlighting the MCC and the five key MCA 
principles (see reftel).  Some initial news stories, which 
included a statement by President Maduro saying that MCA had 
been approved, were misleading, suggesting that an MCA 
proposal had already been submitted and accepted.  However, 
later coverage corrected Maduro\'s statement and gave 
prominent coverage to the message that there were no 
guarantees that Honduras would receive funding. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
27. (SBU) The MCA comes at a particularly welcome time for 
Honduras.  The GOH has given the initiative a great deal of 
thought and will probably be working on its MCA proposal 
throughout the summer.  The preliminary proposal outline the 
GOH currently has in mind is likely to be complementary to 
(and not duplicative of) other foreign assistance, and 
should help lay a solid foundation for Honduras\' 
participation in the Central America customs union and the 
Central American Free Trade Agreement.  Key challenges will 
include (1) ensuring sufficient consultation throughout 
society on a well-focused proposal that emphasizes economic 
growth, (2) developing efficient implementation mechanisms 
that ensure accountability and transparency, and (3) 
proposing good indicators and targets for the measurement of 
success, including relevant policy changes.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18477","7/7/2004 12:57","04TEGUCIGALPA1508","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 001508 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN and WHA/EPSC 
TREASURY FOR EIlzetzki 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID (LAC/SA) 
STATE PASS OPIC, EXIM 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, EINV, SOCI, PREL, PGOV, HO, MCC, NSC 
SUBJECT: Review of the Consultative Group meeting in 
Honduras, June 10-11, 2004 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  Summary: The Honduran Consultative Group (CG) meeting 
was held on June 10-11 with more than 300 participants from 
the GOH, civil society, and the international donor 
community.  President Maduro made a key-note presentation on 
the importance of this meeting to report on the progress 
made on achieving the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) goals 
and the actions left to be taken.  His presentation was 
followed by a number of presentations by Cabinet Ministers, 
the President of Congress, the President of the Supreme 
Court, and representatives of the Honduran civil society and 
members of the international donor community.  Primary 
themes in these presentations included the importance of 
achieving the goals of the PRS, strengthening transparency 
and anti-corruption programs, decentralizing PRS 
implementation to include municipalities and civil society, 
and insuring equal rights for women and minority ethnic 
groups. 
 
2.  The principal results of this meeting were the 
announcement by the IDB President of the CG Meeting, Miguel 
Martinez, that the donors pledged $1.8 billion over the next 
three years in support of the Honduran PRS, and that the 
Government of Honduras (GOH), civil society, and the 
international donors would continue to work together to 
achieve the PRS goals as expressed in the Declaration of 
Tegucigalpa and the Follow-up Actions to be taken during the 
coming year. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Overview of the Consultative Group Meeting 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3.  The Honduran Consultative Group (CG) meeting was 
held on June 10-11 with more than 300 participants from the 
GOH, civil society, and the international donor community. 
The U.S. Government delegation was co-chaired by Ambassador 
Palmer and USAID Country Director Paul Tuebner, and also 
included EconCouns Robin Matthewman, U.S. Treasury/W Officer 
Ethan Ilzetzki, USAID Chief Economist Duty Greene, USAID/W 
Desk Officer for Honduras Laura Libanati, and visiting 
Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) representatives John 
Hewko, John Wingle, and Katharine Uhre. 
 
4.  The meeting was opened with a welcoming presentation by 
Miguel Pastor, mayor of Tegucigalpa and a leading 
presidential candidate for the 2005 elections.  This 
presentation was followed by those of Miguel Martinez (IDB 
Manager of the Regional Operations Department for Mexico, 
Central American Isthmus, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic) 
and President Ricardo Maduro.  President Maduro spoke on the 
importance of this CG meeting to report on the progress 
being made by his government to achieve the goals of the 
national Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the work that 
lies ahead.  After the President\'s presentation, GOH 
Ministers Luis Cosenza (Presidency), Arturo Alvarado 
(Finance), Vicente Williams (First Vice-President and 
Coordinator of the National Competitiveness Program and the 
Plan Puebla Panama), and Thierry Pierrefeu (Tourism) spoke 
on the government\'s national transformation program to 
reduce poverty.  They were followed by Porfirio Lobo 
(President of the National Congress) and Vilma Morales 
(President of the Supreme Court) who discussed the role of 
Congress and the judicial system, respectively, in achieving 
the transformation of Honduras. 
 
5.  After lunch, representatives of the G-15 and civil 
society spoke on the roles that the G-15, civil society, and 
the National Anti-corruption Council have played and should 
play in this transformation process to reduce poverty. 
These speeches were followed by a series of brief opening 
interventions from the participating representatives from 
the international donor community.   They focused primarily 
on the need to continue with the implementation of the PRGF 
program, decentralization, transparency, and broad-based 
economic growth.  The first day ended with a reception for 
all the CG participants in the Presidential Palace hosted by 
President Maduro, the First Lady, and the Government. 
 
6.  The second day of the CG meeting focused on the 
coordination and harmonization of international cooperation 
to support the priorities of the gGovernment, and the 
national capacity of host country institutions to implement 
the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS).  Addressing these 
issues were Rocio Tabora (Vice-Minister of the Presidency), 
Jorge Hernandez Alcerro (Minister of Internal Affairs), and 
Arturo Alvarado.  The Ministers for Education, Agriculture 
and Forestry, Health, and Water and Sanitation spoke on the 
work on sector-wide approach programs (SWAPs) that their 
respective Ministries have been developing.  During lunch, 
President Maduro participated in a signing ceremony with a 
donors\' group willing to pool their funds in an Education 
SWAP.  (USAID is supporting this program separately by 
financing activities that contribute directly to the EFA- 
Fast Track Initiative goals.) 
 
7.  After lunch, representatives from various civil 
society groups gave statements on their roles in supporting 
the PRS and their skepticism of government programs 
(especially decentralization, transformation, and food 
security) to reduce poverty effectively.  This session was 
followed by the closing statements of the international 
donor representatives, including that of Ambassador Palmer 
who focused on the importance of implementing the PRSP and 
strengthening the government\'s efforts in justice, 
education, health, and economic growth with equity. These 
statements were followed by the passing of the Presidency 
Pro-tempore of the G-15 from the Government of Spain to the 
Government of Sweden, the announcement that the donors\' G-15 
will become the G-17 with the addition of France and 
Switzerland, and the closing remarks of Luis Cosenza and 
Miguel Martinez. 
 
8.  Minister Cosenza focused on the government\'s plan to 
implement the PRS and stressed the six pillars of the PRS: 
economic growth with equity, poverty reduction in rural 
areas, poverty reduction in urban areas, human capital 
formation, strengthening protection to specific groups 
living in poverty, and the programs needed for the 
sustainability of the strategy.  He encouraged the donor 
community to provide direct budget support to the Government 
whenever possible, and provide SWAP funding to the 
government\'s six priority program areas of education, 
health, agro-forestry, water and sanitation, justice and 
personal security, and economic infrastructure. 
 
9.  In his closing remarks, Mr. Martinez congratulated 
the Government of Honduras on the progress that it has made 
in implementing the PRS and reiterated the importance of 
continuing with the PRGF program, giving greater 
transparency in government procurement procedures, 
organizing donor cooperation in priority areas, and 
implementing the PRS in a cost-effective participatory 
manner.  He also read the Declaration of Tegucigalpa that 
was drafted by the Government, civil society, and the 
donors. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
The Tri-partite Declaration of Tegucigalpa 
------------------------------------------ 
 
10.  The tri-partite Declaration of Tegucigalpa reaffirmed 
the commitment of the GOH, civil society, and the donor 
community to the following: 
 
a) To support the transformation of the country, the 
consolidation of democracy, sustainable development, and 
poverty reduction; 
 
b) To strengthen their alliance in the future to achieve 
poverty reduction through accelerated and sustained economic 
growth with equity, with transparency in the management of 
resources, and broad citizen participation and gender 
equality in national and local decisions; 
 
c) To support the Stockholm Principles that call for the 
protection of social and environmental protection in 
Honduras, as well as better governance, decentralization, 
transparency, respect for human rights, foreign debt 
reduction, and the harmonization of international 
cooperation according to national priorities; 
 
d) To support the agreements made in the National Agreement 
of Transformation for Human Development in the Twenty-First 
Century; 
 
e) To support the PRS that constitutes the general plan that 
will guide the development policy of the country in the 
future and that is consistent with the Millennium 
Development  Objectives and Goals.   This strategy will be 
implemented with a programmatic vision based on the 
harmonization of national efforts, complemented by 
international assistance. 
 
11.  The Declaration goes on to say that the GOH is the 
leader and facilitator of the transformation process of the 
country, with broad and effective participation of civil 
society.  Therefore, it is important that the government: 
 
a) Continue strengthening the rule of law, combating 
corruption, and defending human rights; 
 
b) Strengthen the processes of transparency and 
accountability, the participative social auditing of the PRS 
implementation, and faithfully comply with the Law of State 
Contracting and related norms, the recommendations of the 
Program for the Efficiency and Transparency in State 
Purchases and Contracts, and the National Anti-Corruption 
Council, and the technical capacity and independence of the 
Superior Accounting Tribunal; 
 
c) Continue preparing and implementing the Central 
Government\'s budget for multiple years, based on regional 
needs, and with medium-term expenditure goals to reflect 
effectively the PRS goals, providing details of the 
implementation of the PRS expenditures and the advances made 
to reach these goals, and initiate the same budgeting 
process for sector-wide approach programs (SWAPs); 
 
d) Agree to participative mechanisms to incorporate 
citizens\' demands coming from territories and priority 
sectors identified in the PRS and in the multi-year budget, 
starting this process with the 2005 budget; 
 
e) Achieve greater articulation of the PRS activities, 
programs, and projects, including the proposals of the 
different social sectors; 
 
f) Strengthen the implementation of policies to make the 
state efficient, modern, competitive, and agile, so that the 
administration is at the service of its citizens and focused 
on national development; 
 
g) Implement the Macroeconomic Program for 2004-2006 to 
reach in the first quarter of 2005 the HIPC completion 
point, and implement public policies that permit the 
development of a strategy that substantially improves 
productive infrastructure and generates wealth with greater 
equity; 
 
h) Strengthen municipal governments and local development 
through the decentralized management of the PRS with an 
integrated regional vision, taking into account municipal 
and regional realities with emphasis on the existing 
resources in the different regions and local and regional 
priorities; 
 
i) Advance in the implementation of a transparent and 
coherent policy with civil society that permits its 
strengthening and broad participation in the PRS 
implementation, complying with the commitments agreed to in 
the different international forums; 
 
j) Accelerate the efforts to achieve efficiency in the 
management of international cooperation, orienting their 
assistance to achieve the PRS goals. 
 
12.  The parties also consider that civil society should 
have a greater participation in the transformation of 
Honduras and support the democratic process and the 
consolidation of the Rule of Law.  In this respect, it is 
important that civil society: 
 
a) Deepen and broaden its base and social communication in 
its institutions; 
 
b) Strengthen its technical capacity and political 
presentations, as well as its transparency and 
accountability processes; 
 
c) Participate actively and efficiently in the 
implementation and monitoring of the PRS to strengthen the 
ownership and sustainability of the activities. 
 
13.  The parties also agree that the international donors 
are a strategic ally of the GOH and civil society in the 
transformation process of the country.  Therefore, it is 
important that the donors: 
 
a) Coordinate their activities in the framework of PRS 
implementation, giving priority to achieving the goals of 
poverty reduction and informing about the different support 
instruments used; 
 
b) Simplify and harmonize their procedures and 
administrative requirements to contribute more effectively 
and efficiently to achieving the PRS goals; 
 
c) Harmonize their support, basing it on sector strategies, 
programs, and budgets that have been defined and given 
priority in the PRS; 
 
d) Support the GOH to advance substantially in effective 
compliance with the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility 
(PRGF) Agreement with the IMF and the PRS implementation; 
 
e) Contribute to strengthening the national capacity 
required by the GOH and civil society to overcome the 
challenges stated above. 
 
14.   Also, the parties agreed to reaffirm: 
a) Their interest in strengthening the work of the PRS 
Consultative Council to allocate and monitor the PRS funds; 
 
b) Their conviction that in order to achieve the common good 
it is necessary to favor the interest of the nation over 
those of individual interest groups and partisan politics; 
 
c) Their commitment to strengthen the constructive and 
transparent dialogue without prejudicing differences in 
opinion that could exist in confronting the challenges of 
the country.  They reiterate that the objectives and goals 
of the transformation should be independent of changes in 
the government so as to guarantee the sustainability of the 
reforms and the medium and long-term policies; 
 
d) The importance of the work of the Follow-up Group, today 
known as the G-17, as a monitoring mechanism of the donor 
community in the transformation process of Honduras. 
Likewise, they agree to continue developing and 
strengthening the tri-partite mechanisms that allow them to 
give continuity to the agreements reached in this 
Consultative Group Meeting, which will constitute an 
invaluable guide to reduce poverty and transform Honduras. 
 
15.  Martinez also announced that the donor community had 
pledged a total of $1.8 billion to support the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy of Honduras over the next three years, 
with approximately $810 million coming in the form of 
donations and the remaining billion coming in the form of 
loans.  This pledged amount has yet to be confirmed and has 
not been broken down by donor or by sector. In hisIn his 
closing remarks, Ambassador Palmer stated that the U.S. 
Government is committed to continue its support to Honduras 
for poverty reduction with USAID planning to give a total of 
$235 million over the next five years and other U.S. 
Government agencies, such as the Department of State, 
Department of Agriculture, Department of Labor, Peace Corps, 
and possibly the Millennium Challenge Corporation, adding to 
that amount. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Follow-up Actions to the CG Meetings 
------------------------------------ 
 
16.  In conclusion, Martinez also read the following 
principal follow-up actions to this CG meeting: 
 
a) Consolidation of the Economic Program 
      Continue implementing the macroeconomic program and 
take all the necessary steps to be able to reach the 
completion point of the HIPC initiative. 
 
b) PRS Implementation 
      Prepare before the end of September a proposed budget 
for the implementation of the PRS for the 2005-2006 period 
that is integrated into the multi-year budget and is 
consistent with the PRS implementation plan for 2004-2005. 
This plan would be presented to the PRS Consultative Council 
for future consideration by the Social Cabinet and its 
incorporation into the national budget 
 
      Prepare before the end of September a plan of concrete 
actions to consolidate and strengthen the advances in the 
implementation of the PRS monitoring system (SIERP), 
including the community social audits and the monitoring 
systems for the PRS expenditures (SIAFI) and the financing 
from external cooperation. 
 
c) Legislative Agenda 
  - Reform of the Penal Code to Combat Financial Crimes 
  - Law of Financial Institutions 
  - Law of the Fund for Deposit Insurance 
  - Law of the Bank and Insurance Commission 
  - Organic Law of the National University 
  - Law of Public Servants 
  - Forestry Law 
  - Organic Law for the Judicial Power 
  - Law of the Judicial Council and of the Judicial Career 
  - New Civil Procedures Code 
  - Notary Code 
 
d) Modernization of the Justice Sector 
      Implementation of the institutional reforms for the 
modernization and systematization of the management models 
of justice that allow for the increase in the independence 
and efficiency of the judicial system.  These include 
progress in the selection process of judicial personnel 
through opposition procedures with the participation of 
civil society, and substantial progress in the finalization 
of the processes initiated under the Penal Procedures Code 
that allows its conclusion in 2006. 
 
e) Transparency and Accountability 
      Prepare before the end of September an action plan 
with steps to take before the end of 2005 that permits the 
continuation of increasing the transparency of managing 
public funds, especially in the area of State purchases and 
contracts, and to strengthen the control process and 
accountability. 
 
f) Coordination of the International Cooperation 
      Achieve before the end of September agreement by 
consensus on the strategies with sector focus for education, 
health, potable water and sanitation, agro-forestry, and 
justice, and continue the actions to define the sector 
strategy for housing, all based on the working documents 
prepared for the current Consultative Group Meeting. 
 
      Prepare before the end of September an action plan 
with concrete steps to carry out through December 2005 a 
program to strengthen the coordination process for each 
sector table. 
 
      Achieve before the end of July a workshop to review 
the lessons learned about the functioning of the sector 
tables, as well as the relevant experiences in other 
countries of the region, and prepare before the end of 
August a proposal to improve the functioning of the sector 
tables, particularly in relation to the active participation 
of civil society. 
 
PalmerALMER 
"
"18591","7/9/2004 18:35","04TEGUCIGALPA1526","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04PARIS3044","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 001526 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB, DRL/IL, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT SHUETE 
SAN SALVADOR FOR COMMATT DTHOMPSON 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, OPIC, EXIM, USTR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USED IDB, USED WB, USED IMF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, ELAB, ETRD, EWWT, KJUS, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduran Economic Highlights: April-June 2004 
 
REF: PARIS 03044 
 
Contents 
-------- 
Macroeconomics: 
 - Paris Club and USG Provide Debt Relief 
 - Agreement Reached on Minimum Wage Increase 
 - High Gas Prices Continue to Pinch 
 
Port Security: 
 - Coast Guard Pleased With Honduran Ports 
 
Law Enforcement: 
 - Major Money Laundering Conviction 
 - Banhcreser Fugitive Captured in Florida 
 
Business: 
 - Governors Bush, Perdue Vie for FTAA Support 
 
Agriculture: 
 - GOH Lifts Restrictions on U.S. Beef 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Paris Club and USG Provide Interim Debt Relief 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
1.  On April 14, Paris Club creditors and the GOH agreed to 
a restructuring of Honduras\' public external debt, leading 
to the cancellation of approximately $147 million of 
Honduran debt, and the rescheduling of $214 million more 
(see reftel).  Under the agreement reached between Paris 
Club participating creditors and a Honduran delegation led 
by the Minister of Finance Arturo Alvarado, total Honduran 
debt service due to Paris Club creditors between January 1, 
2004, and June 30, 2005, was reduced from $405 million to 
approximately $49 million.  As a participant in the HIPC 
(Heavily Indebted Poor Countries) initiative, Honduras was 
granted \"Cologne terms\": 90 percent cancellation of pre-1990 
debt. 
 
2.  Following the collective agreement with its Paris Club 
creditors in April, the GOH has begun to negotiate bilateral 
agreements with these creditors individually.  The first of 
these bilateral agreements to be negotiated and signed was 
with the USG.  On June 1, Charge d\'Affaires Roger Pierce and 
Minister Alvarado signed an agreement which forgives over 
$55 million in official debt service payments owed by the 
GOH to the USG.  The U.S. agencies included in the agreement 
are USAID, DOD, USDA, and the Ex-Im Bank.  The USG went 
beyond the required Cologne terms by offering 100 percent 
cancellation of pre-1999 debt.  Acting President Vicente 
Williams presided over the signing ceremony and reaffirmed 
in strong terms the GOH\'s full commitment to use these funds 
for poverty reduction, as envisioned in the HIPC initiative. 
 
3.  The agreement was delivered to the U.S. Congress on June 
8.  After a 30-day notification period, the agreement 
entered into force on July 8, ahead of a DOD payment due 
July 15 that, if not paid, would have triggered Brooke 
sanctions.  The GOH is currently negotiating bilateral 
agreements with Spain and France, and must conclude 
negotiations with all of its bilateral creditors by October. 
 
--------------------- 
Minimum Wage Increase 
--------------------- 
 
4.  After months of negotiations, the government, the 
private sector, and labor unions finally reached an 
agreement on April 19 on a new minimum wage.  The increase 
varies between nine and twelve percent, depending on the 
activity and the number of employees of a given company. 
The new average minimum salary will be 2,212 Lempiras per 
month (approximately $122 per month), up 7.3 percent from 
the 2003 level of 2,050 Lempiras per month ($113).  The 
increase is retroactive only to April 1 of this year, not to 
January 1 as unions had requested. 
 
5.  During the negotiations, the parties agreed in principle 
to include in a new Minimum Salary Law clear mechanisms to 
determine future revisions to the minimum wage, starting in 
2005.  These mechanisms would be based on production 
parameters of each sector, the inflation and devaluation 
rates, and the economic growth of the country.  The law 
would have to be approved by Congress by September 30 of 
this year in order to be in place for next year\'s 
negotiations. 
 
--------------------------------- 
High Gas Prices Continue to Pinch 
--------------------------------- 
 
6.  High gas prices, the result of an increase in the tariff 
on fuel imposed at the end of 2003 as well as the high world 
price of oil, continue to cause discontent among Hondurans 
and a political headache for the GOH, even as world prices 
eased somewhat in June.  Honduras continues to have the 
highest oil prices in Central America: at the end of May, a 
gallon of super gasoline in Honduras cost $3.08, while in 
Costa Rica the price was $2.29, in Nicaragua $2.27, in El 
Salvador the price was $2.06, and in Guatemala $2.05.  The 
much-ballyhooed Presidential Commission on fuel prices, 
established in March by President Maduro with representation 
from the government, private sector, and civil society, has 
had little effect. 
 
7.  In reaction to the high prices, the Honduran government 
ordered a 10 percent reduction in fuel consumption by its 
branches, and restricted the circulation of government 
vehicles.  Among the new regulations is an order that 
government vehicles with license plates ending in an even 
number may only be used Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, while 
those with plates ending in an odd number may be used 
Tuesday and Thursday - though this regulation has not been 
enforced. 
 
8.  In late May, the increasing price of jet fuel was blamed 
for an increase in the prices of airline tickets.  According 
to Armando Funez, president of the Honduran Airlines 
Association, airline operation costs were increasing due 
primarily to high fuel prices.  However, some in the tourism 
industry suggested that international airlines would raise 
ticket prices in any case to take advantage of the high 
season for tourism and international travel. 
 
------------- 
Port Security 
------------- 
 
9.  From June 14-18, a U.S. Coast Guard port security team 
visited Honduras; this was the first such port security 
assessment visit in the Western Hemisphere.  The team came 
to assess Honduras\' implementation of the new, more 
stringent port security standards under the International 
Ship and Port Facility Security Code (ISPS).  It reviewed 
security practices at five national ports, met with the 
national commission on port security, and discussed Honduran 
port security regulations with the national port security 
authority, which was recently created to comply with the 
ISPS.  The USCG team reported that it had identified several 
innovative and efficient security practices that it would 
carry back to the port facilities in the U.S. as \"best 
security practices\".  The USCG team also lauded Honduras for 
being a port security leader for hosting the first USCG 
verification visit in the region. 
 
10.  On July 1, the official international deadline 
established by the Maritime Transportation Security Act of 
2002, the GOH reported to the IMO (International Maritime 
Organization) that it has security assessments and plans in 
place for all but one of its national ports, thereby 
declaring these ports certified.  The only exception was the 
small port at La Ceiba, which is expected to be certified in 
July. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Money Laundering Convictions in Captain Ryan Case 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
11.  Due in part to unprecedented regional law enforcement 
cooperation, the government of Honduras won guilty verdicts 
for money laundering against the four principal defendants 
in the Captain Ryan case.  This is only the second-ever 
successful prosecution of a drug-related money laundering 
seizure case in Honduras.  The Captain Ryan maritime vessel 
was seized by members of the INL-funded elite unit and the 
Frontier Police in December 2002 as it was departing a 
Honduran port.  The defendants face a sentence of 16 to 20 
years; they will be sentenced in mid-July.  Furthermore, the 
$467,000 found on board the ship, and other assets seized at 
the time of arrest, including the ship itself, were ordered 
forfeited by the tribunal.  Three unwitting crewmen were 
found innocent and released after having spent almost 7 
months in jail.  Several potential witnesses were murdered 
in the run-up to the trial. 
 
12.  The verdict was aided by joint cooperation between INL 
offices at Embassy Panama and Tegucigalpa.  Embassy Panama 
provided a timely assist in funding travel so that 
Panamanian police and prosecutors could share critical 
evidence with Honduran authorities and receive practical 
training in a money laundering prosecution.  In addition, 
this case was one of the top priority cases being supported 
by the anti-money laundering technical assistance project, 
funded by INL and the U.S. Treasury Department. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Ex-Banhcreser Board Member Captured in Florida 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
13.  Honduran police gained access to Florida territory in 
order to facilitate the capture of Caupolican Zuniga 
Maradiaga, one of the principal board members of the 
Honduran Credit and Service Bank, Banhcreser, which failed 
in 2001 amidst allegations of corruption and wrongdoing. 
Zuniga was captured in Broward County, Florida on May 23. 
The 56 year-old banker, who held the position of general 
manager, was charged with the crime of continued fraud 
against Banhcreser depositors.  He is specifically accused 
of having acted improperly by transferring $3.7 million 
dollars in Banhcreser deposits to a U.S. bank account, then 
establishing a line of credit for a shell company using 
those deposits as collateral.  The Honduran government is 
working towards extraditing Zuniga to Honduras.  The 
Attorney General, Ovidio Navarro, has requested that the 
embassy assist with the extradition process.  Zuniga is a 
U.S. resident. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Governors Bush, Perdue Vie for FTAA Support 
------------------------------------------- 
 
14.  Governor Jeb Bush of Florida and Governor Sonny Perdue 
of Georgia visited Honduras in immediate succession during 
the first week of June.  The Governors were seeking 
Honduras\' support for the selection of Miami and Atlanta, 
respectively, to be the headquarters of the FTAA. 
 
15.  Governor Bush visited first, making up for a visit that 
had been planned for February, but that was cancelled when 
poor weather conditions and malfunctioning navigational 
equipment at Tegucigalpa\'s main airport prevented his plane 
from landing.  Governor Bush was accompanied by a delegation 
of 19 Florida businessmen, as well as representatives of 
\"FTAA Florida\", the organization pushing for Miami\'s 
selection as the FTAA headquarters.  President Maduro, who 
was Bush\'s friend and college classmate at Stanford 
University, received Governor Bush warmly and hosted a lunch 
in his honor at the Presidential Palace.  Other members of 
the delegation met with a group of Honduran ministers and 
discussed CAFTA, tourism, port security, and other issues. 
At a press conference held on June 2, Maduro publicly 
declared his support for Miami to be chosen as the FTAA 
headquarters. 
 
16.  The day after Governor Bush\'s departure, Governor Sonny 
Perdue of Georgia visited San Pedro Sula with a small group 
of advisers.  Governor Perdue met privately with Minister of 
Industry and Trade Norman Garcia, and had breakfast with a 
group of business leaders from northern Honduras.  He also 
met with President Maduro on the margins of a dinner event 
on June 3.  In each meeting, he acknowledged that Maduro had 
already pledged his support to Miami, but continued to push 
for Atlanta as the FTAA seat, and stressed the benefits of 
Atlanta as a city from which to conduct business in the 
United States. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Restrictions Lifted on U.S. Beef 
-------------------------------- 
 
17.  On May 31, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 
signed a decree lifting the restrictions on beef imported 
from the United States.  The restrictions were put in place 
in December 2003 as a result of the case of mad cow disease 
identified in Washington state.  The process of lifting the 
restrictions began when OIRSA (International Regional 
Organization of Plant and Animal Health) gave a preliminary 
recommendation to Central American governments that 
restrictions be lifted.  Following this recommendation, the 
Honduran government reviewed the several USDA documents 
citing U.S. advances in monitoring and surveillance and 
other protective measures.  After review and analysis of 
the documents, Honduras agreed that the risk was minimal, 
resulting in the complete lifting of the restrictions which 
had been imposed. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18615","7/12/2004 13:05","04TEGUCIGALPA1541","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001541 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID, ALSO FOR WHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, HO 
SUBJECT: Electoral Law Reform Adopted; 2005 Primary 
Elections Calendar Released 
 
1. On June 21, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (Tribunal 
Supremo Electoral TSE) - established for the purpose of 
directing the electoral process and internal elections - 
approved the calendar for the 2005 primary and internal 
elections in Honduras. According to the Calendar, starting 
August 20, 2004, political parties will have 102 days for 
the enrollment of candidates and primary election platforms 
for the 2005 popular election, with a deadline of November 
30, 2004.  Primary elections will take place on February 20, 
2005. Positions for election include president, vice 
president, 128 representatives and alternates to the 
National Congress, and 298 mayoral municipalities.  There 
will not be an election of representatives to the Central 
American parliament. 
 
2. This election will be the first to carry out procedures 
put in place by the new Electoral Law, adopted in January 
2004.  After much discussion and debate in the National 
Congress, all 277 articles of the law were entered into 
effect on April 1, 2004. Conflict over the law arose in May 
when Liberals accused the Deputies of the Style Commission - 
in charge of making editorial corrections to the law, after 
it is approved in content - of making content changes. Some 
members of the National Congress told the Honduran press 
that the commission modified articles regarding the release 
of poll results. The approved version stated that poll 
results would NOT be permitted for publication 50 days prior 
to the primaries and 90 days before the general election. 
The modification stated reporting would be allowed during 
this period. The language change was caught and reverted 
before it went to the floor. 
 
3. There are several important components to the Electoral 
Law. The new law limits campaigns to four months and a 
political candidate can run for one political position only. 
A political movement has to have two percent of valid voter 
signatures in order to register, otherwise it will be 
dissolved.  A quota for no less than 30 percent 
participation of women officeholders was established. An 
office of Vice President was created and the current system 
of 3 presidential designates was eliminated.  This change 
will make the VP more visible in the campaign. Honduran 
voters abroad will be able to vote, but only to elect 
President and Vice President in general elections. 
 
4. Another reform established that all private campaign 
donations must be registered in the individual parties\' 
accounting registers.  Donations that surpass roughly USD 
16,500 must separately be reported to the TSE and the funds 
deposited in banking institutions, which will then be at the 
disposal of the party authorities that manage the party\'s 
statutes or rules. 
 
5. Proportional representation was abolished for primary 
elections and voters will now be able to vote directly for 
congressional candidates in their party\'s primary. 
Moreover, in the next elections, voters will select 
candidates based not only on their names but also on their 
photographs, a process without precedent in Honduras. 
Congressional seats will still be assigned by the total 
proportional vote each party receives.  Those candidates who 
win the most votes will still be the first elected. However, 
there exists the possibility that a candidate from a small 
party could be elected with fewer votes than a lower ranking 
candidate in a major party.  In party primaries, winners 
will be selected strictly in accordance with the number of 
votes they receive. 
 
6. The new law prohibits political advertising until 50 days 
before the election.  However, it seems that abuses are 
already being made on both sides.  In June, the TSE 
suggested it would investigate the content of and source of 
funding for political messages in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro 
Sula, specifically looking at the campaigns of Porfirio Lobo 
Sosa, President of the Congress and presidential primary 
candidate in the National Party, as well as the mayor of 
Tegucigalpa Miguel Pastor, Liberals Jaime Rosenthal Liva, 
and Manuel Zelaya Rosales.  Currently, the TSE has been 
calling a number of politicians running in a variety of 
capacities to alert them to their infringement upon the 
propaganda law. 
 
7. Aside from ensuring that candidates obey the new campaign 
laws, the TSE is also looking into an organized effort to 
falsify National Identity documents, especially at the 
National Registry of Persons (Registrario Nacional de 
Personas RNP).  The RNP is setting up the procedural aspects 
for the emission of identification cards.  The RNP began a 
bidding process for the company that would produce the 
cards, and finally settled on the IAFIS-SAGEM company that 
is a subsidiary of GBN (a subsidiary of IBM) - the company 
that was contracted for the last election and caused several 
problems (due mostly to technical problems, i.e. machines 
did not get adequate maintenance and people were not 
adequately trained).  As a result, there are roughly 600 
thousand ID cards that remain unaccounted for in the country 
(according to some, the number is over 1 million).  This is 
especially problematic as the identification card is the 
only documentation necessary for voting.  For this election, 
IAFIS-SAGEM will not only have to document new voters, but 
do something to solve the issue of the floating 
identification cards.  However, the company is currently 
being audited and, during the transition process, employees 
have gone on strike leaving the identification process at a 
standstill. 
 
PALMER 
"
"18650","7/13/2004 13:22","04TEGUCIGALPA1543","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA116|04TEGUCIGALPA2878|04TEGUCIGALPA70","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
POSTS FOR DHS, CONS AND POL 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, CA/FPP, G/TIP, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PHUM, KFRD, CVIS, KHLS, ASEC, KCRM, EFIN, HO 
SUBJECT: TWELVE ILLEGAL CHINESE NATIONALS VIOLENTLY FREED 
FROM GOH MIGRATION\'S DETENTION CENTER 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 002878, 
Tegucigalpa 00116, 
Tegucigalpa 00070 (NOTAL) and previous 
 
1. SUMMARY:  On June 13, 2004 two armed individuals broke 
into the detention center at GOH Migration in Tegucigalpa. 
They freed twelve People\'s Republic of China (PRCs) 
nationals apprehended early in 2004 and six South Americans. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. Since November 2003, GOH investigative and migration 
authorities have intercepted over 25 illegal PRCs using 
forged Indonesian, Taiwanese, Japanese and Great Britain 
passports.  Some were traveling with their PRC passports but 
had false GOH visas printed.  These intercepts and the 
arrest of four smugglers represented an important impact on 
the smuggling organization. On June 13, 2004, at about 1640 
hours, two armed individuals broke into the GOH Migration 
detention facility, reduced four migration and frontier 
officials to impotency, and fled with twelve PRCs and six 
South Americans.  Late at night on June 13, 2004, the 
captors released two of the South Americans. Their 
statements however, did not shed much light on the location 
of the PRCs or the organization that freed them. 
 
3. On Wednesday, June 16, 2004, the GOH\'s Attorney General 
issued warrants to search six local businesses owned by PRCs 
known for their participation in the smuggling of PRCs into 
Honduras and the United States.  An anonymous telephone 
call, however, revealed that the location of the PRCs was 
Rio Hondo, a village located some 16 miles from Tegucigalpa. 
Authorities were thus able to recapture the twelve PRCs, and 
the owner of the property where the PRCs were found was also 
arrested.  Surprisingly, the subject was released after 
providing the name of an individual who has been known by 
post officials to be involved in the theft of 1600 Honduran 
passports in 2001.  Post learned that after his release, the 
owner of the Rio Hondo property killed a neighbor in Rio 
Hondo.  As of the date of this cable, the owner of the Rio 
Hondo property and the subject identified by him remain at 
large. 
 
4. On Thursday, June 17, 2004, two more South Americans were 
intercepted in a poor hotel in Tegucigalpa.  Interviews of 
these aliens indicated that the operation of their captors 
was only directed at the PRCs.  Therefore, the captors 
released the South Americans. 
 
5.  Interviews of the PRCs with the assistance of officials 
from the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement suboffice 
at post have provided local authorities with additional 
information about the members of this smuggling organization 
and their associates in the escape from the detention 
facility. 
 
6. COMMENT: This is an exceptional case where all the 
different investigative agencies in Honduras have worked 
together in an investigation of organized crime.  GOH 
Migration has experienced serious difficulties in obtaining 
PRC documents from the PRC Consulate in Mexico City. 
Consequently, and in furtherance of U.S. interests, GOH 
Migration has kept the PRCs in custody for periods well 
above the 40-day limit authorized under current law. The 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement office (ICE) at post 
provided GOH Migration with funding for the repatriation of 
the recaptured PRCs. END COMMENT 
 
PALMER 
"
"18666","7/13/2004 18:59","04TEGUCIGALPA1546","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001546 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PERSONAL FOR COMMANDANT FROM THE AMBASSADOR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, HO 
SUBJECT: KUDOS FOR VISIT OF U.S. COAST GUARD PORT 
SECURITY TEAM 
 
 
1. I want to personally thank you for accepting the 
Honduran government\'s invitation to send a U.S. Coast 
Guard port security verification team to assess this 
country\'s considerable efforts to implement the IMO\'s 
ISPS.  The Honduran government was extremely pleased by 
the results of the visit and the suggestions made by 
your team. 
 
2. I would like to commend the work of the entire team, 
which was effectively and ably led by Lieutenant 
Commander Joseph Lo Sciuto.  LTCDR Lo Sciuto 
demonstrated the finest traditions of U.S Coast Guard 
professionalism in his interactions with Honduran 
government officials during a brief exchange with 
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro at a reception and 
his presentation of the U.S. Coast Guard International 
Port Security Program to four Cabinet Ministers.  The 
team made efficient use of the time available for this 
visit and was able to visit all of the major Honduran 
ports. 
 
3. Finally, your team\'s visit helped our Embassy 
advance significant U.S. national interests and 
supported our year long effort to convince the 
Government of Honduras of the importance and necessity 
of adopting the highest port security standards.  All 
in all, the visit was a complete success.  We will be 
reporting separately on the details and specific 
results of the visit.  Best regards. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18667","7/13/2004 21:42","04TEGUCIGALPA1554","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA1434","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR H, EB, S/CT, INL, DRL/IL, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR JWOLFE 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
TREASURY FOR OTA: JANTONOVICH 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, ECON, EFIN, ETRD, KJUS, PREL, PTER, OREP, HO 
SUBJECT: CODEL SHELBY DISCUSSES BANKING, MONEY LAUNDERING, 
AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1434 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1490 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 819 
 
1.  Summary: Codel Shelby\'s June 28-30 visit underscored the 
close economic and political relationship between the 
U.S. and Honduras, while providing a welcome focus on 
financial regulation and prevention of money laundering and 
terrorist financing.  In meetings with GOH officials and 
business and banking sector leaders, the delegation discussed 
the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA), port security, and 
the Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA).  The senators expressed interest in further 
assisting the Government of Honduras (GOH) with economic 
development, security training, and financial reform.  The 
visit took place during unrelated protests by teachers and 
environmentalists, which did not impact the delegation 
directly.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Meeting with Ministers and President Maduro 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  Senator Richard Shelby (R-AL) and Senator John Cornyn 
(R-TX) visited Honduras June 28-30 as part of a five-country 
visit through Central America.  In their first meeting at the 
Presidential Palace, Norman Garcia, Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, presented the group with a broad overview of the 
main economic issues facing Honduras, namely CAFTA and the 
MCA.  The Senators raised the fight against terrorist 
financing and money laundering, as well as immigration and 
remittances.  Minister of Finance Arturo Alvarado arrived 
partway through the meeting, having come directly from 
teacher negotiations.  He updated the delegation on the 
status of negotiations and explained the background to the 
government\'s policy of controlling growth of teacher salaries 
to maintain fiscal balance and keep within the macroeconomic 
framework of the IMF agreement (ref A). 
 
3.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, joining the meeting in 
progress, described the relationship between the U.S. and 
Honduras as one of shared convictions and the common belief 
in basic responsible behavior, citing his administration\'s 
willingness to invest scarce political capital on issues of 
importance to the U.S., such as Iraq and Cuba, as evidence of 
Honduras, commitment to this friendly relationship.  Maduro 
spoke optimistically of the 
MCA, viewing it as a means to invest in important 
infrastructure projects and promote economic development. 
Regarding CAFTA, Maduro commented that open markets are key 
to Honduras\' prospects for economic growth, stating that 
ratification of CAFTA would be the single most important 
thing the U.S. Congress could do for Honduras. 
 
4.  As the conversation turned to the Senators, interests in 
financial institutions and the rule of law, Maduro 
highlighted recent accomplishments, such as a revised 
judicial system and a method of auditing state purchases. 
Maduro emphasized the challenge that a lack of continuity 
from one administration to the next poses for maintaining 
these advances. 
 
--------------------- 
Meeting with Citibank 
--------------------- 
 
5.  The next morning, the delegation, accompanied by members 
of the Honduran Banking and Insurance Association 
(AHIBA), attended a breakfast hosted by Citibank.  Citibank 
President Maximo Vidal reviewed the bank\'s operations in 
Honduras, emphasizing its focus on education, economic and 
community development, and quality of life.  Senator Shelby 
raised issues such as remittances and the prospects for 
economic growth in Honduras.  He discussed infrastructure 
projects (including those that may potentially be funded by 
the MCA - see ref B) and port security improvements as ways 
to facilitate and stimulate economic growth.  Senator Cornyn 
also emphasized the importance of port security, noting that 
a balance must exist between security and commercial issues, 
such that security is adequate, but does not inhibit 
commercial activity. 
 
---------------- 
Meeting at CABEI 
---------------- 
6.  Next, the delegation met with representatives of the 
Central American Bank of Economic Integration (CABEI) to 
discuss CABEI,s role in the region.  CABEI\'s Chief 
Economist Marvin Taylor explained that about two-thirds of 
CABEI lending goes to the public sector, and stressed the 
bank\'s role as a leader in microlending, with a focus on 
small and medium enterprises.  Senator Shelby voiced his 
support for the bank,s focus on economic development, 
extolling the benefits of regional and economic integration. 
Senator Cornyn asked what challenges CABEI faces and how the 
U.S. may assist the bank.  Taylor cited a lack of continuity 
within the Honduran government as a principal roadblock to 
progress, in addition to a &fragile8 macroeconomic 
environment.  Taylor described CAFTA as a fantastic 
opportunity to solidify economic growth.  Taylor suggested 
incorporating the U.S. into CABEI as a member, thereby 
increasing U.S. investment. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Factory Tour and Lunch with Manufacturers\' Association 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
7.  Following the meeting at CABEI, members of the Honduran 
Manufacturers, Association (AHM) met with the delegation and 
guided them on a tour of the MANEX factory facility. 
The tour highlighted the use of U.S.-made material and 
equipment at the factory, emphasizing the importance of 
Honduras as a destination for U.S. exports, and Honduran 
reliance upon the U.S. as a market for the industry\'s 
finished products.  The factory managers explained to the 
delegation that the factory must uphold the labor standards 
of the companies that contract its work. 
 
8.  After the tour of the factory, AHM representatives hosted 
a lunch for the delegation, and gave a presentation showing 
the increase in textile-related exports from the United 
States to Honduras over the past decade.  Because the 
outsourcing of jobs is of primary concern to many in the 
United States, AHM members focused on U.S. economic gains due 
to foreign investment in the Honduran textile industry.  The 
Senators acknowledged the association,s support for the 
passage of CAFTA, with Senator Cornyn expressly stating that 
he supports CAFTA as well. 
 
---------------- 
Money Laundering 
---------------- 
 
9.  To discuss Honduran efforts to combat money laundering, 
the delegation met with Dr. Ana Christina Mejia de Pereira, 
President of the National Banking Commission (CNBS), and 
Doris Aguilar, Special Prosecutor for Organized Crime, a unit 
of the Public Ministry.  The Treasury Department advisor from 
the Office of Technical Assistance, who is currently 
providing training on money laundering issues to the GOH, 
also attended the meeting. 
 
10.  Mejia began by providing an overview of the anti-money 
laundering law passed in 2002 and the steps taken since the 
law\'s passage (ref C).  She discussed the establishment of 
the Financial Information Unit (FIU) and the development of a 
cooperative working relationship among this unit, the police 
investigative units responsible for financial crimes, and the 
Public Ministry officials responsible for prosecution of 
those crimes.  Aguilar discussed recent 
Public Ministry successes in prosecuting financial crimes, 
but also focused on the challenges that remain, including a 
lack of resources.  Mejia and Aguilar were very complimentary 
of the assistance that the GOH has received from the USG in 
the last two years, both from the Treasury Department and 
from State INL funds.  Senators Shelby and Cornyn were 
pleased to hear that USG assistance has been useful, and 
pledged their commitment to continued support in the future. 
 
-------------- 
Media Coverage 
-------------- 
 
11. Senators Shelby and Cornyn held a press conference on the 
steps of the Presidential Palace after their meeting with the 
President, which was covered by all major news media. 
Coverage highlighted the Senators, interest in financial 
regulations to prevent money laundering and terrorist 
financing, port security and certification, and economic 
integration and development.  Senator Shelby stated that 
Honduras is strategically situated to help other countries in 
the region grow by developing its own internal economy and 
infrastructure.  Senator Cornyn spoke of the positive 
consequences that CAFTA would have for Honduras and for the 
region.  One news article inaccurately indicated that both 
Senators support the ratification of CAFTA, when in fact only 
Senator Cornyn declared his support for the agreement.  The 
press accurately described the Senators as optimistic about 
Honduras being a future potential recipient of funding from 
the MCA. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
12.  Codel Shelby was well received by all sectors here, 
including the press, and supported USG interests and Embassy 
efforts on a range of issues.  The Senators\' visit was 
especially appreciated by the GOH officials in charge of 
investigation and prosecution of financial crimes, who were 
happy to be able to discuss this important issue with the 
Chairman of the Senate Banking Committee.  The Senators were 
very pleased with their meeting with President Maduro, coming 
away with a strong personal connection and a sympathetic 
understanding of the difficulties that Maduro\'s 
administration is currently facing. 
 
13.  This cable was not cleared by Codel members prior to 
their departure. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18775","7/15/2004 18:29","04TEGUCIGALPA1567","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04State150176","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001567 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS USTR FOR JWOLFE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EAGR, PGOV, HO, WTO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS READY TO ADVANCE ON DOHA, UNEASY ABOUT G- 
90 
 
REF: A) State 150176 
 
     B) Tegucigalpa 778 
     C) Urs July 12 e-mail 
 
1. (U) EconOff delivered ref A talking points to Vice 
Minister for External Trade Irving Guerrero on July 13.  As 
Honduran officials have stated in the past (ref B), the GOH 
is eager to move forward with the Doha Round negotiations 
and are generally supportive of U.S. positions, but regard 
themselves as largely peripheral to the major conflicts 
which have slowed progress on the negotiations thus far. 
 
2. (SBU) Vice Minister Guerrero expressed some concern about 
the formation of the G-90 group of developing countries, and 
the attention being paid to this group by both the USG and 
the European Union.  He raised the fear that the focus on 
the G-90 will \"divide poor countries into two groups\", with 
those developing countries outside the G-90 (such as 
Honduras) being left out of key conversations. 
 
3. (SBU) Regarding the selection of a successor to WTO 
Director General Supachai, Guerrero stated that Honduras has 
not yet chosen a preferred candidate, but he shared the 
sense (ref C) that a high ranking official with greater 
international clout would be preferable to a lower level 
official such as a former trade minister, given the crucial 
period ahead for the organization. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18817","7/16/2004 18:02","04TEGUCIGALPA1577","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA404","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 001577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
FOR EB/CBA AND EB/TRA 
FOR INL/LP AND S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT, EINV, ETRD, PBTS, SNAR, PTER, BEXP, ECON, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras Poised to Become Leader in Port Security 
 
Ref: Tegucigalpa 404 
 
1. SUMMARY: Following a June visit to the ports of Honduras, 
a United States Coast Guard delegation confirmed that 
Honduras was taking the appropriate measures to ready its 
ports for certification on July 1, and to successfully 
comply with International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
requirements and the Maritime Transportation Security Act 
(MTSA).  The team visited Puerto Castilla, Puerto Cortes, a 
cruise ship dock in Roatan, and the port of San Lorenzo, 
leaving only the national port of La Ceiba uninspected by 
the Coast Guard.  Visits to the four international Honduran 
ports revealed that, despite some minor shortcomings, 
Honduras has made progress in improving port security worthy 
of regional emulation.  Upon conclusion of the port 
inspections, the Coast Guard delegation commended the 
Honduran authorities for their efforts to revamp port 
security, stating that when other countries doubt their 
ability to effect such rapid improvement in port security 
measures, the Coast Guard will highlight Honduras as an 
example of success.  On July 1, the National Commission for 
Port Protection successfully certified all four of the ports 
visited by the U.S. Coast Guard.  END SUMMARY 
 
------------ 
Introduction 
------------ 
 
2.  In May, the Government of Honduras (GOH), in 
collaboration with its newly established National Commission 
for Port Protection (CNPP), extended an invitation to the 
United States Coast Guard (USCG) to inspect ports within 
Honduran territory.  In response, on June 14, 2004 a ten- 
person delegation from the U.S. Coast Guard traveled to 
Honduras to inspect a series of ports on the Atlantic and 
Pacific coasts, as well as a cruise ship dock in the Bay 
Islands.  Honduras was the first country in the Western 
Hemisphere to voluntarily have their ports visited and 
evaluated by the U.S. Coast Guard. 
 
3.  The purpose of the inspection was to evaluate the 
implementation of new measures of protection established in 
the International Shipping and Port Facility Security (ISPS) 
Code set forth by the International Maritime Organization 
(IMO).  In addition, the USCG sought to conduct a mutually 
beneficial exchange of information and ideas with the GOH in 
order to identify successful practices, which could improve 
maritime security and counteract global terrorism.  Honduran 
ports had been working intensely to meet the IMO 
certification deadline of June 30 (Ref). 
 
4.  The delegation representing the U.S. Coast Guard, led by 
Lt. Cmdr. Joseph Lo Sciuto, included Lt. Cmdr. Oziel Vela, 
Mr. Michael Brown, Lt. Jeff Wasserman, Lt. Galia Kaplan, Mr. 
Peyton Coleman, Mr. Jeff Hoagland, and Ens. Nicolas 
Oliverie, with Mr. Nick Lakis from Transportation Security 
Administration and Ms. Dixie Faries from Customs and Border 
Protection.  The facilities subject to inspection were 
Puerto Castilla near Trujillo, Puerto Cortes north of San 
Pedro Sula, the cruise ship dock of Roatan, and the port of 
San Lorenzo. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Background on the National Commission of Port Protection 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
5.  In April, President Maduro approved the creation of the 
National Commission for Port Protection (CNPP), a Honduran 
governmental organization that acts as the principal 
authority on port security matters at the national level. 
The commission was granted full authority to certify all 
Honduran ports in agreement under the IMO\'s ISPS code. 
Certification of the vessels in the Honduran national ship 
registry is the responsibility of the General Direction of 
the Merchant Marine in accordance with the ISPS Code, which 
includes evaluations, elaboration of protection plans, and 
certification.  The GOH was aware that without 
certification, international maritime trade between Honduras 
and the U.S. would be jeopardized, as vessels originating 
from Honduras would, at a minimum, experience significant 
difficulties docking in the United States, and possibly be 
refused entry into U.S. waters and ports. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Introductory Meeting at the Presidential Palace 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
6.  Prior to the first Coast Guard inspection, the 
delegation met at the Presidential Palace with the GOH\'s 
high-level port security inspection team.  Those present 
included Minister of Trade and Industry Norman Garcia, 
Minister of Defense Federico Breve, Minister of Public Works 
and Transportation Jorge Carranza, Minister of Public 
Security Oscar Alvarez, Port Security Officer Dennis 
Chinchilla, Merchant Marine Chief Marco Augusto Hernandez, 
and Presidential Adviser Mauro Membreno. 
 
7.  Mr. Chinchilla gave the Coast Guard delegation a well- 
organized presentation outlining the background information 
and recent progress of each of the ports to be inspected. 
The presentation highlighted Honduras\'s favorable maritime 
location and demonstrated that the GOH established port 
security parameters consistent with ISPS and MTSA code.  He 
informed the USCG that as of the meeting, port assessments 
had been approved, with the audit timetable scheduled to be 
turned in the week of June 22.  Mr. Chinchilla reaffirmed 
the government\'s commitment to complete the certification 
process by June 30.  The presentation was followed by a 
question-and-answer period between the Honduran 
representatives and the Coast Guard delegation.  Lt. Cmdr. 
Joseph Lo Sciuto ably led the discussion and served as 
spokesperson on behalf of the Coast Guard throughout the 
meeting. 
 
------------------------ 
Visit to Puerto Castilla 
------------------------ 
 
8.  The Coast Guard visit got off to a very positive start 
with the inspection of Puerto Castilla (Standard Fruit/Dole 
facility).  The delegation praised the strict entry and exit 
procedures encountered on arrival.  Upon entrance, all 
occupants were required to exit from the vehicles for a 
thorough search at both the original entry point and the 
internal entrance to the facilities.  Employees all wore 
visible photo identification badges and were checked with 
metal detectors upon entrance and exit for every shift. 
 
---------------------- 
Visit to Puerto Cortes 
---------------------- 
 
9.  Puerto Cortes is the most important maritime customs 
facility in Honduras.  The port is the largest port on the 
Caribbean side of Central America.  Because Guatemalan ports 
can only dock up to four ships while Puerto Cortes can dock 
up to ten, use of the Honduran port is preferable and more 
efficient for sea freight shipping to the United States.  In 
2003, Puerto Cortes handled 7.6 million metric tons of 
cargo, or 577,000 containers. 
 
10.  At Puerto Cortes, the Coast Guard delegation 
acknowledged the effective security measures already in 
place, noting that the port sets a good example for other 
facilities.  They expressed some concern over the height of 
port lighting and the need to complete implementation of 
some entry/exit control points.  The team fully reviewed the 
port\'s security plan and found that it met the ISPS 
standards.  They suggested that the port authority could 
improve the plan by implementing and testing it, and 
ensuring full coordination with local municipal authorities. 
The GOH scheduled preliminary testing the week of June 22, 
after the USCG team departed, during which the CNPP 
conducted audits in order to verify compliance with the 
requirements of the ISPS code.  At this time, the CNPP found 
that minimum requirements were met.  In the future, the CNPP 
will conduct planned testing annually, in addition to 
unplanned testing periodically, to verify that the port 
stays in compliance with the code. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Visit to the Cruise Ship Dock in Roatan 
--------------------------------------- 
 
11.  At the cruise ship dock in Roatan, the Coast Guard 
delegation found the security measures to be still under 
development.  They had temporary, rather than permanent, 
guards in place.  The team noted that the guards needed 
better training on the inner perimeter.  Improvements were 
also needed on the outer perimeter wall, especially by the 
main building.  Although the GOH had begun to implement a 
photo identification badge system, police were not checking 
tourists reentering for the cruise ships.  An Embassy 
Military Group officer noted that a local band playing 
beside a cruise ship entered with drums that had not been 
inspected and could pose a potential hazard.  The GOH 
officials said they would look into installing x-ray 
equipment for better checks in the future.  In addition, 
individual shipping facilities on the island were at varying 
stages of readiness.  Some have plans drawn up that would 
exceed minimum requirements while others do not appear to 
have begun preparation.  The CNPP told the team that none of 
those facilities would be certified until they come into 
compliance with ISPS code. 
 
---------------------------- 
Visit to Port of San Lorenzo 
---------------------------- 
 
12.  The Coast Guard delegation\'s final inspection took 
place at the port of San Lorenzo, located on the Pacific 
Coast in the Gulf of Fonseca.  Overall, the delegation 
approved of the measures in place.  The port had two 
entrances, both guarded by national police.  The group 
received clearance to enter at the external entrance and was 
escorted by a police officer to the internal entrance.  At 
the internal entrance, all occupants were required to exit 
the vehicle for inspection, which was the same procedure 
implemented for vehicles departing.  All port employees wore 
photo identification badges and visitors, including the 
delegation, were required to trade photo identification for 
visitor badges.  As previously noted, an identical procedure 
is used at Puerto Cortes and Puerto Castilla. 
 
13.  Upon inspection of the facility, the delegation made 
some suggestions for improvement.  For example, some foliage 
and containers lined the inside perimeter of the fence, 
revealing locations where outsiders may be able to climb 
over the fence and gain access to the port.  The Coast Guard 
extensively reviewed the security measures already in place. 
They were satisfied with the cooperation between the naval 
and police forces.  The delegation also verified that should 
the threat level rise, those in charge at the port would be 
able to take the necessary measures to provide sufficient 
security. 
 
------------------- 
Embassy Outbriefing 
------------------- 
 
14.  Upon completion of the port inspections, the Coast 
Guard delegation met with Embassy representatives and 
Ambassador Palmer to review the visit.  Lt. Cmdr. Lo Sciuto 
began by noting that the ISPS code has a baseline, and 
Honduras had set their standards above that baseline.  The 
delegation was impressed with the progress of the ports and 
their efforts to meet their self-implemented high standards. 
They were especially impressed with Puerto Castilla (the 
Dole fruit company facility), observing that it was very 
efficient and one of the best ports they visited.  The 
delegation found the security in place to be consistent with 
ISPS code standards, suggesting that temporarily increasing 
security when vessels come in would be sufficient. 
 
15.  Regarding future plans, Lt. Cmdr. Lo Sciuto stated that 
the full team would re-inspect the ports in three years; but 
prior to this visit, someone from the USCG would be back to 
inspect when the Honduran port authorities feel they have 
fully implemented all their security upgrades.  In the 
meantime, the Embassy plans to conduct unannounced visits to 
the ports throughout the summer to verify that the ports are 
not falling out of compliance. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Concluding Meeting at the Presidential Palace 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
16.  The Coast Guard delegation reconvened at the 
Presidential Palace for a final meeting with Honduran 
representatives.  Those present on behalf of the United 
States included the entire Coast Guard delegation and 
representatives from the Embassy.  Those representing the 
Honduran government included Minister of Trade and Industry 
Norman Garcia, Minister of Defense Federico Breve, Minister 
of Public Works and Transportation Jorge Carranza, Port 
Security Officer Dennis Chinchilla, Merchant Marine Chief 
Marco Augusto Hernandez, and Presidential Adviser Mauro 
Membreno. 
 
17.  Lt. Cmdr. Lo Sciuto began by reading a statement to the 
panel.  His statement highlighted Honduras\'s significant 
progress with port security.  He commented that Honduras was 
doing a great job implementing the requirements set forth in 
the ISPS code, but must keep progressing in order to 
establish themselves as the lead example in the region.  He 
clarified that the U.S. Coast Guard was not in Honduras to 
certify the ports, but rather to assess the implementation 
of the GOH\'s port security regime. 
 
18.  The GOH asked for future interaction between Honduras 
and the U.S. Coast Guard, and indicated an interest in 
testing its ability and decision-making process for 
elevating the ports\' alert levels.  The USCG reassured the 
Ministers that they would maintain a partnership with 
Honduras, extending them an open invitation to visit and 
observe the port security process in place in the United 
States.  Ms. Dixie Faries, the U.S. Customs representative, 
stated that U.S. Customs intended to provide training and 
assistance to Honduras. 
 
19.  Lt. Cmdr. Lo Sciuto emphasized the importance of 
following through with their recommendations in order not to 
fall out of compliance with the code.  He made some 
specific, well-received recommendations to improve port 
security in Honduras even further.  The first suggestion 
involved increased interaction between the port authorities 
and the Frontier Police, either in a partnership or 
oversight capacity.  An additional suggestion concerned the 
lighting at Puerto Cortes, where the light towers currently 
in place are 55 feet tall, rather than the required 80 feet 
tall.  In conclusion, he stated that should Honduras 
continue along the same path, they would serve as a model 
for port security in the region. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Media Response to Coast Guard Visit 
----------------------------------- 
 
20.  Initially, the media misinterpreted the role of the 
U.S. Coast Guard visit to inspect the Honduran ports, 
thinking that the Coast Guard was responsible for 
certification of the ports.  The content of the initial 
reporting was otherwise accurate and objective.  After the 
final meeting at the Presidential Palace, an Embassy 
spokesperson, on behalf of the Coast Guard, read a statement 
in Spanish to the press noting Honduras\'s progress with port 
security.  In response to questions, he clarified that the 
Coast Guard was not in charge of certifying the ports; 
rather, that was the responsibility of the CNPP.  Media 
coverage following the Coast Guard visit was positive and 
optimistic, reflecting well upon the Honduran government and 
port security measures in place and under development. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
21.  The U.S. Coast Guard visit proved successful and 
beneficial to Honduran and U.S. representatives, reaffirming 
once again that the relationship between Honduras and the 
U.S. is one of cooperation and collaboration.  GOH Ministers 
were extremely pleased with the Coast Guard\'s findings, 
voicing their intent to take into consideration all 
suggestions.  On July 1, the CNPP successfully certified all 
four of the ports visited by the U.S. Coast Guard.  The 
fifth remaining port in La Ceiba will likely be certified in 
the near future.  End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18820","7/16/2004 22:03","04TEGUCIGALPA1581","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001581 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR OES, EB, WHA AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, SENV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, SNAR, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: March For Life Focused on Forests Reenergizes 
Honduran Environmental Movement 
 
REF: 03 Tegucigalpa 1812 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  The March for Life (Marcha por la Vida) 
appears to have successfully launched a new committed 
environmental protection movement in the country.  It 
remains to be seen if the movement can sustain its momentum 
and maintain political pressure on the government and 
Congress, and whether the Government of Honduras (GOH) will 
respond to the demands of the movement.  Negotiations appear 
to be at a standstill with leaders of the March for Life, 
who have stayed in Tegucigalpa to press their agenda, 
demanding an immediate halt to all logging until better 
standards are put in place.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) The March for Life began on June 24, from four 
cardinal points across the country (Olancho, Siguatepeque, 
Danli, and Choluteca) converging on June 30 in front of the 
Presidential Palace in Tegucigalpa.  Father Andres Tamayo is 
a Salvadorian priest who resides in Olancho and heads the 
Olancho Environmentalist Movement (MAO).  According to 
Tamayo, the March for Life is a collective complaint and 
call for a united front against politicians who benefit from 
the projects of transnational companies that allegedly 
deforest and exploit the country\'s natural resources.  He 
called on the government, transnational companies, and 
Honduran citizens alike to share in the responsibility to 
remedy the situation.  Roughly 3,000 people participated in 
the march, less than the 10,000 that organizers expected. 
 
3. (SBU) Among the marchers in front of the Presidential 
Palace were several members from a Center for International 
Policy (CIP) delegation led by former U.S. Ambassador to El 
Salvador Bob White.  In an e-mail to White prior to the 
march, Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza Jimenez tried 
to discourage CIP members from attending the march.  Cosenza 
cited as a reason the June 21 declaration by Catholic Bishop 
of Copan, Luis Alfonso Santos, that he would not participate 
in nor support the march because it allegedly would seek to 
undermine the government and ask for the President\'s 
resignation.  He feared the possibility of violence and 
indicated that the marchers could be in danger.  Other 
groups, including the left-wing Democratic Union (UD) Party 
and the Catholic church itself, minimized their 
participation.  Finally, in a last ditch effort to derail 
the march, President Ricardo Maduro himself invited the 
leaders of the march to dialogue with him rather than march. 
He even offered full press coverage, so that all of Honduras 
would bear witness to the dialogue on this critical issue. 
 
4. (U) The government went to great lengths to exploit its 
efforts to combat the problem of illegal logging and 
deforestation.  A year ago, the President ordered operatives 
to control illegal logging in Olancho, Cosenza said.  As a 
consequence, more than 100,000 board feet of wood were 
seized, several people were arrested, and vehicles and arms 
were decommissioned.  Recently the operation was repeated 
with a similar outcome.  However, these isolated actions do 
not properly address or resolve the illegal logging problem 
in the long term.  Moreover, Cosenza stated, President 
Maduro has submitted new legislation to Congress (which 
returned from its recess July 6) to adopt stronger 
enforcement measures. 
 
5. (U) These new measures include reforming the Mining Law, 
prohibiting the transport of wood between 6:00pm and 6:00am, 
and establishing a motor vehicle registry.  Additionally, it 
would prohibit the auction of national forest lands, except 
for those agreed to by the inhabitants of the local 
municipality.  The GOH also urged municipalities to 
establish commissions to assure compliance with 
environmental requisites, such as compliance with the law 
requiring the submission of management plans to the Honduran 
Corporation for Forestry Development (Corporacion Hondurena 
de Desarrollo Forestal or COHDEFOR) authorities.  President 
Maduro stated that he would name a commission to intervene 
in COHDEFOR operations and (starting July 2), investigate 
the actions of COHDEFOR and its proposed reforms.  Beginning 
in 2005, the GOH also plans to have COHDEFOR become a 
centrally funded institution and eliminate its partial 
dependency on the auction of national timber and fees from 
private timber sales.  During the past two years, COHDEFOR 
has been reduced from over 1,000 employees to fewer than 500 
- an issue that has also reduced COHDEFOR\'s ability to 
monitor the implementation of forest land management plans. 
Finally, Maduro proposed to revise and strengthen the new 
Forestry law.  (Note: Tamayo stated at the initiation of the 
March on June 24, that despite government promises such as 
the intervention at COHDEFOR, the reality is that the 
sacking of the forests continues and thus the march would 
proceed.  He is calling for a total ban on any logging until 
stronger, more effective enforcement measures can be put in 
place.  See below.  End Note.)  See septel for more 
information on COHDEFOR. 
 
6. (U) In a letter to President Maduro, Tamayo along with 
other march organizers (Roger Escober, Bertha Oliva de 
Nativi, Jorge Varela, P. Osmin Flores, Walter E. Ulloa, 
Angel Amilcar Colon, and Rufino Rodriguez) outlined the 
march\'s objectives and demands.  Immediate demands of the 
marchers included the investigation and capture of \"those 
who put a price on the lives of the participants in the 
march and in the fight for the environment;\" an end to 
police and judicial impunity; and sentencing for the 
murderers of Jeannette Kawas and Carlos Escaleras (, the 
1998 killing of environmental activist and Catacamas town 
councilman Carlos Antonio Luna Lopez, and the June 2001 
killing of community leader and environmental activist 
Carlos Roberto Flores in Olancho.  Post does not know the 
dates or locations of the Kawas and Escaleras murders. 
(Note: In June of last year, the first National March for 
Life began from Juticalpa led by Father Tamayo as well as 
Carlos Arturo \"Oscar\" Reyes.  Reyes (23) was the leader of 
the campaign to stop the deforestation of Olancho.  Shortly 
after the march, armed men gunned down Reyes outside of his 
home in Olancho on July 18, 2003 (reftel).  There are 
allegations that timber magnates, frightened by Reyes\' 
organizational capabilities, offered a reward of USD 40,000 
to anyone who killed the environmentalist.  Tamayo himself 
has received death threats in the past.  End Note.) 
 
7. (U) (Note:  In May and July 2002, police arrested Jose 
Angel Rosa and Jorge Adolfo Chavez Hernandez, a former 
member of Battalion 3-16, for the 1998 killing of Carlos 
Luna Lopez.  An appeals court later freed Rosa; however, in 
May 2002 police arrested him for the attempted killing of 
Sylvia Esperanza Gonzales, which is related to the killing 
of Luna Lopez.  Rosa is still in prison on unrelated 
environmental charges.  In May 2003, the Supreme Court ruled 
against a motion to dismiss the charges against Chavez, and 
he is also in prison.  Former security official Jose Marcos 
Hernandez Hernandez and two other suspects remained at 
large.  In December 2002, a court sentenced Oscar Aurelio 
\"Machetillo\" Rodriguez Molina, to 20 years\' imprisonment for 
the murder of Luna Lopez and seven years\' imprisonment for 
grave injury to Gonzales.  In January, two NGOs brought the 
case to the IACHR.  Three suspects are in jail and three 
remain at large in the June 2001 killing of Carlos Flores. 
Post has no further information on the Kawas and Escaleras 
murders.  End Note.) 
 
8. (U) Other specific demands that the environmental 
movement is making on the government are fourfold.  First, 
an immediate halt to both legal and clandestine logging, as 
well as declaring a state of emergency in the forests by 
legislative decree and an immediate stop to logging for 90 
days.  Second, an investigation into all private property 
titles to determine their legality.  Third, an immediate 
review of all forestry programs and projects to better align 
them with the policy of poverty reduction.  According to 
march leaders, this last demand should also include greater 
community participation in the management and utilization of 
local natural resources.  Fourth, a government audit on 
forestry resources to be conducted by a qualified 
international firm, which would involve the participation of 
the community and non-governmental organizations who are 
involved in the proper management of natural resources. 
Additional demands include the use of social audits where 
citizens can supervise the behavior of forestry industries 
and functionaries by means of regional forestry tribunals 
and the creation of an inter-institutional commission to 
supervise and control the wood industry. 
 
9. (U) March organizers are not completely against the 
harvesting of wood.  One of their recommendations consists 
of making the communities responsible for managing and 
harvesting the forest areas in their vicinities.  March 
organizers also called for the abolishment of the Mining Law 
which was approved in the wake of Hurricane Mitch because, 
according to march organizers, it allows excessive 
exploitation of mining resources by unscrupulous 
transnational companies that make pacts with corrupt local 
functionaries.  The marchers argue this should include 
closing the Office of Mining Development (Direccion de 
Fomento de la Mineria) and replacing it with another 
organism that would attend to national interests before 
those of the international businesses.  Father Tamayo\'s 
group is opposed to the new Forestry Law for several 
reasons, including that it is designed to permit the private 
concession of forestry resources to national and 
international companies.  The group also is seeking a 
separate law just for protected areas.  They urge the 
government to conduct a technical and administrative purging 
of the regional COHDEFOR offices. 
 
10. (U) Tamayo had consistently stated that the march would 
not \"end where it ends, it begins where it ends.\"  Now that 
the march is over, members of the national commission of the 
March for Life have said they will stay in the capital. 
They have said they are ready to organize the necessary 
political forces to bring about the completion of their 
demands at the executive and congressional levels.  Tamayo 
stated that they say they are finished with unconstructive 
dialogue.  The group demands that the president act now to 
address these issues in order to save what is left of the 
country\'s natural resources. 
 
11. (U) According to march organizers, the initial response 
of the government was to send an unmarked and unsigned two- 
page letter to them on June 30.  According to Tamayo, the 
letter purported to respond to each one of the specific 
demands made on the GOH, in a \"we are already doing this\" or 
\"we already did this\" tone and not addressing or referring 
to several points.  Nevertheless, Tamayo stated that they 
accept the president\'s invitation to continue the discussion 
of their stance. 
 
12. (SBU) Comment:  Two of the leading presidential 
candidates, the Nationalist Party member and President of 
Congress, Pepe Lobo, and leading Liberal Party candidate Mel 
Zelaya, are from Olancho.  During a prior administration, 
from 1990-1992, Lobo was head of COHDEFOR.  In addition, 
Zelaya owned a sawmill and has been president of the 
sawmiller\'s association in Honduras.  Neither is pre- 
disposed to support the march organizer\'s goals.  The group 
protest was peaceful and demonstrated a cohesiveness that 
has put the Maduro government on the defensive.  If the 
marchers continue to press their agenda, however, they could 
run into violent opposition by the powerful economic 
interests who stand to lose the most by greater 
environmental protection enforcement and any changes/reform 
to the current system.  End Comment. 
 
PALMER 
"
"18862","7/19/2004 13:06","04TEGUCIGALPA1583","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPA1581","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, OES/ENV AND OES/ETC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, SENV, EAGR, KCRM, KJUS, KCOR, PHUM, SOCI, HO 
SUBJECT: Maduro Launches Investigation of Forestry Agency 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 1581 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: On July 2, Honduran President Ricardo Maduro 
established an \"intervention\" into the operations of the 
Honduran Corporation for Forest Development, COHDEFOR.  A 
three-person commission was named to conduct an in-depth 
analysis of COHDEFOR\'s operations, report back to Maduro 
within three months on the administrative and financial 
problems found within the institution, and recommend 
possible solutions.  Maduro\'s creation of this intervention 
is a partial response to the charges brought by participants 
in the \"March for Life\" (reftel), which concluded in 
Tegucigalpa on June 30, and a tacit admission of the widely- 
held belief that COHDEFOR has serious resource problems 
which prevent it from effectively carrying out its function 
of administering the nation\'s forests and protected areas. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) On July 2, Honduran President Ricardo Maduro launched 
an \"Intervention Commission\" (Comision Interventora) for the 
GOH agency responsible for managing Honduras\' forests, 
COHDEFOR.  The establishment of this intervention was 
announced to the public on July 6.  The stated objective of 
the Commission is to conduct an in-depth analysis of the 
administrative and financial problems found within COHDEFOR, 
and at the end of three months present a report to Maduro 
outlining possible solutions to those problems.  In 
addition, each employee is to be evaluated to determine his 
or her eligibility for continued employment with the 
institution.  The commission is composed of the Executive 
Director of the Environmental Management Program of the Bay 
Islands and Doctor of Forest Sciences, Jose Flores, 
environmental consultant Luis Eveline Hernandez, and 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (SERNA) 
adviser Joaquin Aguero.  In announcing the establishment of 
the Commission, Maduro cited \"serious problems of 
management, administration and financial controls\" within 
COHDEFOR, and declared that \"actions taken to date have been 
insufficient\" to deal with these problems. 
 
3. (U) While initial reports announced that COHDEFOR would 
continue to operate normally throughout the investigation 
period, recent suspensions of managerial tasks have 
temporarily stalled some of the institution\'s activities. 
As of July 8, the Intervention Commission had taken away the 
signing capabilities of several of COHDEFOR\'s top managers. 
COHDEFOR Manager Gustavo Morales observed that, by taking 
away their power to sign, the Commission has effectively 
stopped COHDEFOR from carrying out its administrative 
functions.  The decision also prohibits the eleven regional 
directors from signing documents.  Without the ability to 
authorize, for example, the purchase of fuel for employee 
vehicles, Morales noted that COHDEFOR personnel\'s ability to 
conduct their daily activities would be limited. 
 
4. (SBU) Maduro\'s establishment of the intervention is a 
partial response to the \"March for Life\" protests of June 24- 
30, though Maduro and march leader Father Andres Tamayo also 
agreed on the creation of a second commission, the National 
Environmental Commission, to be headed by Father Tamayo 
himself.  Tamayo has called for an administrative purge of 
regional COHDEFOR offices, where allegations of corruption 
have been the strongest. 
 
---------------------------------- 
COHDEFOR Manager Reacts Positively 
---------------------------------- 
 
5. (U) COHDEFOR Manager Gustavo Morales has publicly said 
that he does not oppose the investigation.  He indicated 
that the intervention would determine whether or not 
accusations against COHDEFOR are valid.  Morales stated that 
he and his administrative team would provide all information 
requested regarding COHDEFOR\'s history and operations.  He 
said that the most serious problem facing COHDEFOR is a lack 
of resources, due to the fact that COHDEFOR receives only a 
portion of its financing from the GOH budget, and relies 
mainly upon licensing fees from logging operations.  Morales 
expressed hope that the proposed investigation would reveal 
the extent of any problems so that the appropriate solutions 
may be identified and implemented. 
 
---------------------- 
Background on COHDEFOR 
---------------------- 
 
6. (U) COHDEFOR was created in 1974 by a populist 
government, as a reaction to the abuses of the private 
sector-controlled forest industry.  The GOH decreed that 
COHDEFOR would have control of all forest harvests, act as 
the only exporter of lumber, and invest to establish 
industries for forestry products.  From 1974 to 1985, 
COHDEFOR functioned as a profitable corporation, but since 
1985 has operated at a loss, as most of its investments in 
forest industries lost money, and only continued operating 
due to continuous GOH financing. 
 
7. (SBU) In its initial years, COHDEFOR\'s exports of lumber 
and acquisition of equipment and materials were fertile 
ground for corruption.  In the late 1980s, COHDEFOR ended 
its involvement in lumber exports and concentrated more in 
forest management.  The Agriculture Modernization Law of 
1992 decreed that private landowners could manage and use 
their own forest lands, and that only the private sector 
could be involved in the production and marketing of wood 
and wood products.  However, COHDEFOR\'s poor performance in 
the roles of management and regulation has led to the 
current state of affairs. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (SBU) While the \"March for Life\" occurred during this 
administration, the issues which it addresses - poor forest 
management, lack of community participation, and allegations 
of corruption - have been with COHDEFOR since its inception, 
though these problems have become more prominent during the 
past decade.  Improvements in management have occurred under 
the leadership of Morales (who is the first forester to ever 
lead COHDEFOR), but the legacy of alleged corruption, and 
perceived unwillingness to allow for public participation, 
are still present. 
 
9. (SBU) A proposed new forestry law is intended to address 
many of the institution\'s problems, including the issue of 
public participation, and the conflict of interest inherent 
in the fact that the organization charged with protecting 
the nation\'s forests is itself principally funded by the 
exploitation of those forests.  This bill, however, has been 
controversial since its first reading, and has been 
temporarily placed on hold by the GOH.  In any case, the 
intervention into COHDEFOR\'s operations should be a welcome 
step to highlight the institution\'s problems, and identify 
practical solutions.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18892","7/19/2004 22:50","04TEGUCIGALPA1597","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE152813","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, DRL/IL, DRL/PHD, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, ELAB, CU, HO, ILO 
SUBJECT: GOH, BUT NOT HONDURAN CIVIL SOCIETY, OPEN TO 
SUPPORTING CUBAN CIVIL SOCIETY; MFA NAMES NEW CHARGE FOR 
EMBASSY IN HAVANA 
 
REF: A. STATE 152813 
 
     B. STATE 153312 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1461 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 793 
 
Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Derrick Olsen; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) As noted in ref C, the GOH has actively worked to 
advance democracy, human rights, and fundamental freedoms in 
Cuba.  On April 15, the UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) 
passed a Honduran-drafted resolution calling for greater 
respect for human rights in Cuba.  The Government of Cuba 
(GOC) responded to the GOH\'s action by suspending pending 
maritime boundary negotiations with Honduras, something that 
has been a foreign policy priority of President Ricardo 
Maduro\'s administration.  Also, while the GOH does have 
formal diplomatic relations with Cuba, Honduras has not named 
an Ambassador to Cuba, partly out of deference to U.S. 
wishes.  However, the GOH consistently and publicly states 
that concern over Cuba\'s human rights policies is a 
fundamental tenet of its policy toward the Castro regime. 
 
2. (SBU) The MFA publicly announced that Humberto Lopez 
Villamil, currently the DCM at the Honduran Embassy in Quito, 
had been appointed as the new Charge d\'Affaires in Havana. 
He will replace the current Charge, Reinieri Amador.  PolOffs 
will try to meet with Lopez to stress the importance of 
supporting Cuban civil society in late July or early August 
after he leaves Ecuador and comes to Honduras prior to taking 
his post in Havana. 
 
3. (C) Note:  MFA Director General (DG) Mario Fortin had told 
PolCouns earlier that this announcement was coming.  A 
22-year career officer, Lopez Villamil may also be promoted 
to rank of career Ambassador, but Honduran representation in 
Havana will not be elevated.  End Note. 
 
4. (SBU) In general, Honduran nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs) do not share the same willingness as the GOH to 
advocate human and labor rights in Cuba.  As noted in ref D, 
many NGO and union leaders were highly critical of the GOH\'s 
drafting of the UNCHR resolution on Cuba.  The most common 
argument made by critics was that the GOH is in no position 
to criticize another country due to the serious human rights 
problems in Honduras, especially extrajudicial killings. 
Even Catholic Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez made a veiled 
statement along these lines.  Other arguments made by critics 
include castigating the GOH for criticizing a country that 
has been helpful since Hurricane Mitch hit in 1998 by 
providing doctors and educating medical students, and calling 
the GOH a U.S. lackey, among others. 
 
5. (C) Some NGOs are thought to receive financing or other 
assistance from the GOC.  Many NGOs and some unions in 
Honduras are also ideologically predisposed not to criticize 
the GOC, despite the fact that their ability to voice 
opinions critical of the GOH is a freedom Cubans do not 
enjoy.  A possible exception is Andres Pavon, President of 
the human rights NGO CODEH, and a recent IVP grantee.  During 
the controversy in March/April over the UNCHR Cuba 
resolution, Pavon told PolOff privately that, unlike most NGO 
leaders taking public stands criticizing the GOH, he 
supported the GOH drafting a UNCHR resolution on Cuba.  He 
agreed with his NGO colleagues that there is much to 
criticize about the GOH\'s human rights record, but said that 
did not preclude the GOH from drafting a resolution that 
criticized a country with clear human rights abuses.  Post 
notes that two labor confederations, CTH and CUTH, are 
affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade 
Unions (ICFTU), and might be willing to support ICFTU calls 
for labor rights in Cuba.  Post is not aware of any prominent 
Honduran labor leader having criticized the lack of labor 
rights in Cuba in the last couple years. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  Post believes that, while gun-shy of another 
public confrontation with the GOC, the GOH will continue to 
emphasize the importance of human rights in Cuba.  A new 
Charge in Havana will give the GOH a chance to focus on 
supporting Cuban civil society as well.  Unfortunately, Post 
has not seen any prominent Honduran NGO or labor leader take 
a public position critical of the GOC or strongly supportive 
of Cuban civil society.  As such, Post is not very optimistic 
that a Honduran civil society leader would be willing to 
publicly stand up for Cuban human and labor rights.  End 
Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"18931","7/20/2004 17:23","04TEGUCIGALPA1598","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001598 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, EB/EPPD 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, SMIG, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON TPS, JULY 20, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 7/20 entitled \"Neither yes or no.\"  \"Despite the fact 
that Washington hasn\'t accepted or refused a new TPS 
extension, the Honduran Ministry of Foreign Affairs is 
optimistic, and President Maduro has planned a trip to the 
U.S. in September to negotiate a fifth extension.  The 
Salvadoran President, who presented a similar request, has 
recently returned from Washington with dismay, where he even 
promised to send another contingent of Salvadoran troops to 
Iraq, but we can\'t lose hope.\" 
 
\"The Honduran government anticipates that a massive 
deportation of so many Hondurans and other Central Americans 
living illegally in the U.S. just wouldn\'t be possible, and 
this fact wouldn\'t give Washington another chance but to 
keep extending TPS every time the deadline approaches. 
Besides, the U.S. is considering the human implications for 
our countries and our economies, which will be severely 
affected because they are mostly dependent of the millions 
of dollars we receive every year as remittances.\" 
 
\"These negotiations aren\'t only a task for the Honduran or 
the Salvadoran president, but for all Central American 
presidents that should organize a diplomatic offensive in 
Washington, to achieve a migratory amnesty or any other 
definite solution for this issue.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"18932","7/20/2004 17:25","04TEGUCIGALPA1599","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa1434","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 001599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB, DRL/IL, AND INR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR EIlzetzki 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, EAID, ELAB, SOCI, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: Maduro Reaches $33 Million Deal with Teachers; 
School Finally Resumes 
 
REF: A. Tegucigalpa 1434 
 
     B. Tegucigalpa 232 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  On July 10, President Ricardo Maduro and 
representatives of teachers\' unions signed an agreement 
reinstating certain salary benefits which had been cut in 
December, thus bringing an end to the 33-day teachers\' 
strike.  The GOH did not offer an across-the-board salary 
increase, but did agree to pay 600 million Lempiras ($33 
million) to the teachers over the next two and a half years, 
in the form of benefits keyed to qualifications and years of 
service.  The GOH will raise this money by drawing upon 
savings, eliminating two minor ministries, and taking other 
unspecified actions.  While the GOH structured its 
concessions in such a way that they do not break the terms 
of the IMF deal negotiated in February, the agreement 
nonetheless represents a step away from fiscal 
sustainability.  Worse, while teachers are declaring 
victory, many observers fear that the rank and file do not 
fully appreciate the limits to the deal that their leaders 
have signed, and that, as a result, even this deal will not 
fully satisfy the teachers\' grievances.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Late at night on July 8, as a strike by teachers 
entered its second month and amidst continuing protests (ref 
A), the GOH acceded to many of the teachers\' demands, and 
agreed to a deal to bring an end to the strike.   President 
Maduro had appointed a three-man commission to negotiate a 
deal, comprised of Presidential Advisor Ricardo Alvarez, 
former President Rafael Callejas, and leader of the 
Christian Democratic party Arturo Corrales.  News of the 
agreement was made public on July 9, sending teachers into 
the streets in celebration, and the deal itself was signed 
by President Maduro and representatives of all of the 
teachers\' unions on July 10. 
 
------------------ 
What\'s in the Deal 
------------------ 
 
3. (U) The agreement reinstates the automatic five-year and 
three-year salary increases at their previous levels. 
(Under this scheme, a teacher receives an automatic salary 
increase every five years for his/her first fifteen years of 
service, and every three years thereafter.)  It also 
restores the arrangement under which salaries rise with 
educational qualifications: a 69 percent salary increase for 
all teachers achieving a tertiary degree, and a 50 percent 
increase upon completion of the technical education degree. 
Other smaller benefits, including the \"work zone\" payment to 
encourage teachers to take positions in remote areas of the 
country, were also restored.  All of these provisions from 
the teachers\' law were effectively cut by Congress in 
December 2003. 
 
4. (SBU) However, the GOH will pay these benefits only up to 
certain ceilings prescribed in the agreement: 120 million 
Lempiras ($6.6 million) for the rest of 2004, and 240 
million Lempiras ($13.2 million) per year for 2005 and 2006. 
There are differing views as to whether these ceilings will 
be adequate to cover all benefits during these periods. 
Former President Callejas mentioned to the Ambassador that, 
in his opinion, the ceilings are higher than necessary, and 
that in fact the benefits that the GOH must pay out will 
only amount to 80 million Lempiras this year and 200 million 
in the years 2005 and 2006, for a total bill of 480 million 
Lempiras.  Most observers, however, believe that the 
opposite is true, and fear an angry reaction from teachers 
if the 120 million Lempiras for 2004 run out before the end 
of the year. 
 
5. (SBU) Though their jubilant public reaction suggests 
otherwise, the teachers also made several concessions to 
reach the July 10 deal.  In addition to the caps on benefits 
described above, they agreed to forfeit the amounts that 
they would have been paid for five-year and three-year 
raises between January and June of this year, and agreed to 
base future salary increases on the base salary of December 
2003, thus slightly reducing the amount that they will 
receive.  They also committed to revise the school calendar 
for the rest of 2004 so as to recover the class time lost by 
the strike.  Recovering these days will require canceling 
September and October school holidays, holding classes on 
Saturdays, and extending the school year into mid-December 
(instead of early November).  Note: Given that teacher 
absenteeism is already a chronic problem in Honduras, many 
doubt that the teachers will stick to the plan of Saturday 
classes for the entire year.  End note. 
 
6. (SBU) The agreement establishes two further projects not 
directly tied to teacher remuneration.  First, the teachers 
agreed to a national salary audit to verify the national 
payroll.  This is an urgently needed measure, as anecdotal 
evidence suggests that there are many \"ghost teachers\" on 
the rolls, and that some teachers draw two or three 
salaries.  However no details have yet been provided as to 
who will carry out this audit, or how. 
 
7. (SBU) Second, the agreement calls for the establishment 
of a commission which will work for improvements in the 
quality of education, and lists specific measures such as 
improved teacher training, further definition of the new 
national curriculum, improvements in educational materials 
and infrastructure, and greater involvement of parents.  All 
of these measures are badly needed, and many are already 
addressed in the national Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
However, no details have yet been given as to how this 
commission will accomplish its goals, and it seems unlikely 
that a commission born out of such a contentious political 
conflict will have much success in addressing the difficult 
issues of improving educational quality. 
 
----------------------- 
What\'s Not in the Deal? 
----------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Despite the reinstatement of many of the teachers\' 
collateral benefits, the deal does not increase teachers\' 
base salary, and does not repeal the December 2003 salary 
law (see ref B).  This is important as it allows the Maduro 
administration to claim that it is still in compliance with 
at least the letter (if not the spirit) of the February IMF 
agreement.  The deal also falls far short of fully 
satisfying the teachers\' more extreme demands, which at one 
point were are as high as 2.9 billion Lempiras ($159 
million) in salaries and benefits, and the creation of an 
additional 20,000 teaching positions.  Perhaps more 
important than the contents of the agreement that has been 
made publicly available, however, are alleged side 
agreements that, according to several embassy contacts, are 
being made behind the scenes. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Teachers\' Unions Happy, if GOH Fulfills Commitments 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
9. (U) Nelson Calix, President of the College of Secondary 
School Teachers of Honduras (COPEMH) and a key leader for 
the teachers\' unions, told LabAtt July 16 that the deal was 
\"favorable\" for teachers.  He said that, if the GOH had 
respected the teachers\' law to begin with, the whole 
confrontation could have been avoided.  Calix said that he 
did not foresee future problems with the Maduro 
Administration, if the GOH complied with all the terms of 
the deal. 
 
10. (SBU) Arturo Corrales, leader of the Christian 
Democratic party, who along with former President Callejas 
and Presidential Adviser Ricardo Alvarez negotiated the 
settlement on behalf of the GOH, told LabAtt July 13 that 
things were being blown out of proportion prior to the 
establishment of the GOH\'s three-man commission to negotiate 
an agreement.  He said that the commission would meet with 
the teachers\' unions again in August to check on the status 
of the agreement.  Follow-up and trust building will be key, 
he said, noting that the changes passed by Congress last 
December had set the stage for this dispute. 
 
------------------- 
The Cost to the GOH 
------------------- 
 
11. (U) The total cost of the deal as made public is 600 
million Lempiras (about $33 million), spread out over the 
next two-and-a-half years as explained above.  The 120 
million Lempiras to cover the costs of 2004 will be paid out 
of savings that GOH has accrued between January and May of 
2004 - in other words, it will contribute directly to a 
greater budget deficit than would otherwise have been 
achieved.  In 2005 and 2006, the GOH has publicly announced 
only that the money will be raised as follows: 90 million 
Lempiras from EU funds for decentralization, 87 million 
Lempiras from the closing of two ministries, and 63 million 
Lempiras from \"the sacrifice of other projects\".  The two 
ministries to be closed are said to be the Ministry of 
Culture, Arts and Sports, and the Secretariat for Technical 
Cooperation or SETCO, which together had 2004 budget 
allocations totaling 110 million Lempiras.  Maduro stressed 
that taxes will not be increased to pay for the deal. 
 
12. (SBU) In a July 16 conversation with EconOff, Vice 
Minister of Finance William Chong Wong stressed that in fact 
the GOH\'s economic position so far in 2004 is quite good, 
and that, owing to stronger than expected economic growth, 
the GOH is on track to meet its IMF-prescribed fiscal 
targets even after taking into account the extra money for 
the teachers.  Chong Wong conceded that the deal was not 
ideal from a fiscal standpoint, but called it a political 
necessity which, fortunately, the budget will be able to 
handle. 
 
------------------- 
Reaction of the IMF 
------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) In a conversation with EconOff, the IMF country 
representative for Honduras confirmed that the deal with the 
teachers does not break the terms of the February IMF 
agreement, as it does not technically change the GOH\'s 
overall wage bill.  The salary caps that the GOH and the IMF 
agreed to are still in place.  While the use of 120 million 
Lempiras to pay teachers\' benefits this year will increase 
the budget deficit, it should not prevent the GOH from 
meeting its target for the year.  (120 million Lempiras are 
equal to about 0.1 percent of GDP; the central government 
deficit target for 2004 is 3.5 percent of GDP.)  The savings 
from the closing of the ministries is money that was already 
identified by the IMF at the time of the agreement, and 
considered a \"cushion\".  If that money goes to the teachers, 
says the IMF representative, \"we\'ve lost the cushion\", but 
not the entire deal. 
 
14. (SBU) However, while the GOH is still technically on 
track with the IMF, the IMF is concerned that the deal will 
not satisfy teachers\' demands beyond the very short term. 
Based upon the text that has been made publicly available, 
the teachers received only a partial victory, and when the 
teachers realize that they didn\'t gain everything that they 
were fighting for, the IMF representative fears that 
teachers may return to the streets, a fear President Maduro 
shares.  Moreover, the deal only addresses the next two-and- 
a-half years, and, by emboldening teachers, has made the 
task of designing a new teacher compensation package for 
2007 even more difficult. 
 
15. (SBU) The IMF has issued no public statement about the 
deal, and plans none.  IMF Managing Director Rodrigo de Rato 
was in fact in Honduras the day the deal was announced, 
attending an unrelated event.  Rato praised Central American 
governments in general terms for \"strong macroeconomic 
policies and reforms\" of recent years, but avoided any 
comment on the specifics of the teachers\' deal, saying that 
the IMF needed time to evaluate the terms of the agreement. 
However, President Maduro told the Ambassador and DCM that, 
in his meeting with Rato, Rato confirmed that the agreement 
did not jeopardize the GOH agreement with the IMF. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Sustainable Fiscally, But Politically? 
-------------------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) Comment:  If the December salary law represented 
two steps forward in the GOH\'s fight to establish fiscal 
control and rein in the public sector wage bill, this 
agreement is one step backward.  Fortunately, thanks to a 
favorable macro-economic situation and higher than expected 
GDP growth, the GOH can afford to make these concessions and 
still stay on track with the IMF.  Politically, however, 
this agreement probably marks only a pause, and not a 
permanent resolution, in the ongoing struggle to control 
teachers\' salaries.  Still, though far from perfect, the 
deal does at least have one positive result: after five 
weeks with no teachers, the nation\'s 1.6 million public 
school students have returned to the classrooms.  End 
comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"18955","7/21/2004 13:51","04TEGUCIGALPA1611","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA1622","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP, AND INR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, ASEC, SOCI, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: CONVICTED HONDURAN NARCO-CONGRESSMAN PANCHAME 
MURDERED IN PRISON 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 01622 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 00381 
 
1.  On July 11, Armando Avila Panchame (52), a Honduran 
National Party ex-Congressman serving a 20-year sentence at 
the National Penitentiary (PN) in Tamara for 
narcotrafficking, was murdered by another prison inmate, 
Juvernal Alvarado Diaz (23).  Diaz, sentenced in January 2004 
to 12 years in prison for homicide, reportedly brandished a 
38-caliber revolver hidden beneath his clothes and proceeded 
to shoot Panchame at close range four times, killing him. 
According to press accounts, Diaz claimed he murdered 
Panchame because he had worked for Panchame for seven months 
and had not been paid his salary.  It is not clear whether 
this murder was in connection with Panchame\'s 
narcotrafficking activities.  Nevertheless, authorities 
suspect the Atlantico Narco-trafficking Cartel, with whom 
Panchame was allegedly associated, ordered him killed fearing 
that Panchame would cooperate with Honduran law enforcement 
authorities. 
 
2. On July 20, the Supreme Court of Justice (CSJ) was 
scheduled to review Panchame\'s narcotrafficking conviction. 
According to a source quoted in the Honduran press, Panchame 
had stated that, if his sentence was upheld, he would tell 
all he knew and implicate the \"big people.\"  Catholic Priest 
Maximiliano Orellana told Honduran press that Panchame had 
felt threatened in the days before his murder.  According to 
police sub-commissioner Leonel Sauceda, Panchame had been 
warned not to put himself at risk by walking in certain areas 
of the prison.  Sauceda reported that Panchame indicated he 
had never had a problem with any of the inmates at the prison 
and had never informed authorities he felt threatened in any 
way. 
 
3.  Panchame was arrested July 6, 2003, while attempting to 
flee the scene of a drug trafficking airplane crash in the 
eastern department of Olancho.  He was charged with drug 
trafficking (though no drugs were seized) and attempted 
murder (for running his car through two police roadblocks) 
and was sentenced on February 19 to 20 years in prison and a 
fine of roughly 60,000 USD. (ref A).  Panchame was the third 
political figure to be arrested on drug trafficking charges 
in 2003, and his sentence was the first time a Honduran court 
has convicted a legislator on drug trafficking charges (ref 
B). 
 
4.  The murder of Panchame brings the number of prisoners 
killed during the year in the Tamara prison by firearms or 
small knives to more than 20, including Jorge Anibal 
Echevaria-Ramos (alias Coque) also linked with the Atlantico 
Cartel.  The Attorney General\'s office is investigating 
Panchame\'s death, believing the death to be linked to 
organized crime.  Johnny Handal, the first vice-president of 
the National Congress, also introduced a motion to order an 
investigation into the causes of Panchame\'s assassination and 
to create a maximum security policy for the country\'s jails. 
 
5.  COMMENT:  Security at Honduran prisons is notoriously 
lax.  Corrupt prison guards are easily bribed, allowing 
prisoners to escape, leave the prison for a few hours during 
the day, or import banned weapons.  Many prisoners continue 
to run illegal operations in their prison cells.  While the 
GOH is aware of the problem, scarce resources continue to 
hamper effective measures to shore-up prison security.  END 
COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"19019","7/22/2004 21:58","04TEGUCIGALPA1617","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1518","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001617 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USSOUTHCOM FOR GEN HILL 
STATE FOR PM, INR, AND INL/LP 
STATE FOR WHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2014 
TAGS: MARR, MASS, MCAP, SNAR, PREL, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: FURTHERING REGIONAL INTEGRATION; GENERAL HILL 
DISCUSSES SOUTHCOM INITIATIVES AND OTHER ISSUES WITH GOH 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1518 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (U) Summary:  On July 15, General Hill, USSOUTHCOM 
Commander, met with Honduran Minister of Defense, Federico 
Breve, and separately, with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff (CJCS), General Jose Isaias Barahona to discuss Central 
American integration, narcotrafficking, U.S. military 
assistance, and other issues of importance.  General Hill 
also paid a courtesy call on President Ricardo Maduro on July 
14.  The Government of Honduras (GOH) remains receptive to 
SOUTHCOM initiatives, although limited resources and 
political concerns remain stumbling-blocks as Honduras 
continues to focus its armed forces on addressing pressing 
regional concerns.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Regional Integration and Possible \"Plan Centro America\" 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
2. (C) MOD Breve told General Hill he was generally pleased 
with the direction and pace of regional integration and the 
path the Conferencia De Fuerzas Armadas (CFAC) was taking. 
He noted that Central American presidents were engaged on 
regional military issues, and that CFAC was focusing its 
efforts on trans-national threats such as combating 
terrorism, narcotrafficking, and organized crime in general. 
Breve also indicated CFAC was in the initial process of 
considering a comprehensive regional plan to further address 
these problems, but noted that budgetary constraints were a 
real problem, suggesting Honduras alone needed some USD 40-50 
million to \"guarantee\" better results.  Breve did express 
some consternation that El Salvador and Guatemala, despite an 
agreement in 2002 to do so, had yet to submit comprehensive 
arms inventories to the Secretaria de Integracion 
Centroamericana (SICA). 
 
3. (C)  General Hill recommended CFAC follow the example of 
Colombia by developing a comprehensive, regionally integrated 
plan and then in a unified manner approach the U.S. for 
funding.  General Hill pointed out that individually it could 
be difficult to garner political support in Washington for 
military assistance funding increases;  jointly, however, the 
Central American countries had a much better chance of 
success.  He also noted, considering upcoming U.S. elections 
in November, that realistically, no action would be taken in 
Washington until next year, allowing CFAC sufficient time to 
develop a sound action plan.  General Hill indicated to Breve 
that if CFAC were to do this, DOD and DOS would likely both 
be supportive of the effort. 
 
----------------- 
Next Steps on RTI 
----------------- 
 
4. (C) General Hill queried MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona on 
their latest thinking regarding SOUTHCOM\'s proposed Regional 
Training Initiative (RTI), while at the same time elaborating 
in more detail where he saw RTI heading.  General Hill 
assured Breve and Barahona that the U.S. understands the RTI 
process will take time to evolve but that it presents 
Honduras with an opportunity to show regional leadership 
while also providing a venue the Central American states can 
use to better regionally integrate.  General Hill also told 
Breve and Barahona that the U.S. does not envision a single 
facility with an RTI sign posted above it, but rather that 
the philosophical concept be embraced by the GOH who could 
then, with U.S. assistance, seek other Central American 
participation, including exercises in those countries. 
 
5. (C)  MOD Breve stated agreement with RTI in principle and 
again confirmed Honduras\' willingness to participate. 
However, he did say that other countries would also have to 
agree to host exercises on their bases.  He did not claim, as 
had been indicated previously, that Honduras\' participation 
in RTI would require National Congress approval but, he did 
allude to the political \"scene\" as currently not being 
\"ideal\" to advance such an initiative. 
 
6. (C) General Hill suggested as a next step that within six 
months, SOUTHCOM would generate an exercise concept involving 
Honduras and a number of other Central American countries to 
be held at Soto Cano and a separate location within another 
participant\'s country.  General Hill envisioned this initial 
training exercise would be held at the platoon or company 
level.  Breve agreed in concept and said he looked forward to 
what SOUTHCOM would propose. 
 
------------------- 
Hondurans in Haiti? 
------------------- 
 
7. (C) General Hill raised the issue of Honduran 
participation in peacekeeping operations (PKO) in Haiti with 
both MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona.  He indicated he would 
shortly be sending Honduras, and the other CFAC members, a 
letter suggesting they form a PKO battalion (one company from 
each of the four countries) that could possibly deploy to 
Haiti.  He underscored the U.S. Government\'s understanding 
that, if accepted, it would take time to organize.  Breve was 
open to the idea in theory, but told General Hill that many 
details would require attention before CFAC could deploy to 
Haiti, including a decision on who would command the 
expedition. 
 
8. (C) CJCS Barahona stated the Honduran military is 
ready/able to deploy to Haiti, but the decision to 
participate is a political decision and the issue is a 
sensitive one.  (Comment:  Honduran national primary 
elections are scheduled for February next year and public 
opinion, although hardly fully informed, has been squarely 
against any type of deployment to Haiti.  The GOH might still 
be willing to support the UN mission there, but they are not 
pushing it.  One thing the GOH mentioned in the past (and 
something that would help give them political cover) is their 
desire to receive a formal invitation from the UN to provide 
PKO forces to Haiti.  End Comment). 
 
------------------------------ 
Honduras\' No Shoot-Down Policy 
------------------------------ 
 
9. (C) General Hill stressed to both MOD Breve and CJCS 
Barahona the utmost importance that Honduras strictly follow 
its declared no shoot-down policy.  Breve and Barahona 
assured General Hill they fully understood U.S. legal 
requirements regarding CNIES information sharing and they 
again reiterated Honduras\' \"no shoot-down\" policy.  MOD 
Breve, however, echoed President Ricardo Maduro\'s earlier 
frustration with U.S. policy, particularly the U.S.\'s 
expectations that Honduras scramble air intercepts simply to 
escort intruding aircraft through Honduran air space. 
General Hill told Breve that the U.S. was working on a 
regional air-bridge denial strategy that addresses these 
issues but the policy making process was still not complete. 
 
------------------------------ 
Honduran Ordnance Destruction 
------------------------------ 
 
10. (C) On July 6, a SOUTHCOM Navy Explosive Ordnance 
Disposal (EOD) team arrived in Honduras for a three day 
mission in response to a Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) request 
that the U.S. assist them with limited ordnance destruction. 
The team\'s primary mission was to assess the types and 
quantities of ordnance, particularly the air-launched 
munitions that Honduras currently holds, and to explore 
disposal options.  (Note: It was initially thought that 
Honduras might be willing to significantly reduce its 
stockpiles of air-launched munitions, particularly those 
capable of being delivered by Honduras\' aging fleet of F-5s. 
It appears, however, that the GOH is seeking U.S. assistance 
for only destroying obsolete and/or dangerous ordnance that 
poses a health and safety risk to HOAF personnel.  As the EOD 
team\'s initial report concludes: \"The problem is that the 
vast majority of ordnance in their destruction plan is not 
air-launched ordnance.\" End Note). 
 
11. (C) General Hill urged CJCS Barahona to consider 
selecting more air-launched ordnance for destruction.  He 
did, however, assure Barahona that the U.S. would be willing 
to assist the HOAF with general ordnance destruction. 
(Comment:  The current state of some of the HOAF\'s munitions 
stockpiles poses a serious health and environmental risk. 
The HOAF is aware of this and is seeking U.S. assistance in 
its destruction.  It does not appear, however, that the HOAF 
is considering even marginally reducing its serviceable 
air-launched munitions.  In this light, Honduran ordnance 
destruction should not be considered in any way a 
quid-pro-quo for Nicaraguan MANPADS destruction.  End 
Comment). 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"19064","7/23/2004 21:20","04TEGUCIGALPA1626","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001626 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND INL/LP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, KCRM, KJUS, ASEC, SOCI, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: LA MOSQUITIA MAYORS CALL FOR MORE RESOURCES TO 
FIGHT NARCOTRAFFICKING PROBLEM 
 
1.  The mayors of two communities in La Mosquitia (in the 
northeast corner of Honduras) called on central authorities 
to increase police presence and equipment in the region as it 
has become the foremost narcotrafficking zone in the country. 
The complaint was issued June 20 by the mayor of Puerto 
Lempira, Cirilo Fellman, and the mayor of Ahuas, Carlos 
Sanabria.  They asked for at least 200 new police assignments 
as well as the equipment necessary to confront 
narcotraffickers, namely cars, arms, and small boats. 
 
2.  According to the two mayors, drug trafficking in La 
Mosquitia has begun to reign uncontrollably, especially along 
the coast, and many times in plain view of police.  La 
Mosquitia has only 46 police officers for the entire region. 
According to Sanabria, Ahuas, which is one of the more 
central municipalities in the region, has a very strong drug 
trade, especially at night.  There are only three police 
agents in the municipality, and no cars or boats assigned to 
the precinct. Puerto Lempira has 12 police officers. 
 
3.  La Mosquitia is one of the biggest regions of the 
country, but also one of the least populated.  The population 
is just over 70,000, yet the territory occupies an area of 
around 20,000 square km - making up about a fifth of 
Honduras.  Most of the region is wilderness and uninhabited 
land, making it an ideal place for illicit activity. 
Moreover, many from the region profit from drug activity and 
are reluctant to cooperate with authorities.  There are three 
main points of entry for drug cargoes in the region: 
Tilbalaca, Ribra, and Barra Patuca. From these points, drugs 
(mainly cocaine) move to Olancho and Colon, in the north and 
center of Honduras, ultimately heading toward the United 
States. According to the mayors, at least two more police 
cars and assigning more police officers to the area would 
help squelch these transactions. 
 
4.  Aside from the drug trade, the mayors also voiced concern 
about a rise in drug use and delinquency in the region. 
Fellman in particular voiced concern about the proliferation 
of crack cocaine use among youth in Puerto Lempira.  The 
problem is more than just the \"competence of the local 
authorities and politicians,\" he told the Honduran press, and 
it is also an issue of \"finding means of control, security, 
and logistical support.\" 
 
5.  COMMENT: Most of the inhabitants involved in the drug 
trade are paid with cocaine instead of money.  This almost 
insures that they sell the cocaine locally in order to 
convert the product into currency.  This is why there is now 
a local consumption problem and a flourishing drug trade 
network in the area.  Additionally, police officers assigned 
to La Mosquitia are viewed as outsiders and are ill equipped 
to handle the drug problem in the area, lacking resources, 
proper training, and management controls. 
 
6.  COMMENT CONTINUED:  An official from the Counter-Narcotic 
Council said that the Council would seek additional police 
officers for the region but noted that police presence alone 
would not solve the drug trafficking and drug corruption 
problems.  Education, employment opportunities, and better 
health care are needed.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"19156","7/27/2004 22:13","04TEGUCIGALPA1652","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","03TEGUCIGALPA2380","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR P, T, WHA, WHA/CEN, PM, AND INR/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/27/2014 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MASS, MCAP, PBTS, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS\' DECISION TO TERMINATE FOUR FMS SERVICE 
LOA WILL SIGNIFICANTLY REDUCE ITS FLEET OF F-5S 
 
REF: 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2380 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'Affaires Roger D. Pierce; 
Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (SBU) On July 22, USMILGP Tegucigalpa received a letter 
from the Honduran Air Force\'s (HAF) Department of Logistics 
requesting that the number of Honduran F-5s under U.S. 
Foreign Military Sales (FMS) service Letters of Agreement 
(LOAs) be reduced from ten to only six jets.  The request 
appears to have been generated from the Commanding General of 
the HAF, Colonel Manuel Enrigue Caceres Diaz, in an effort to 
conserve limited HAF funds.  This move effectively reduces 
Honduras\' original fleet of 12 F-5s to six.  Note:  Although 
the GOH originally had 12 F-5s, two of these are inoperable 
(one crashed and one has been used for spare parts).  End 
Note. 
 
2. (C) In reftel, Post noted that Honduras\' aging fleet of 
F-5s would likely face further reductions due to a lack of 
spare parts and other budgetary constraints.  Honduras\' move 
to reduce FMS F-5 contracts appears to be an effort to keep 
its remaining six jets in a state of adequate repair rather 
than attempt to continue to service the others at a cost of 
significantly reduced readiness.  As it is, Honduran pilots 
train on their F-5s only one hour a month due to high fuel 
costs. 
 
3. (C) Comment:  The Government of Honduras (GOH) has 
consistently indicated it would not negotiate a reduction in 
F-5s on a bilateral basis with Nicaragua regarding its excess 
Man Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS) (reftel), and this 
latest move by the GOH was not necessarily in the spirit of 
furthering regional arms reductions.  However, this 
unilateral move by Honduras, albeit apparently for budgetary 
reasons, could be used to encourage Nicaragua to consider 
deeper cuts in its current MANPAD arsenal.  It could also be 
used as a catalyst for furthering regional arms reductions 
through established channels such as the Central American 
Security Commission (SICA) and/or the Armed Forces Conference 
of Central America (CFAC).  End Comment 
 
4. (U) Post will transmit via fax the original HAF letter to 
WHA/CEN. 
Pierce 
"
"19197","7/28/2004 15:40","04TEGUCIGALPA1655","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1518","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USSOUTHCOM FOR GEN HILL 
STATE FOR PM, INR, AND INL/LP 
STATE FOR WHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2014 
TAGS: MARR, MASS, MCAP, SNAR, PREL, KCRM, HO 
SUBJECT: FURTHERING REGIONAL INTEGRATION; GENERAL HILL 
DISCUSSES SOUTHCOM INITIATIVES AND OTHER ISSUES WITH GOH 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1518 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
1. (U) Summary:  On July 15, General Hill, USSOUTHCOM 
Commander, met with Honduran Minister of Defense, Federico 
Breve, and separately, with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff (CJCS), General Jose Isaias Barahona to discuss Central 
American integration, narcotrafficking, U.S. military 
assistance, and other issues of importance.  General Hill 
also paid a courtesy call on President Ricardo Maduro on July 
14.  The Government of Honduras (GOH) remains receptive to 
SOUTHCOM initiatives, although limited resources and 
political concerns remain stumbling-blocks as Honduras 
continues to focus its armed forces on addressing pressing 
regional concerns.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Regional Integration and Possible \"Plan Centro America\" 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
2. (C) MOD Breve told General Hill he was generally pleased 
with the direction and pace of regional integration and the 
path the Conferencia De Fuerzas Armadas (CFAC) was taking. 
He noted that Central American presidents were engaged on 
regional military issues, and that CFAC was focusing its 
efforts on trans-national threats such as combating 
terrorism, narcotrafficking, and organized crime in general. 
Breve also indicated CFAC was in the initial process of 
considering a comprehensive regional plan to further address 
these problems, but noted that budgetary constraints were a 
real problem, suggesting Honduras alone needed some USD 40-50 
million to \"guarantee\" better results.  Breve did express 
some consternation that El Salvador and Guatemala, despite an 
agreement in 2002 to do so, had yet to submit comprehensive 
arms inventories to the Secretaria de Integracion 
Centroamericana (SICA). 
 
3. (C)  General Hill recommended CFAC follow the example of 
Colombia by developing a comprehensive, regionally integrated 
plan and then in a unified manner approach the U.S. for 
funding.  General Hill pointed out that individually it could 
be difficult to garner political support in Washington for 
military assistance funding increases;  jointly, however, the 
Central American countries had a much better chance of 
success.  He also noted, considering upcoming U.S. elections 
in November, that realistically, no action would be taken in 
Washington until next year, allowing CFAC sufficient time to 
develop a sound action plan.  General Hill indicated to Breve 
that if CFAC were to do this, DOD and DOS would likely both 
be supportive of the effort. 
 
----------------- 
Next Steps on RTI 
----------------- 
 
4. (C) General Hill queried MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona on 
their latest thinking regarding SOUTHCOM\'s proposed Regional 
Training Initiative (RTI), while at the same time elaborating 
in more detail where he saw RTI heading.  General Hill 
assured Breve and Barahona that the U.S. understands the RTI 
process will take time to evolve but that it presents 
Honduras with an opportunity to show regional leadership 
while also providing a venue the Central American states can 
use to better regionally integrate.  General Hill also told 
Breve and Barahona that the U.S. does not envision a single 
facility with an RTI sign posted above it, but rather that 
the philosophical concept be embraced by the GOH who could 
then, with U.S. assistance, seek other Central American 
participation, including exercises in those countries. 
 
5. (C)  MOD Breve stated agreement with RTI in principle and 
again confirmed Honduras\' willingness to participate. 
However, he did say that other countries would also have to 
agree to host exercises on their bases.  He did not claim, as 
had been indicated previously, that Honduras\' participation 
in RTI would require National Congress approval but, he did 
allude to the political \"scene\" as currently not being 
\"ideal\" to advance such an initiative. 
 
6. (C) General Hill suggested as a next step that within six 
months, SOUTHCOM would generate an exercise concept involving 
Honduras and a number of other Central American countries to 
be held at Soto Cano and a separate location within another 
participant\'s country.  General Hill envisioned this initial 
training exercise would be held at the platoon or company 
level.  Breve agreed in concept and said he looked forward to 
what SOUTHCOM would propose. 
 
------------------- 
Hondurans in Haiti? 
------------------- 
 
7. (C) General Hill raised the issue of Honduran 
participation in peacekeeping operations (PKO) in Haiti with 
both MOD Breve and CJCS Barahona.  He indicated he would 
shortly be sending Honduras, and the other CFAC members, a 
letter suggesting they form a PKO battalion (one company from 
each of the four countries) that could possibly deploy to 
Haiti.  He underscored the U.S. Government\'s understanding 
that, if accepted, it would take time to organize.  Breve was 
open to the idea in theory, but told General Hill that many 
details would require attention before CFAC could deploy to 
Haiti, including a decision on who would command the 
expedition. 
 
8. (C) CJCS Barahona stated the Honduran military is 
ready/able to deploy to Haiti, but the decision to 
participate is a political decision and the issue is a 
sensitive one.  (Comment:  Honduran national primary 
elections are scheduled for February next year and public 
opinion, although hardly fully informed, has been squarely 
against any type of deployment to Haiti.  The GOH might still 
be willing to support the UN mission there, but they are not 
pushing it.  One thing the GOH mentioned in the past (and 
something that would help give them political cover) is their 
desire to receive a formal invitation from the UN to provide 
PKO forces to Haiti.  End Comment). 
 
------------------------------ 
Honduras\' No Shoot-Down Policy 
------------------------------ 
 
9. (C) General Hill stressed to both MOD Breve and CJCS 
Barahona the utmost importance that Honduras strictly follow 
its declared no shoot-down policy.  Breve and Barahona 
assured General Hill they fully understood U.S. legal 
requirements regarding CNIES information sharing and they 
again reiterated Honduras\' \"no shoot-down\" policy.  MOD 
Breve, however, echoed President Ricardo Maduro\'s earlier 
frustration with U.S. policy, particularly the U.S.\'s 
expectations that Honduras scramble air intercepts simply to 
escort intruding aircraft through Honduran air space. 
General Hill told Breve that the U.S. was working on a 
regional air-bridge denial strategy that addresses these 
issues but the policy making process was still not complete. 
 
------------------------------ 
Honduran Ordnance Destruction 
------------------------------ 
 
10. (C) On July 6, a SOUTHCOM Navy Explosive Ordnance 
Disposal (EOD) team arrived in Honduras for a three day 
mission in response to a Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) request 
that the U.S. assist them with limited ordnance destruction. 
The team\'s primary mission was to assess the types and 
quantities of ordnance, particularly the air-launched 
munitions that Honduras currently holds, and to explore 
disposal options.  (Note: It was initially thought that 
Honduras might be willing to significantly reduce its 
stockpiles of air-launched munitions, particularly those 
capable of being delivered by Honduras\' aging fleet of F-5s. 
It appears, however, that the GOH is seeking U.S. assistance 
for only destroying obsolete and/or dangerous ordnance that 
poses a health and safety risk to HOAF personnel.  As the EOD 
team\'s initial report concludes: \"The problem is that the 
vast majority of ordnance in their destruction plan is not 
air-launched ordnance.\" End Note). 
 
11. (C) General Hill urged CJCS Barahona to consider 
selecting more air-launched ordnance for destruction.  He 
did, however, assure Barahona that the U.S. would be willing 
to assist the HOAF with general ordnance destruction. 
(Comment:  The current state of some of the HOAF\'s munitions 
stockpiles poses a serious health and environmental risk. 
The HOAF is aware of this and is seeking U.S. assistance in 
its destruction.  It does not appear, however, that the HOAF 
is considering even marginally reducing its serviceable 
air-launched munitions.  In this light, Honduran ordnance 
destruction should not be considered in any way a 
quid-pro-quo for Nicaraguan MANPADS destruction.  End 
Comment). 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
Pierce 
"
"19311","7/30/2004 19:25","04TEGUCIGALPA1674","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03TEGUCIGALPA442|04STATE157889","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001674 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR PRM/PMP, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR EILZETZKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PHUM, PREF, PREL, ELAB, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: TPS for Honduras - Update on Economy and 
Reconstruction Efforts 
 
REF: A. State 157889 
     B. 03 Tegucigalpa 442 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Honduras has largely recovered from the 
devastation of the 1998 Hurricane Mitch.  Most USG-funded 
reconstruction efforts were completed in 2001, and will be 
entirely completed in 2005.  However, Honduras remains a 
poor country with insufficient housing and job opportunities 
to offer a decent standard of living for the majority of its 
people.  Furthermore, the economy is increasingly dependent 
upon remittances from Hondurans living abroad, especially 
the estimated 650,000 who live, legally and illegally, in 
the United States.  These remittances now represent roughly 
15 percent of GDP, according to Central Bank figures, and 
are the country\'s largest source of foreign exchange.  The 
return of the 87,000 Hondurans who currently enjoy TPS would 
therefore pose economic difficulties for Honduras.  Post 
strongly recommends that Department seek another extension 
of TPS for Honduras.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Hurricane Reconstruction Largely Complete... 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) With the help of the international donor community 
(of which USAID is the largest bilateral contributor), 
Honduras has largely recovered from the physical devastation 
of Hurricane Mitch.  USAID\'s $300 million recovery program 
focused on a wide variety of reconstruction interventions in 
the areas of education, housing, water and sanitation, rural 
roads and bridges, disaster mitigation, health, agriculture 
reactivation, credit, accountability, and transparency.  The 
majority of this program was completed by the end of 2001. 
The only element of USAID\'s reconstruction program which is 
still ongoing, the reconstruction of damaged urban water and 
sanitation systems, was expected to be completed by the end 
of FY04, but was recently extended and will be fully 
completed by the end of FY05. 
 
3. (U) While the GOH is still engaged in activities such as 
construction of housing, its main economic focus is no 
longer on the task of post-hurricane reconstruction per se. 
Instead, the GOH\'s efforts to combat poverty are based on 
the October 2001 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). 
While this document mentions the impact of the hurricane in 
passing, its focus is not on reconstruction but rather on 
the broader goals of reducing urban and rural poverty, and 
investing in human capital.  At the same time, the GOH is 
pursuing measures to improve Honduras\' long-term prospects 
for economic growth and development, including 
infrastructure development, increasing openness to trade and 
investment, and integrated rural development to increase the 
competitiveness of farmers and link the agricultural sector 
to market opportunities.  By now, nearly six years after the 
hurricane, President Maduro and other GOH officials rarely, 
if ever, mention Hurricane Mitch in discussions of the 
country\'s challenges or the government\'s plans. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
... And The Economy is Picking Up Speed 
--------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) After shrinking in 1999, just after Hurricane Mitch, 
and rebounding strongly in 2000, the Honduran economy grew 
at 2.5 and 2.6 percent per year in 2001 and 2002, barely 
enough to keep pace with population growth.  However, this 
sluggish growth rate was largely attributable to the U.S. 
economic slowdown, rather than to the process of post- 
hurricane reconstruction.  As the U.S. economy has picked up 
speed so has the Honduran economy, growing by 3.2 percent in 
2003 and, based on Ministry of Finance data from January to 
May 2004, an annualized rate of 3.5 to 4 percent in 2004. 
Coffee prices, while still low by historical standards, have 
increased 23 percent this year and 50 percent over their mid- 
2002 low point, providing much needed relief to the Honduran 
agricultural sector.  GOH officials and private sector 
contacts also report that Honduran exports are up strongly 
so far in 2004.  The government is benefiting from debt 
relief negotiated with its Paris Club creditors (including 
the U.S.) in April, and is currently on track to meet all of 
the growth, fiscal and monetary targets set in its February 
2004 IMF agreement. 
 
Real GDP Growth Rate 
-------------------- 
          (Percent) 
1998         2.9 
1999        -1.9 
2000         5.2 
2001         2.6 
2002         2.5 
2003         3.2 
2004(est.)   3.5 to 4.0 
 
---------------------------- 
But Honduras Remains Poor... 
---------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Despite recent positive economic developments, 
however, Honduras remains a country where the majority live 
in poverty, without adequate housing, education, or health 
care.  The Honduran economy, even when growing at a rate 
which is healthy by historical terms, cannot provide 
sufficient job growth for its people.  As a result, a 
considerable segment of the Honduran population continues to 
regard immigration to the United States as one of the few 
real economic opportunities available. 
 
6. (U) According to World Bank figures and definitions, 63 
percent of the Honduran population currently live below the 
poverty line, and 45 percent are \"extremely poor\" - an 
improvement over the post-Mitch 1999 figures of 66 percent 
and 49 percent, respectively, but still among the highest in 
the Western Hemisphere.  The GOH is unable to provide basic 
necessities such as adequate housing, health care, or 
education for the 170,000 people added to the population 
each year through population growth.  If the 87,000 
Hondurans with TPS were to be added to the population as 
well, the burden would be even greater. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
... And More Dependent Upon Remittances Than Ever Before 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
7. (U) Remittances sent from Hondurans living abroad 
continue to grow rapidly, both in real terms and as a share 
of GDP, and Honduras is more reliant upon these remittances 
now than ever before in its history.  From 1999 to 2003, 
remittances from Hondurans living abroad (predominantly in 
the U.S.) have increased at an average rate of 28 percent 
per year.  In 2003, according to Central Bank figures, these 
remittances totaled 860 million dollars (12.8 percent of 
GDP), which is roughly equal to the value added from the 
entire maquila sector (assembly manufacturing for export), 
Honduras\' largest industry.  These remittances close what 
would otherwise be a significant balance-of-payments 
deficit. 
 
            Remittances       As percent 
Year       in US$ million       of GDP 
----       --------------     ---------- 
1999            319              5.9 
2000            409              6.9 
2001            533              8.5 
2002            711             11.1 
2003            860             12.8 
2004 (est.)    1075             15.5 
 
Source: Central Bank of Honduras.  2004 estimates are based 
upon figures through May 2004: 3.75 percent annual rate of 
GDP growth and 25 percent growth in remittances. 
 
8. (SBU) The Honduran Embassy in Washington has estimated 
that there are some 650,000 Hondurans living in the United 
States, both legally and illegally, which includes the 
87,000 who have registered for TPS.  According to the 
Embassy\'s Department of Homeland Security office, in 2003 
Honduras received 5,953 deportees via the INS/JPATS 
deportation program and on commercial flights.  (For reasons 
that are not clear, this figure is sharply down from the 
2002 estimate of 10,400 deportees cited in reftel B.)  Post 
suspects that many of those deported attempt to return to 
the U.S. again illegally, and thus a considerably smaller 
number actually remain in Honduras.  It is clear, however, 
that only a small percentage of those Hondurans who live 
illegally in the U.S. are being returned to Honduras at the 
present time, and that the return of 87,000 Hondurans would 
be a drastic increase. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (SBU) COMMENT: While Honduras lacks adequate housing, 
education, health care, and employment opportunities for the 
63 percent of its people that live below the poverty line, 
this was the case prior to Hurricane Mitch in 1998, and can 
no longer reasonably be attributed in large part to the 
hurricane itself.  In many ways, Honduras has returned to 
its pre-Mitch economic status, with the one significant 
difference that remittances have soared and their economic 
importance continues to grow.  While the 87,000 Hondurans 
under TPS make up only a relatively small part of the total 
Honduran population living in the United States without 
permanent legal status, their return to Honduras would 
represent a 14-fold increase over the number of 2003 
deportees, and would place a considerable economic burden 
upon the country.  Post therefore strongly recommends that 
Department seek another extension of TPS for Honduras.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
Pierce 
"
"20325","9/2/2004 17:18","04TEGUCIGALPA1969","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001969 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC FOR GEORGE LIKE, DCHA/PVC-ASHA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: PROPOSED SUPPORT BY ASHA TO THE PAN AMERICAN 
SCHOOL OF AGRICULTURE LOCATED IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 175560 dated August 13, 2004 
 
The present cable provides comments regarding the Pan- 
American School of Agriculture (AKA Zamorano) request 
for financial assistance from American Schools and 
Hospitals Abroad. 
 
Zamorano has requested $1,126,000 for the following 
actions/investments: 
 
1. Increase the storage capacity of a reservoir used 
for irrigation from 30,000 cubic meters to 340,000 
cubic meters. 
 
2. Increase the cultivated area under irrigation by 
adding 96 hectares. 
 
3. Increase the plantation forest area under irrigation 
by adding 45 hectares. 
 
4. Purchase timber harvesting equipment (a skidder). 
 
5. Purchase wood processing equipment and improving the 
wood processing area. 
 
6. Construction and furnishing of a women\'s dormitory. 
 
In response to the request for comments, USAID/Honduras 
is pleased to provide the following comments regarding 
the Pan-American Agriculture School, Zamorano: 
 
Zamorano is a private U.S. chartered non-profit 
organization that has been in existence for 60 years. 
Zamorano is recognized as the premier agricultural 
institution in Honduras because of its high standards 
and reputation of excellence in the workplace 
established by its graduates over the years. 
 
Zamorano graduates are key contributors to the 
agricultural development of all of the Central American 
countries. 
 
At the Central American level, four institutions are 
recognized as quality centers of higher learning: 
CATIE, INCAE, EARTH and ZAMORANO. 
 
The combination of quality staff and field experience 
possessed by Zamorano cannot be matched by any other 
Honduran agriculture institution. 
 
Zamorano\'s training program is recognized and 
accredited in various U.S. universities with premier 
agricultural programs.  U.S. universities such as 
Cornell, Purdue, Auburn, and Iowa State have developed 
collaborative research, faculty exchange, and 
international training programs with Zamorano. 
 
SICE, the \"Foreign Trade Information System\" of the 
Trade Unit of the Organization of American States (OAS) 
indicates that: 
 
\"The Zamorano Pan American School is a good example of 
what is needed in terms of improving the human 
resources of a nation in order to offer skills to 
industry. Zamorano is a world-class, specialized 
undergraduate institution.  It is dedicated to 
spreading expertise in agro-industry in which the 
region has a solid opportunity to build a market 
leadership position.  It is a regional institution, 
attracting bright young people from all over Latin 
America.  It offers direct assistance to the farming 
sector in those countries.  It has research facilities 
which are creating and disseminating knowledge about 
new agricultural technology, methods and systems.\" 
 
USAID/Honduras cables to ASHA from previous years amply 
describe Zamorano\'s background, the excellence of its 
training program and faculty, and the constant 
collaboration that Zamorano has provided in the 
execution of USAID\'s development programs.  At present, 
Zamorano is executing a one-year cooperative agreement 
with USAID in water resource management activities. 
 
Zamorano is constantly improving its capacity and focus 
according to the changing needs of Latin America.  For 
example, Zamorano has recently changed from a three- 
year program with an additional one-year specialization 
to a four-year, university-level academic program. 
Zamorano now offers four career paths: agribusiness 
development, agricultural science and production, agro 
industry, and socioeconomic development and 
environment.  Beyond the classroom, students learn-by- 
doing as they participate actively in planning, 
production, and marketing activities related to 
educational business operations called ZamoEnterprises. 
The new program begins with a two-year core curriculum 
comprised of courses and learning-by-doing activities 
offered by each of the four careers and six 
ZamoEnterpirses.  During their third and fourth years, 
students undertake a specialized program of study in 
one of the four careers and return to the 
ZamoEnterprises to further develop their skills and 
deepen their knowledge.  In addition, Zamorano and the 
University of New Mexico are presently executing a two- 
year collaborative program to establish a Central 
American Water Resources Development Center and 
training Honduran professionals in water resource 
management. 
 
Zamorano is a non-sectarian institution.  There is no 
religious orientation nor is religion a factor in the 
curriculum or entrance requirements.  Since Zamorano 
serves predominantly Catholic countries, the majority 
of the students are Catholic but the institutional 
atmosphere provides an open welcome to students or 
faculty of every religious belief. 
 
We concur with Zamorano that the current water storage 
capacity is already insufficient and that a major 
expansion of Zamorano\'s water storage capacity is 
necessary to expand the area under irrigation. 
Zamorano has indicated that, during the dry months, the 
daily requirement to properly attend the land area 
presently apt for irrigation exceeds the supply by 
almost 3,000 cubic meters.  Therefore, to place 
additional land under irrigation, the large increase in 
water storage capacity proposed by Zamorano is 
necessary.  We also concur that Zamorano, as a regional 
leader in agriculture, must improve its water 
catchments, irrigation and water management practices 
to generate and transfer appropriate technologies. 
 
USAID concurs that Zamorano must improve its forest 
harvesting and processing equipment to be able to 
execute and teach sustainable forest management 
practices and efficient wood processing techniques. 
The skidder being requested will complement the cable 
extraction equipment being purchased under ASHA Grant 
842.  The sawmill improvements along with the wood 
products facility will allow Zamorano to teach and 
promote cost effective production and value added 
alternatives. 
 
USAID also concurs with Zamorano\'s proposal to 
construct a dormitory for women.  Already one-third of 
Zamorano\'s student body is women and it is projected 
that this percentage will rise in the future.  Also, 
the present lack of dormitory space is limiting 
enrolment and forcing less than optimal spacing for 
some students (living three to a room instead of the 
normal arrangement of two per room).   The construction 
of an additional dormitory facility for women will 
allow Zamorano to accommodate the increased number of 
female applicants and to improve the living space 
provided to the students. 
 
USAID/Honduras supports the objectives of Zamorano\'s 
request, but suggests that a grant contain 
conditionality that the institution complies with all 
the required environmental actions, reporting, and 
monitoring applicable to USAID-financed activities, 
including those set forth in title 22 of the United 
States Code of Federal Regulations, part 216 and with 
the requirements of the Foreign Assistance Act, Section 
118 Tropical Forest. 
 
Section 118 of the FAA indicates that the President 
shall deny assistance to developing countries for the 
procurement of logging equipment, unless an 
environmental assessment indicates that all timber 
harvesting operations involved will be conducted in an 
environmentally sound manner which minimizes forest 
destruction. 
 
If you require additional information regarding 
environmental compliance, please contact the agency\'s 
environmental coordinator, James Hester, 
jhester@usaid.gov. 
 
Any questions about the comments which USAID/Honduras 
provides in this cable may be addressed to Ramon 
Alvarez, Mission Forestry Advisor, by cable or e-mail, 
ralvarez@usaid.gov. Regards. 
 
Palmer 
"
"20359","9/3/2004 19:57","04TEGUCIGALPA1984","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1899","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001984 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2014 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS\' FINANCIAL REFORM LAWS: THREE DOWN, ONE 
TO GO 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1899 
 
Classified By: Economic Chief Patrick Dunn; reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The Honduran Congress has approved three of 
the four financial sector reform laws required under the IMF 
agreement.  The three that have passed are the shortest and 
simplest of the laws, leaving the longest and most important 
for last.  However the President of the Banking Commission is 
confident that this fourth will also pass within the weeks to 
come, and discounts recently publicized opposition to the law 
from some Congressmen as empty political posturing.  While 
the GOH badly missed its original IMF-imposed deadline of 
June 30 for the implementation of these reforms, the general 
consensus among the IMF, GOH and Post is that late is better 
than never.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On August 27, EconOffs met with the President of the 
National Banking Commission (Honduras\' banking regulator), 
Dr. Ana Cristina Mejia de Pereira, to discuss the progress of 
the four financial sector reform laws which, under the terms 
of the IMF agreement, were to have been passed by June 30. 
Mejia informed us that three of the four laws have been 
approved by Congress, and are currently undergoing a final 
legal review, after which they must be signed by the 
President and published in the official federal register (La 
Gaceta) to enter into legal force.  The three laws that have 
been approved are reforms of the Central Bank, the National 
Banking Commission (CNBS), and the bank insurance fund 
(FOSEDE).  Each of these laws is relatively short, and is a 
revision of existing legislation, which contributed to their 
relatively easy passage through Congress.  Post will provide 
a more detailed description of the bills septel once their 
final form is known. 
 
3. (SBU) The fourth and most important of the reforms, the 
financial institutions law, is still being reviewed by 
Congress.  Since this is an entirely new piece of 
legislation, and is quite long, Congress is inspecting it 
more closely than it did the other three.  Mejia cited the 
bill\'s complexity and this more thorough than usual debate as 
the reason for the bill\'s slow progress.  As of August 27, 
approximately 70 of the 180 articles in the bill had been 
debated.  Mejia assured EconOffs that she has been going 
personally to Congress every morning to move the debate 
along, provide guidance, and attempt to ensure the new law is 
not gutted during mark-up. 
 
4. (C) Mejia acknowledged that there is opposition to the 
bill from certain quarters, namely those bankers who have the 
most to gain from maintaining the status quo of looser 
regulation of the sector.  Specifically, she mentioned that 
Jorge Bueso (of Banco Occidente), Guillermo Bueso (of Banco 
Atlantida), and Jaime Rosenthal (of Banco Continental, also 
an opposition Liberal Party (PL) congressman and one of many 
PL presidential candidates), are opponents of the bill, as 
they are directors of the three banks that would have the 
most difficulty adjusting under the new laws.  As reported in 
reftel, Rosenthal announced publicly last week that he had 
succeeded in halting debate on the financial institutions 
law, but Mejia was dismissive of these claims, saying that as 
soon as Rosenthal left town, debate began again.  Despite the 
opposition that exists, Mejia assured us that sufficient 
numbers of Congressmen in both major parties understand the 
importance of the law so that its ultimate passage is not in 
doubt. 
 
5. (C) Comment: Mejia is clearly placing a very high priority 
on the passage of the financial institutions law, and has the 
support of the Ministry of Finance in doing so.  While the 
GOH badly missed its original IMF-imposed deadline of June 30 
for the implementation of these reforms, the general 
consensus among the IMF, GOH officials, and Post is: better 
late than never. 
 
Palmer 
Palmer 
"
"20363","9/3/2004 20:18","04TEGUCIGALPA1985","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","04SANJOSE2297|04SANJOSE2339|04TEGUCIGALPA1439","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001985 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, AND WHA/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2014 
TAGS: ECON, ENRG, ELAB, PGOV, KMCA, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN OIL TRUCKERS\' STRIKE BLOCKS NORTHERN 
HIGHWAY FOR A DAY 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1439 
     B. SAN JOSE 2297 
     C. SAN JOSE 2339 
 
Classified By: Economic Chief Patrick Dunn; reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Striking oil truckers blocked the main 
highway to Puerto Cortes in northern Honduras for 19 hours 
from the night of August 30 to the afternoon of August 31, 
before Honduran police cleared the road and detained two 
strike leaders.  The strike was triggered by a contract 
dispute with Texaco, but also was also fueled by discontent 
over high fuel prices, wage demands, and complaints that 
firms are seeking to hire foreign truckers over Honduran 
firms.  The Honduran authorities acted relatively quickly to 
end the strike and open the highway, which is the only 
transportation artery linking Honduras\' industrial zones with 
its major port.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) More than a thousand truckers went on strike the night 
of August 30, blocking heavy cargo traffic at four different 
key points of the country.  The most significant blockade was 
on the toll road between San Pedro Sula and Puerto Cortes, 
approximately 5 kilometers south of the main entrance to the 
port.  Striking truckers allowed private cars and small 
trucks to pass through, but not tractor-trailers or 
containerized shipping.  The strike came to a peaceful end 
Tuesday afternoon August 31 when the National Police arrived 
on the scene and detained the two leaders of the strike, 
Erasmo Flores of the National Transportation Union of Heavy 
Cargo (NTUHC), and Celin Aranky of the Honduran Independent 
Transporters\' Union (UTIH).  The other striking truckers 
dispersed without incident or violence. 
 
3. (C) Econoff met with Minister of Transportation Jorge 
Carranza on the margins of another meeting on August 31 and 
raised the matter of the strike.  Minister Carranza said 
Texaco is the only one of the four major gasoline companies 
operating in Honduras (Esso, Dippsa, and Shell are the 
others) that does not own its tanker fleet.  Instead, they 
have contracted with about 75 private haulers since 2001. 
Starting at the end of this year, they wish to move to a 
five-year contract, but only with trucks that are well 
maintained and operators that are trained and safe.  Those 
criteria led Texaco to sign with only 45 of the current 
operators, while rejecting 30 more.  Those 30 promptly went 
on strike, and demanded that the GOH force Texaco to renew 
their contracts as well.  Carranza said he has no intention 
of doing so, and that furthermore the businessman in him is 
appalled at the demand.  Carranza said that he had met with 
President Maduro the morning of August 31 over the issue and 
offered his good offices to at 
tempt to reach an amicable resolution, but he said he would 
not pressure Texaco to sign for services with unsafe haulers. 
 
4. (U) Press statements made August 30 by strike leader 
Erasmo Flores of the NTUHC support this version of the 
origins of the strike, explicitly stating that one goal of 
the strikers was to pressure Texaco-Chevron to renew the 
transportation contracts of the two transport companies. 
However, the broader appeal of the strike (which included up 
to 1,000 drivers) was likely due to an expanded set of 
striker demands.  Flores called on the GOH to increase 
salaries for drivers, and complained of high fuel costs. 
Flores also alleged that Texaco\'s true motive in failing to 
renew certain transport companies\' contracts was their 
preference to work with Salvadoran and Nicaraguan haulers. 
Flores complained that Salvadoran and Nicaraguan transport 
companies are not paying their share of the new fuel taxes. 
(Note:  Honduras\' fuel taxes, and consequently its fuel 
prices, are the highest in the region.  If haulers from 
neighboring countries are fueling up in Nicaragua and El 
Salvador prior to making their runs to the reg 
ional Atlantic port of Puerto Cortes, then their lower fuel 
costs could indeed provide them with a competitive advantage. 
 End Note.) 
 
5. (SBU) EconOff spoke with President of the Honduran 
Manufacturers\' Association, Jesus Canahuati, who expressed 
his satisfaction with the relatively prompt response of the 
GOH authorities to this strike.  (During previous strikes in 
June and July near Tegucigalpa, (reftel A) the GOH had 
allowed roads to remain blocked for longer periods of time 
before taking action.)  The highway from San Pedro Sula to 
Puerto Cortes is the most economically important stretch of 
road in the country, as the entire maquila sector relies on 
Puerto Cortes for imports and exports, as do most other 
sectors of the Honduran economy (the major exception being 
agricultural products exported by Dole, which use the 
facility at Puerto Castilla near Trujillo).  Canahuati 
reported that several U.S. companies were concerned about the 
strike, but pleased to see it dispersed peacefully and, by 
Honduran standards, quickly. 
 
6. (S) Comment:  It is worth noting that Costa Rica just went 
through a week of similar troubles over similar issues (in 
their case, relating to the fees charged to inspect tankers 
and the high failure rate of trucks -- mostly for brakes). 
On August 31, the GOCR caved in to protesters\' demands 
(reftels B and C) following several days of road blockages 
and resultant gasoline shortages.  The GOCR alleges that 
\"foreign powers\" (read Venezuela or Cuba) might have been 
involved in fomenting the protest.  To date Post has heard 
nothing to suggest that this week\'s truckers\' strike in 
Honduras was the work of external forces, though Post does 
not fully discount that possibility.  More likely, however, 
is the possibility that Honduran truckers, at a competitive 
disadvantage from high fuel costs, might simply have seen 
that the tactic worked in Costa Rica and adopted it for 
themselves.  End comment. 
Palmer 
"
"20437","9/8/2004 14:19","04TEGUCIGALPA2016","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002016 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON); IIP/G/WHA; CA, PRM AND EB 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, SMIG, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IMMIGRATION, SEPTEMBER 2, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 9/2, entitled \"Corridor of Death.\"  \"Statistics from the 
National Forum on Immigration show that in the first 
semester of 2004, 66 Hondurans died, 74 were injured and 25 
were maimed attempting to enter illegally in the U.S.\" 
 
\"The reasons that cause the constant migration of our 
countrymen are still the same: the lack of jobs and the 
precarious living conditions that most Hondurans endure. 
This situation has been worsened by other recent 
developments, such as the high prices of oil and public 
services, the shortage of basic grains, and the lack of 
educational opportunities and health services.\" 
 
\"It\'s unfortunate that a country isn\'t able to provide 
basic, sufficient options for its people to prevent them 
from risking their lives on such a dangerous quest.  It\'s 
acceptable that one of our priorities is to achieve 
permanent migratory status for our undocumented countrymen 
living abroad, but it\'s also crucial to develop the 
necessary conditions here to prevent their exodus.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 9/2, entitled \"Migrants.\"  \"Even though the 
remittances sent by the almost 800,000 Hondurans working 
abroad (most of them as undocumented aliens) have become an 
important source of foreign currency for our economy, both 
government and society shouldn\'t overlook the suffering and 
humiliation the emigrants and their relatives go through.\" 
 
\"Although we can\'t expect, at least in a short term, that no 
Honduran flees the country due to the lack of opportunities 
here, our authorities should join forces with other 
countries of the region to negotiate agreements with the 
United States to allow legal migration of Hondurans who 
would work temporarily in the U.S.  Such an effort would 
save us a lot of tears and frustration.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"20602","9/14/2004 15:30","04TEGUCIGALPA2049","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa926","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/T/GIC (CLACOVEY); WHA/PDA (OHILTON) 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL/LP, AND DRL/PHD 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
DOJ FOR CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/CAO AND TIP OFFICER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, OEXC, PHUM, SMIG, ELAB, KCRM, KWMN, HO 
SUBJECT: EVALUATION OF U.S. SPEAKER ON TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS: MARIA JOSE T. FLETCHER, TRACKER NO. 21830 
 
REF:  Tegucigalpa 00926 
 
A.  Name of Speaker/Date of Program: Maria Jose T. Fletcher, 
supervising attorney in the Florida Immigration Advocacy 
Center (FIAC) and the director of LUCHA: A Women\'s Legal 
Project, returned to Honduras August 18-21, 2004, for a 
second series of seminars on trafficking in persons (TIP), 
sponsored by the Office of the Honduran Delegate to the OAS 
Inter-American Commission of Women (ICW). 
 
B.  Summary of Topics/Venues/Audiences:  Post invited Dr. 
Fletcher to return as the keynote speaker at the seminars on 
\"Prevention of the Commercial Sexual Exploitation and 
Trafficking of Children and Adolescents in Honduras\" 
organized by the Office of the Honduran Delegate to the OAS 
Inter-American Commission of Women, Ambassador Soledad de 
Ramirez.  The seminars were held at hotels in the northern 
cities of Puerto Cortes, Central America\'s main port on the 
Caribbean, and Tela, a mayor tourist area.  Both cities are 
vulnerable areas with relatively high levels of commercial 
sexual exploitation of children (CSEC) and women. 
Approximately 80 participants attended the seminar in each 
city and included representatives from the local, 
departmental and national government, the Honduran Congress, 
NGOs working in this area, law enforcement, tourism sector, 
civil society, and the media.  PAS arranged several press 
events for Dr. Fletcher before, during, and after the 
seminars, which provided an opportunity for the Honduran 
authorities and public to understand of the importance the 
USG puts on fighting this transnational crime. 
 
During her presentations, Dr. Fletcher discussed the 
difference among illegal immigration, TIP, and alien 
smuggling, and drew on her own experience in dealing with a 
number of cases.  She discussed how the U.S. system works, 
from identifying the victims to protecting and treating them 
to penalizing the criminals, always stressing the need for 
networking among all players.  Throughout her program, Dr. 
Fletcher called attention to the need for Honduras to work 
on stronger legislation and better implementation of the law 
to control traffickers, as well as the need to better health 
and education programs. 
 
Dr. Fletcher noted that Honduras was named as a Tier Two 
Watch List country in the Department of State\'s 2004 TIP 
report, and therefore that it needs to take action sooner 
rather than later to avoid sanctions.  She encouraged 
Honduran authorities, the private sector, NGOs, and the 
press to address the issues pointed out in the TIP report 
and to work together to produce positive changes.  She 
called for better application of the laws, networking with 
the NGOs to identify and register places where CSEC takes 
place, and the creation of databases to share information. 
 
The Post distributed the section on Honduras of the 2004 TIP 
Report, as well as a handout on generic mechanisms that 
should be taken to effectively combat TIP, and other IIP 
materials. 
 
C.  Effectiveness of Speaker:  Dr. Fletcher is an 
undisputable expert in her field who reaches her audience 
with simple and concrete information on the tragedy of this 
crime.  Her day-to-day contact with the victims and deep 
knowledge of the legal aspects of TIP, along with her 
excellent bilingual skills and warm personality, connect her 
immediately with her audience.  She is a forceful speaker 
who calls on her audience to overcome the obstacles that 
prevent the different sectors from working together to fight 
this abominable transnational crime. 
 
D.  Quality of IIP Support:  Excellent.  IIP/T/GIC Cindy 
LaCovey fully supported the Post to secure Maria Jose 
Fletcher for this program. 
 
E.  Results/Impact:  Outstanding.  TIP Speaker Maria Jose 
Fletcher\'s program enabled the Post to continue raising 
awareness among the Honduran audiences on the crime of TIP 
and to encourage effective coordination between the public 
and private sectors, civil society and the media on anti-TIP 
efforts.  Key GOH officials in the fight against TIP 
remembered her fondly from her last visit and greatly valued 
the opportunity to discuss TIP issues with her.  Post works 
closely with Ambassador Soledad de Ramirez to keep the TIP 
issue on the agenda. 
 
The program supported the MPP themes of Human Rights, 
Illegal Drugs, Economic Development, Regional Stability and 
Mutual Understanding.  The program drew the attention of the 
public and local authorities to the urgent need to combat 
TIP. 
 
Palmer 
"
"20613","9/14/2004 19:20","04TEGUCIGALPA2051","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES 
FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, G, AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, SMIG, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON AMBASSADOR CRESENCIO ARCOS AND 
DAS DAN FISK VISIT AND TPS, SEPTEMBER 13, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 9/11, entitled \"Optimism for TPS.\"  \"Cresencio Arcos, 
Director of International Affairs for the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security, and Dan Fisk, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
for Western Hemisphere Affairs, visited Tegucigalpa to 
participate in a forum analyzing the benefits of CAFTA.\" 
 
\"However, the most auspicious news given by Arcos during his 
visit was about the issue of our immigrants in the U.S.  He 
said that there are good possibilities that the U.S. will 
extend TPS once more, although he said the final decision 
will depend on the results of the electoral process in the 
U.S.\" 
 
\"For us, even though an extension is much better than 
nothing at all, it\'s more important to achieve a permanent 
and definite solution for our immigrants, to relieve them 
from the constant distress of not knowing what will happen 
to them every time their TPS expires.  If the Maduro 
administration achieves that, it\'ll definitely be a great 
hit.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"20614","9/14/2004 19:21","04TEGUCIGALPA2052","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, IIP/T/ES 
FOR S/CT AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PTER, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON 9/11, SEPTEMBER 13, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 9/11, entitled \"Three years later.\"  \"Three 
years after the devastating attacks against the Twin Towers 
and the Pentagon, symbols of the U.S. economic and military 
power, Islamic and other anti-Western extremists have caused 
chaos around the world, where terrorism grows while freedom 
decreases.\" 
 
\"If Osama bin Laden and the leaders of Al Qaeda wanted to 
unleash the irrational anger of the sole global superpower 
to get more followers out of the bloody remains of the war 
against terrorism, it appears that they\'ve accomplished that 
goal, perhaps beyond their own expectations.\" 
 
\"The U.S. failure in the `war\' against terrorism is evident. 
Neither the Americans nor any other person in the world is 
safe anymore.  Meanwhile, the main leaders of Al Qaeda 
haven\'t been defeated yet: they keep planning other 
terrorist acts, threatening the world, and laughing at the 
Americans\' `intelligence\' and their technology.  There\'s no 
doubt that 9/11 still has repercussions everywhere.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 9/11, entitled \"Three years after.\"  \"Thirty-six 
months after the most serious attacks on American soil, the 
balance still is unclear, while the risks and fear still 
remain because the structures of terrorism have become 
stronger and more diversified.  Now, terrorism may strike 
any place, any time, and we have to deal with it with 
determination because no one can feel totally safe, not even 
the children at their schools or the workers going to their 
jobs.\" 
 
\"A terrorist is a terrorist, with no distinction.  To yield 
to their demands isn\'t only a matter of weakness, but above 
all, an insult to the justice owed to the victims of evil 
and fanaticism.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"20616","9/14/2004 22:11","04TEGUCIGALPA2057","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1599|04TEGUCIGALPA1769","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND INR/B 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/14/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, EAID, ECON, SOCI, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: UNDER SIEGE FOR MONTHS, HONDURAN MINISTER OF 
EDUCATION FINALLY STEPS DOWN 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1769 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1599 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) During a national press conference on September 13, 
Honduran President Ricardo Maduro announced the resignation 
of the embattled Minister of Education Carlos Avila Molina. 
Maduro praised Avila\'s accomplishments and noted that Avila 
was leaving strictly for personal reasons.  Replacing Avila 
will be Roberto Martinez Lozano, General Manager of the 
National Autonomous Water and Sanitation Service (SANAA). 
Avila had been under pressure for months to step down due to 
his controversial stance against Honduras\' powerful teachers\' 
unions and his inability to successfully negotiate an end to 
the teachers\' strike this past July, which was eventually 
resolved by a trio of negotiators (ref B). 
 
2. (SBU)  Martinez\'s background is very similar to Avila\'s. 
Both hail from a private business with significant managerial 
experience and neither had a background in education. 
However, a critical difference is that Martinez is a 
well-established political figure who is widely acknowledged 
to be an effective politician.  Maduro broke with past 
tradition in naming a non-educator as Minister of Education, 
preferring someone with solid managerial experience in the 
private sector.  This irritated Honduras\' traditionally 
powerful teachers\' unions who from the beginning had a poor 
relationship with Avila.  Although Avila was controversial, 
to the point of being named the worst minister in 2002 by the 
Honduran media, Maduro always steadfastly supported him. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment:  Maduro\'s choice of Martinez to succeed 
Avila seems to reflect his desire to continue pressing for 
educational reform at the expense of entrenched interests in 
education.  (Note:  Although per capita spending on education 
in Honduras is high for regional standards, and was actually 
increased under Avila, Honduras continues to demonstrate poor 
results.  The teachers\' unions reluctance to reform education 
policy or renegotiate their high remuneration package are a 
considerable part of the problem (ref A).  End Note.)  While 
unpopular, Avila was willing to confront the teachers\' unions 
(something not done in the past) and carry the water for the 
administration in the lead-up to the confrontations with 
these unions which led to the general strike (ref B).  In 
fact, the Ministry of Education under Avila was the first to 
push for corruption charges to be brought against a number of 
high-ranking teachers\' union members, causing some 
consternation among both the leadership and rank-and-file 
union members.  Maduro probably expects Martinez to continue 
to take a hard-line with the teachers and push for needed 
reforms.  The obvious hope is that Martinez will manage the 
politics more effectively.  End Comment 
 
4. (U) Biographic information:  Roberto Martinez Lozano was 
born May 16, 1951, in Arenal, Honduras.  He holds a degree in 
civil engineering from the National Autonomous University of 
Honduras (UNAH), although he has primarily worked in business 
and government.  Martinez rose as high as one of three Vice 
Presidents under Nationalist Party President Rafael Callejas. 
 At one point, he considered running for president himself 
but he was never able to garner much support.  Martinez is 
considered an able manager.  He prefers to surround himself 
with capable technocrats rather than political lackeys and 
received high marks for his positive working relationship 
with the strong SANAA labor union. 
 
5. (C)   Martinez was tainted with corruption charges during 
the late 1980s, primarily in association with his management 
of COPECO (the Honduran Emergency Management Agency), a 
notorious patronage operation at the time under Callejas, 
before becoming a Vice President. 
Palmer 
"
"20696","9/16/2004 20:32","04TEGUCIGALPA2063","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002063 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO SARI, OF/STEFFICK, BOND, HUTCHINSON, 
NTRM/BERGMANN 
DEA MEXICO FOR HOLIFIELD, BAEZA, GARAY AND WHITE 
DEA BOGOTA PLS PASS TO CARTAGENA RO FOR FISCHER 
STATE FOR INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: N/A 
SUBJECT: WEAPON SEIZURE; 
TI-00-0003/WEC1F;GARCIA-MONTES,CARLOS 
CCX:ZU-04-0024/UEC1I;NARVAES-ALTAMAR, JUAN CARLOS 
 
REF: A. BOGOTA TWX 07868 DATED 091639ZAUG04 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA TWX 01712 DATED 042236ZAUG04 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA TWX 01588 DATED 281320ZMAY02 
 
1. (SBU) On August 20, 2004, members of the Honduran police 
and Prosecutors office found another arsenal of weapons from 
a residence near Zamorano, Honduras (HD) belonging to Carlos 
GARCIA-Montes (NADDIS 4539661), who was murdered in 
Bocagrande, Colombia (CB) (near Cartagena, CB) on July 14, 
2004. From hereforth GARCIA-Montes will be referred to as 
MONTES.  The following weapons and serial numbers were 
extracted from a buried hole localized in the house under the 
foundation slab at the Zamorano property: 
 
1 x MG-50M2 (50 cal - heavy barrel), Serial Number (S/N) P/N 
7265636, manufacturer (MFG): Saco Defense Systems Division, 
March 1983 
 
2 x Colt 
 
A.  AR-15, S/N: 618316 
B.  M16AL: S/N unknown 
 
18 x FAL (cal 7.6) 
 
A.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 15048,Receiver#: 853913 
B.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 15074, Receiver#: 853939 
C.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 17305 
D.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 17383 
E.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 17741 
F.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 6255 
G.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 16939 
H.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 14525 
I.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 15575 
J.  MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 15359 
K.  MFG: Argentina, S/N: 113734 
L.  MFG: Argentina, S/N: 109586 (Paratrooper Version) 
M.  MFG: Argentina, S/N: 113716 (Paratrooper Version), 
Possibly a Honduran Police weapon because of tape marking 
indicating it was defective. 
N.  MFG: Unknown, S/N: 14799, Contained initials: 
\"FSP\"indicating it belonged to the pre-1997 Honduran Police 
(Previous Army). 
O. MFG: Argentina, S/N: 112130 (Paratrooper Version), stock 
missing. 
P. MFG: Hestal, Belgium, S/N: 16780, tape marking indicates 
it was likely a Honduran Police weapon. 
Q. MFG: Unknown, S/N: 14610 & 13956, Double serial numbers 
indicate this may have been a Contra War weapon that was 
taken and used by the Honduran Police. 
R. MFG: Unknown, S/N: 1262 & 17164, Double serial numbers 
indicate this may have been a Contra War weapon that was 
taken and used by the Honduran Police 
 
16 x MG-32 (7.62) 
 
A.  S/N: 1095, secondary S/N on rear bolt: 2534, Germany 1944 
B.  S/N: 6059, Germany 1939 
C.  S/N: 4234, Germany 1940 
D.  S/N: 9430, Germany 1940 
E.  S/N: 4293, Germany 
F.  S/N: 3421, Germany 1941 
G.  S/N: 4393, Germany 
H.  S/N: 2467, Germany 
I.  S/N: 3203, Germany 1943 
J.  S/N: 3445, Germany 1937 
K.  S/N: 3890, Germany 
L.  S/N: 3142, Germany 
M.  S/N: 3972, Germany 
N.  S/N: 887,  Germany 1942 
O.  S/N: 4073, Germany 1945 
P.  S/N: 5765, Germany 1942 
 
3 x UZI (9mm) 
 
A. MFG: Israel, S/N: 078848 
B. MFG: Israel, S/N: 079120 
C. MFG: Herstal, Belgium, S/N: 0464 
 
2 x Port-Said (salmopal - 9mm) 
 
A. MFG: Egypt, S/N 71001591 
B. MFG: Egypt, S/N 7100159 
 
4 x MG-42 (7.62) 
 
A. MFG: Germany, S/N 01015 (partial) 
B. MFG: Germany, 8113-14142 
C. MFG: Germany, (none found) 
D. MFG: Germany, 4859D 
 
2 x M60 (7.72 cal) 
 
A. possible S/N 72690239 
B. possible S/N 7792898 
 
4 x AK-47 (7.62 x 39) 
 
A. MFG (possibly Soviet) S/N 1985PZ8760 
B. MFG (possibly Chinese) S/N 2495 
C. MFG unknown, S/N 1985SP27243 (folding stock) 
D. MFG unknown, S/N 1933 (partial) 
 
7 x RPG-7V 
 
A. MFG in 1966, S/N NrDB217 
B. MFG in 1967, S/N NrGA081 
C. MFG in 1969, S/N NrAL836 
D. MFG in 1967, S/N Nr68798 
E. MFG in 1967, S/N NrGA716 
F. MFG in 1966, S/N NrGA721 
G. MFG in 1982, (2 numbers stamped on handle: 964 and 620) 
 
3 x RPG-7B (The following S/N are an interpretation of 
Russian lettering) 
 
A. MFG unknown, S/N AB2510 
B. MFG in 1967, S/N AX858 
C. MFG unknown, S/N BA2522 
 
1 x unknown weapon with Italian lettering and S/N of SHE125458 
 
2.  (SBU) This large weapon seizure is another iteration in a 
complex conspiracy connecting MONTES and Geovani MEJIA, AKA: 
Ethalson Geovanny MEJIA-Hoy (a Colombian weapons trafficker 
in Honduras), allied along family lines with Honduran legal 
representatives and members of the Honduran Judiciary. 
 
3. (SBU) Per ref B, Geovanni MEJIA (NADDIS 5435631) was 
detained on July 28, 2004, by Honduran authorities based on a 
Colombian arrest warrant.  Later that evening, Honduran Judge 
Servin Antonio RUIZ-Lobo, (NADDIS NEGATIVE) claiming to be 
acting on behalf of Supreme Court Magistrate Nicolas 
GARCIA-Sorto, ordered MEJIA\'s release.  RUIZ based his 
decision on the view that there were \"problems\" with the 
Colombian arrest warrant, therefore MEJIA could not be held. 
MEJIA was defended by his live-in \"girl friend\" attorney 
Gloria Maritza GARCIA-Suarez (NADDIS NEGATIVE) who 
facilitated MEJIA\'s release. 
 
4. (SBU) Both MEJIA and GARCIA have been linked to MONTES. 
Per ref A, on July 26, 2004, a Colombian National Police 
(CNP) maritime boat patrol on patrol near Jhonny Cay,(a small 
key off San Andres Island) seized 59 automatic weapons and 12 
RPGs with accompanying rockets from a boat in the area.  A 
Colombian identified as Juan Carlos NARVAEZ-Altamar who was 
arrested at the scene implicated MEJIA and GARCIA as the 
owners of the weapons.  NARVAEZ also indicated the weapons 
were destined for use by the Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia 
(AUC).  NARVAEZ told police that NARVAEZ formerly worked for 
MONTES, who was recently murdered in the area of Cartagena, 
CB. 
 
5. (SBU) According to the March 17, 2004, edition of El 
Heraldo, GARCIA stated she knew nothing of a guns for drugs 
conspiracy between herself, MONTES, and MEJIA as indicated by 
Fiscal Doris Aguilar, but did admit to defending MONTES in 
the past.  It was also reported (ref A) that GARCIA may be 
the niece or otherwise related to Honduran Supreme Court 
Justice Nicolas GARCIA-Sorto who reportedly influenced RUIZ 
to have MEJIA released. 
 
6. (U) Questions concerning this cable can be directed to 
Acting C/A Ivan Rios, S/A Tony Sanes, or I/A John Domingue at 
(301)985-9321. 
 
7. (U) Pursuant to the DEA Agents manual, section 6242.11, 
this twx is submitted in lieu of a DEA-6. 
 
INDEXING 
 
1. MONTES, Carlos Pedro - NADDIS 4539661 
 
2. MEJIA, Geovanni - NADDIS 5435631 
   AKA: Ethalson Geovany Mejia-Hoy 
   POB: Colombia 
   Associate: Gloria Maritza Garcia-Suarez 
 
3. RUIZ-Lobo, Servin Antonio - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
 
4. GARCIA-Suarez, Gloria Maritza - NADDIS PENDING 
   Associate: Ethalson Geovany Mejia-Hoy 
 
 
Palmer 
"
"20790","9/20/2004 19:12","04TEGUCIGALPA2092","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04STATE185263","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/IP/WHA, S/CT, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2014 
TAGS: ASEC, PTER, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: SECURITY ENVIRONMENT PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE (SEPQ) 
FOR HONDURAS 
 
REF: A. STATE 185263 
 
     B. TEGUC 01472 
     C. TEGUC 01439 
     D. TEGUC 00542 
 
Classified By: DCM Roger Pierce, Reason 1.5 (C) and (D) 
 
1. (U) The following responses are keyed to the Security 
Environment Profile Questionnaire (ref A). 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
 
1. (SBU)  Demonstrations: 
 
(1-A.)  Yes.  Additionally, there are a number of 
organizations and groups under the loose collective 
leadership of (and affiliated with) the Bloque Popular that 
have been carrying out anti-American demonstrations, as well 
as demonstrations targeting local issues.  The following 
organizations have been involved in anti-American political 
activities to varying degrees.  They are listed in 
alphabetical order, utilizing Spanish acronyms where 
applicable. 
 
- ARTISTAS DE LA UNAH 
Artists of the National Autonomous University of 
Honduras (UNAH) 
 
- BLOQUE POPULAR 
Popular Block 
 
- COCOH 
Farmers\' Cooperatives Union 
 
- CODECOH 
Honduran Consumer Protection Committee 
 
- CODEH 
Honduran Committee for Human Rights 
 
- COFADEH 
Honduran Committee of Family Members of the 
Detained and Disappeared 
 
- COHAPAZ 
Honduran Committee for Action for Peace 
 
- COLPROSUMAH 
Honduran Professional Teachers College 
 
- COMPA-H 
People of the Americas Convergence Movement 
(COMPA)- Honduras 
 
- COPEMH 
Honduran Association of Secondary School Teachers 
 
- COPINH 
Civic Council of Popular Organizations and 
Indigenous Groups of Honduras (also appears as COPIN) 
 
- COPRUMH 
Honduran Professional Association Teachers\' Union 
 
- CGT 
General Workers Central (the largest of Honduras\' three 
national labor confederations) 
 
- CTH 
Confederation of Honduran Workers (probably, the strongest of 
the three national labor confederations) 
 
- CUTH 
United Confederation of Honduran Workers (the most left of 
the three national labor confederations) 
 
- CRRP 
Regional Center for Popular Resistance (associated with 
Bloque Popular and FUTH) 
 
- FPR 
Popular Revolution Forces, A shadowy alleged revolutionary 
group.  See Reftel C for details. 
 
- FUTH 
United Federation of Honduran Workers (the largest component 
of CUTH, above) 
 
- FSM 
Feminist Movement (details TBD) 
 
- FUR 
University Revolutionary Front 
 
- GRUPO LOS NECIOS DE LA UNAH 
UNAH Fools Group - Activist group in UNAH that \"cheerleads\" 
and motivates demos 
- MEH 
Honduran Student Movement 
- PARTIDO DE LOS TRABAJADORES DE LA FACULTAD DE PEDAGOGIA DE 
LA UNAH 
Teaching Faculty Workers\' Party of UNAH 
- RADIO GUALCHO 
Leftist/Activist radio station (1510Mhz) that works 
closely with Bloque Popular and is actively involved in 
most demonstrations 
 
- REPRESENTANTE DE FRENTE Y REFORMA DE LA UNAH 
Reform Front Representative of UNAH 
 
- SERUNAH 
New UNAH coalition group, like Bloque Popular 
 
- SETROINFOP 
Details Needed 
 
- SITRAINA 
National Agrarian Institute Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAIHSS 
Institute of Social Security Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAUNAH 
UNAH Workers\' Union 
 
- SITRAUPEN 
A Workers\' Union (details needed) 
 
- STIBYS 
Beverage and Associated Industries Workers\' Union 
(plays a key organizing and logistics role for many 
demos)- Leader of STIBYS is also the leader of the Popular 
Block. 
 
- SITRAPANI 
Child Welfare Association Workers\' Union 
 
- UD 
Democratic Unification Party (remnants of the Communist Party 
of Honduras and other former Marxist parties; represented in 
the National Congress) 
 
- UNAH 
National Autonomous University of Honduras 
 
- URP 
Revolutionary People\'s Union 
 
NOTE: The most fervent anti-U.S. groups are: MEH, URP, UD, 
Bloque Popular, STIBYS, COPINH and COMPA-H.  The following 
groups have committed and participated in violent acts 
against the Honduran Government and other entities:  Bloque 
Popular, COPINH, Democratic Unification Party (UD) and The 
Revolutionary People\'s Union (URP). 
 
(1-B.) Yes.  There have been 53 demonstrations in Tegucigalpa 
since September 2003.  While not all demonstrations are 
directed against the U.S. Government, almost all 
demonstrations have some undertone of anti-U.S. sentiment. 
 
Demo dates:  09/04/03, 09/05/03, 09/11/03, 09/16/03, 
09/17/03, 09/19/03, 10/02/03, 10/09/03, 10/29/03, 11/05/03, 
11/20/03, 11/21/03, 11/26/03, 11/27/03, 11/28/03, 12/08/03, 
12/11/03, 12/17/03, 12/19/03, 01/22/04, 02/06/04, 02/18/04, 
03/02/04, 03/20/04, 04/01/04, 04/14/04, 04/15/04, 04/21/04, 
04/29/04, 05/01/04, 05/03/04, 05/10/04, 05/20/04, 05/24/04, 
05/27/04, 06/01/04, 06/03/04, 06/04/04, 06/10/04, 06/14/04, 
06/15/04, 06/20/04, 06/22/04, 06/24/04, 06/25/04, 06/30/04, 
06/30/04, 07/01/04, 07/03/04, 07/08/04, 07/16/04, 08/11/04, 
08/26/04 
 
(1-C.)  About half of the demonstrations listed above have 
taken place at or near U.S. Mission facilities. 
 
(1-D.)  The size of anti-American demonstrations at the 
Embassy varies from twenty to over three hundred 
participants.  The larger demos usually consist of supporters 
from six to more than twelve different organizations, which 
operate as a loosely structured coalition under the guidance 
of Bloque Popular. 
 
(1-E.)  While there are demonstrations based on local issues, 
such as civil service salaries, privatization, IMF 
requirements, etc., U.S. actions in Iraq and the Central 
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), and U.S. involvement 
in Venezuela and Haiti have become the current focus.  The 
following statements, demands, and gestures have been made 
repeatedly during past demos at the Embassy:  No to war in 
Iraq, No to war, Stop Plan Colombia, Pro-Human rights, World 
Peace, Stop Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), 
U.S. Forces out of Honduras (Soto Cano AB), burning U.S. 
flags, U.S. Military out of Cuba, U.S. destroy your WMD, Stop 
intervention in Venezuela, Stop Standard Fruit exploiting the 
indigenous people, No to CAFTA, No to privatization, Stop 
intervention in Haiti. 
 
(1-F.)  Generally peaceful, but demonstrators have burned 
U.S. flags, painted slogans on Mission outer perimeter walls 
and utilized homemade mortars to detonate large fireworks 
charges that are propelled high into the air before exploding. 
 
(1-G.)  N/A. 
 
(1-H.)  N/A. 
 
(1-I.)  Yes. 
 
(1-J.)  Yes.  Occasionally they will pass by the Embassy. 
 
(1-K.)  The size varies from a few hundred to 5,000 - 10,000 
people. 
 
(1-L.)  Generally peaceful but fences, grillwork and windows 
have been destroyed near the National Congress and many tires 
burned.  At times, suspected plain-clothes police have been 
held and beaten by hard-core protesters within the 
demonstrations. 
 
On occasion, small groups of thug-like cadre have 
initiated/instigated violence against static police guards by 
attempting to strike them in the lower leg areas not 
protected by riot shields, with heavy placard poles with 
large nails embedded in the ends.  Several police officials 
have been injured in unsuccessful attempts to get the police 
to use force. 
 
(1-M.)  N/A. 
 
2. (SBU)  Macro Conflict Conditions: 
 
(2-A.)  NO. 
 
(2-B.)  N/A. 
 
(2-C.)  N/A. 
 
(2-D.)  N/A. 
 
3. (SBU)  Host Country Capabilities: 
 
(3-A.)  No. 
 
(3-B.)  Yes.  Training by US Border Patrol(BorTac) Teams 
good, but GOH security infrastructure needs major 
improvements. 
 
(3-C.)  Yes. 
 
(3-D.)  No.  However, GOH intelligence units have an 
institutional awareness of and a modest capability of 
penetrating indigenous radical groups. 
 
(3-E.)  Yes. 
 
(3-F.)  No. 
 
(3-G.)  Yes. 
 
(3-H.)  Average/Below Average. 
 
(3-I.)  Average/Ineffective. 
 
(3-J.)  Average/Ineffective.  A relatively new unit within 
the Ministry of Public Security called the Frontier Police 
has been established to handle border patrol duties.  The 
unit is making positive steps towards border control but lack 
of funding and manpower are limiting the effectiveness of the 
unit. 
 
4. (SBU) Indigenous Terrorism-Anti American Terrorist Groups: 
 
 
(4-A.)  No. 
 
(4-B.)  N/A. 
 
(4-C.)  N/A. 
 
(4-D.)  N/A. 
(4-E.)  N/A. 
(4-F.)  N/A. 
(4-G.)  N/A. 
 
(4-H.)  N/A. 
 
5. (SBU)  Other Indigenous Terrorist Groups: 
 
(5-A.)  No. 
 
(5-B.)  N/A. 
 
(5-C.)  N/A. 
 
(5-D.)  N/A. 
 
(5-E.)  N/A. 
 
6. (C/NF) Transnational Terrorism-Transnational Terrorist 
Indicators: 
 
(6-A.)  No.  However, there are rumors that there are Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty (ETA), IRA, and Chiapas (Zapatistas) 
sympathizers in Honduras who could be involved in advising 
indigenous groups.  Some Hondurans are studying in Cuba and 
also conceivably could be receiving training in subversion 
and terrorism, although it is more likely they are being 
indoctrinated as agents of influence.  As this Cuban program 
for Hondurans is only a few years old, there have been no 
indications that such training is taking place. 
 
(6-B.)  N/A. 
 
(6-C.)  N/A. 
 
(6-D.)  N/A and NO. 
 
(6-E.)  N/A. 
 
(6-F.)  The only known hostile intelligence presence of note 
is Cuban.  While the Cuban mission appears to have extensive 
contacts with leftists and indigenous groups, there is no 
indication they are planning or supporting terrorism. 
 
(6-H.)  There is no shortage of weapons in Honduras.  It 
would also not be difficult for hostile terrorist elements to 
import weapons and/or explosives from neighboring countries. 
Palmer 
"
"20791","9/20/2004 20:16","04TEGUCIGALPA2093","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa1599","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002093 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
DOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR DDouglass 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, ETRD, ELAB, EINV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras:  President Gives Economic Overview 
 
REF: A. Tegucigalpa 1599 
 
     B. Tegucigalpa 2057 
     C. Tegucigalpa 1984 
 
1.  Summary: On September 9, at the opening of an event to 
promote DR-CAFTA, President Ricardo Maduro presented a 
sweeping overview of the state of the Honduran economy.  As 
usual, President Maduro emphasized what he sees as the 
accomplishments of his administration - reining in 
government spending, improved public security, increased 
investment, and accelerated economic growth - yet also spoke 
frankly of the challenges that remain, specifically the need 
for continued fiscal discipline and the weakness of the 
financial sector.  End summary. 
 
2.  Leaving his notes on the table, President Ricardo Maduro 
delivered a wide-ranging extemporaneous overview of the 
Honduran economy in his keynote address to the recent 
Caribbean Central America Action (CCAA) conference on the DR- 
CAFTA trade agreement.  In his 30-minute address to the 
September 9 gathering, Maduro stressed sustained growth 
through continuity of policy, and highlighted his 
administration\'s economic programs and priorities.  Though 
the presidential primaries are more than five months away, 
the political season has already begun in earnest in 
Tegucigalpa.  Maduro himself is ineligible under the 
Honduran Constitution to stand for another term, but his 
message of continuity was clearly calibrated to support the 
National Party candidate (according to recent polls likely 
to be Tegucigalpa Mayor Miguel Pastor or President of 
Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo) as next year\'s elections 
approach. 
 
3.  Maduro opened by saying that poverty reduction through 
job creation and sustained economic growth continue to be 
the organizing principles behind the GOH economic policy. 
Achieving these objectives will require significant foreign 
and domestic investment.  Maduro estimated that to reach an 
annual growth rate of 6 percent (slightly over 3 percent in 
per capita terms) Honduras must attract over $3 billion of 
investment per year for the next 20 years.  Continued moves 
toward regional integration, such as DR-CAFTA, will be 
critical to attracting this investment, as will be overall 
confidence in GOH economic stewardship.  For example, the 
GOH has been relatively successful in containing inflation, 
holding it to just 6.8 percent in 2003.  A spike in 
annualized inflation for 2004 (year to date) to 
approximately 9 percent has the GOH and IMF appropriately 
concerned, though Maduro attributed much of this rise to 
higher energy prices. 
 
4.  Maduro highlighted the need for stability of remittances 
flows from Hondurans abroad, primarily in the United States, 
calling them \"fundamental\" to the Honduran economy.  He 
estimated that current remittances total nearly $1 billion 
per year, up 28 percent over last year and equivalent to 
nearly 15 percent of Honduras\' GDP.  According to Maduro, 
these flows directly or indirectly assist half of the 
population of Honduras.  (Note:  Foreign Minister Leonidas 
Rosa Bautista is conducting meetings in Washington September 
16-17 to press for U.S. renewal of Temporary Protected 
Status (TPS) for Hondurans who claim they cannot return to 
Honduras due to the damage wrought by the 1998 Hurricane 
Mitch.  Estimates of the number of Hondurans currently in 
the U.S. range from 650,000 to nearly 1 million, but of 
those only 87,000 benefit from TPS.  The continued strong 
growth in total remittances is consistent with the trend in 
remittances to Honduras over the last several years, and 
with similar growth trends seen in other Central American 
countries.  This growth is variously attributed to increased 
numbers of expatriate Hondurans, economic growth in the 
U.S., increased social and economic stability of Hondurans 
resident in the U.S., and decreasing remittance costs.  End 
note.) 
 
5.  Maduro stressed the need to continue to advance in 
improving the investment climate, noting that if this 
process is done badly, the resulting growth will not be 
sustainable in the long term.  He said there is a continuing 
need for meaningful civil service reform, to promote the 
formation of a cadre of experienced technical staff within 
the GOH ministries.  The current trend, to replace the 
entire staff right down to the char force after each 
election, robs the GOH of institutional memory, setting back 
the pace of progress and undermining hard-won reforms put in 
place by previous administrations.  (Note:  The exception to 
this rule appears to be the Central Bank, which, largely 
because it is outside the existing civil service system, 
manages to retain a significant portion of its technical 
staff from administration to administration.  The 18 month- 
old Supreme Accounts Tribunal (TSC), roughly equivalent to 
the U.S. GAO, has internalized this lesson and in its 
recently completed hiring and retention guidelines has 
instituted protections for its staff (septel, forthcoming). 
Other ministries are looking for models they can adopt that 
would provide their senior technical staff with similar 
stability (septel, forthcoming).  The Maduro Administration, 
however, has not made it a priority to pass a new civil 
service law to end this problem throughout the GOH.  End 
note.) 
 
6.  Maduro, elected on a law-and-order platform, also 
recognized that public security remains a concern for 
investors.  He cited the dramatic drop under his 
administration in bank robberies and carjackings, and vowed 
to continue to improve public safety.  His government 
enacted anti-gang (\"maras\") legislation over a year ago, he 
said, and Honduran police and military forces now recognize 
local and transnational criminal gangs as a genuine and 
significant threat to social stability and sustained 
economic growth. 
 
7.  Fiscal discipline, a centerpiece of the GOH agreement 
with the IMF, will continue to challenge a government 
struggling to balance development needs with a stable and 
welcoming investment climate.  Maduro noted that a primary 
GOH goal is to reduce the portion of the federal budget 
dedicated to government employee salaries from its current 
11 percent to below 8 percent over the next four years. 
(This has sparked protests from the powerful teachers\' 
unions, including a six-week walkout in June and July 
(reftel A) and a protest march held on September 15, which 
precipitated the recent change in Ministers of Education 
(reftel B)).  The 2005 budget, submitted on September 14 and 
totaling approximately $2.1 billion, remains faithful to 
these goals, according to Vice Minister of the Presidency 
Rocio Tabora.  Post has not yet had an opportunity to review 
the proposed budget, but notes that in real terms the total 
represents only modest growth over last year\'s $1.92 billion 
budget.  On September 14, Tabora told EconOff that much of 
this apparent growth is actually an artifact of accounting 
changes, with bilateral and multilateral donations for the 
first time being accounted for within the budget. 
 
8.  Turning briefly to the revenue side of the budget, 
Maduro underscored progress to date in improving tax 
collection and expanding the tax base, with the intent of 
using those additional revenues to reduce the deficit 
without having to raise taxes on the Honduran public. 
(While Maduro did not cite the USG in this speech, Post 
notes that this success is largely the result of efforts by 
a Treasury and USAID-sponsored technical advisory program 
which includes a taxation resident advisor in the Honduran 
tax authority (the DEI).  The August 20 signing ceremony for 
that program\'s annual renewal, usually conducted at the 
working level, became instead a Presidential signing 
ceremony at Maduro\'s request, with extensive press coverage 
of Maduro\'s remarks praising the program.) 
 
9.  The greatest vulnerability, the President said, is the 
weakness of the financial sector.  While Honduras has been 
successful in attracting investment into the energy and 
telecommunications sectors, continued future investment 
inflows will require increased confidence in the financial 
system.  To move in this direction, as well as to comply 
with IMF program requirements, the GOH is in the process of 
passing four key financial laws, covering reforms of the 
Central Bank, the bank regulator (the CNBS), the bank 
insurance system (FOSEDE), and a sweeping reform of the 
financial sector.  The first three have been approved by 
Congress and once printed in the GOH federal register will 
become law (reftel C).  The fourth and key reform is 
currently in mark-up (the third of three required 
congressional debates), but is making progress, according to 
banking sector contacts. 
 
10.  Comment:  Maduro\'s remarks, broadly consistent with the 
priorities laid out in the GOH poverty reduction strategy 
and the IMF agreement, hit many of the right notes for both 
his domestic and international audiences.  There was little 
new here, but in some ways the medium was the message - the 
consistency of his message reinforced his message of 
consistency.  However, his almost one hour late arrival at 
the conference, as well as the long and sometimes unfocused 
extemporaneous speech, detracted from the message he was 
trying to get across.  As a Stanford-educated economist, 
Maduro is well aware of the steps he must take to bring his 
ambitious plan to fruition.  He is also clearly aware that 
this process will extend well beyond the end of his term in 
2005.  Vigilance and discipline in adhering to these goals 
as we head into the electoral season and beyond will be 
Maduro\'s great challenge.  Post is reassured by his words, 
but will watch with interest to see if the GOH can marshal 
the necessary political will to put those words into action. 
End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"20827","9/21/2004 14:41","04TEGUCIGALPA2097","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/RM, INL/LP, G/TIP, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, AFIN, HO 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR APPROVAL TO SIGN LOA AMMENDMENT TEXT 
ON TIP AND PROVIDE ADVICE OF ALLOTMENT 
 
 
1. Post requests INL approval of the following LOA 
Amendment text on trafficking in persons (TIP).  Post 
tentatively would like to sign this LOA with the 
Government of Honduras (GOH) on September 24, 2004. 
Please provide approval of text, advice of allotment, and 
authorization to sign. 
 
2.  Begin proposed text of LOA Amendment. 
 
MODIFICATION/AMENDMENT TO THE LETTER OF AGREEMENT ON 
NARCOTICS CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT OF June 17, 2003 
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF HONDURAS 
 
I.  GENERAL 
 
The Government of the United States of America (USG), 
represented by Ambassador Larry Palmer, and the Government 
of Honduras, represented by Minister of Public Security, 
Oscar Arturo Alvarez, (each individually, a \"Party.\" Or 
collectively, the Parties\") jointly agree to modify and 
amend the letter of agreement between the USG and the 
Government of Honduras, signed June 17, 2003 (the 
\"Agreement\") in the following respect: 
 
To provide additional funds in the amount specified in the 
cover sheet ($320,000) to establish and support with 
technical assistance, training, equipment and supplies 
projects designed to develop, enhance and improve law 
enforcement and other projects in the efforts against 
trafficking in persons (TIP). 
 
The full project description and project goals are 
described in Sections II and III below.  All other 
obligations, terms, and conditions contained in the letter 
of agreement dated June 17, 2003 shall remain applicable 
and in full force and effect. 
 
II.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
This project is designed to facilitate strengthened 
Honduran trafficking in persons laws, institutionalization 
of a specific police investigative unit working in 
cooperation with prosecutors and judges focused on TIP and 
TIP related crimes, and a public awareness campaign that 
will help bring the justice sector and NGO community 
closer together in the fight against trafficking in 
persons.  Toward that goal, the USG and the Government of 
Honduras will take actions and commit resources on an 
annual basis as authorized by their respective legislative 
processes to support this effort. 
 
Actions to be taken include retaining the services of 
expert consultants and instructors to travel to Honduras 
to train and provide technical assistance in the area of 
TIP cases, facilitating regional TIP conference for 
investigators, purchase of equipment and supplies needed 
to improve the effectiveness of the TIP investigative unit 
and TIP prosecutors, as well as community projects to 
better inform local communities of the dangers of these 
types of crime. 
 
The planned life of this project is two years, following 
which time the Ministry of Public Security will have 
developed a strong working partnership with the Public 
Ministry and other investigative elements of the 
Government of Honduras and trafficking in persons crimes 
will be routinely presented for prosecution in accordance 
with the Criminal Procedure Code, and the evidence 
presented by the Ministry of Public Security and Public 
Ministry will be of a heightened standard to effectively 
prosecute TIP criminal activity. 
 
Provision of USG grant funding beyond the current fiscal 
year is conditioned upon satisfactory progress toward 
project goals and the availability of funds authorized and 
appropriated on a year-to-year basis by the U.S. Congress 
and approved by the U.S. Department of State, Bureau for 
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL). 
 
III.  Project Goal and Achievement Verification 
 
The specifics goals of this project are: (1) establishment 
and institutionalization of the Ministry of Public 
Security TIP investigative unit; (2) provision of 
technical assistance and training to the Ministry of 
Public Security and the Public Ministry in TIP related 
cases according to the most recent anti-TIP laws of 
Honduras; (3) provision of a well defined public awareness 
campaign that will reach the population that is most 
vulnerable to TIP crimes. 
 
Progress toward achievement of the project goal will be 
measured in terms of qualitative and quantitative 
indicators, including: (1) implementation and 
institutionalization of the Ministry of Public Security 
TIP investigative unit evidenced by the inclusion of this 
unit in the Honduran FY 2005 budget indicating full 
support for the unit; (2) based on previous years data, a 
15 percent increase in TIP and TIP-related cases which are 
investigated and brought to prosecution jointly in a task 
force environment by the Ministry of Public Security 
specialized units, the Public Ministry and other GOH Law 
enforcement agencies; and (3) implementation of a public 
information campaign which focuses on the providing a 
defined public awareness of the dangers of TIP crimes in 
the form of a nationwide media campaign which will be 
accessible to persons most susceptible to TIP related 
crimes. 
 
Done in duplicate at Tegucigalpa, Honduras, this 
28th day of September of 2004, in English and Spanish 
languages, both texts being equally authentic. 
 
For the Government of the     For the Government of 
United States of America      Honduras 
 
_________________________     ________________________ 
Ambassador Larry Palmer       Minister Oscar A. Alvarez 
 
 
End text. 
 
Palmer 
"
"20872","9/22/2004 21:21","04TEGUCIGALPA2123","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1690","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC, AND DS 
STATE FOR INL, INL/LP, INR/C, INR/AN/IAA, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG/ROL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCOR, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, PHUM, PINR, ASEC, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: THE DEMISE OF HONDURAS\' ANTI-CORRUPTION COUNCIL 
YET ANOTHER SIGN OF THE GOH\'S WEAK FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION 
 
REF: A. 04 TEGUCIGALPA 1690 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2844 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: Once heralded by President Ricardo Maduro as 
a success story in the fight against corruption, Honduras\' 
National Anti-Corruption Council (Consejo Nacional Anti 
Corrupcion - CNA) is about to fade from existence.  The 
Maduro Administration plans to coopt the CNA\'s operations by 
placing it within the GOH bureaucracy.  Roman Catholic 
Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez will likely resign as head of the 
CNA in October rather than remain as the figure-head leader 
of an ineffective institution.  With little real GOH support, 
frustrated members, and funding problems, the CNA never 
really lived up to its potential.  However, already under 
Transparency International\'s spotlight for its lackluster 
achievements in combating corruption to date, the GOH\'s 
proposed reorganization will hasten the CNA\'s demise and once 
again demonstrate the nation\'s weakness in combating 
corruption.  Stay tuned for one last media firestorm over who 
lost Honduras\' war on corruption. END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------- 
The CNA\'s Demise 
---------------- 
 
2. (U) On September 16, Honduran press reported the 
resignation of German Espinal, Executive Director of the CNA. 
 In public comments, Espinal lambasted the GOH for its 
lackluster commitment to combating corruption, stating that 
publicly the GOH talks about fighting corruption, but \"the 
reality is quite different.\"  Espinal apparently privately 
tendered his resignation to CNA Chairman, Roman Catholic 
Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez, in late August.  Espinal criticized 
the GOH for not funding the CNA, claiming that, rather than 
diminishing, corruption is increasing in Honduras.  Casting 
blame widely, Espinal criticized the GOH, both major 
political parties, police, and well-connected businessmen for 
allowing a culture of corruption to flourish in Honduras.  He 
added that the Attorney General\'s anti-corruption office in 
the Public Ministry (PM) and the Supreme Court of Accounts 
(Tribunal Superior De Cuentas - TSC) lacks the qualified 
personnel, technical expertise, and funding to effectively 
fight corruption in Honduras. 
 
3. (SBU) The CNA was conceived under the previous government 
of Liberal Party President Carlos Flores and its mandate was 
renewed by current President Ricardo Maduro.  The CNA\'s 
charge was to develop a national anti-corruption strategy and 
then help the GOH implement that strategy.  The CNA is 
composed of 14 prominent individuals representing Honduran 
civil society (some apparently hand-picked by Maduro for 
their fidelity to the Nationalist Party) and 14 senior GOH 
officials, although in reality far fewer members actually 
attended the CNA\'s monthly meetings or took an active 
interest in the organization.  While the CNA is officially 
headed by Cardinal Rodriguez, Espinal was responsible for its 
day-to-day activities. 
 
4. (SBU) The CNA did develop a national strategy, but its 
implementation fell short.  Lassitude among the CNA\'s 
members, insufficient funds, and lack of any concrete 
follow-on action by responsible GOH prosecuting and judicial 
officials all contribute to the CNA\'s poor performance.  Its 
most significant achievement has been to consistently call 
public attention to the nation\'s most blatant corrupt 
practices, such as government inaction against those 
responsible for massive bank failures.  Most of its 
credibility emanates from the moral authority of Cardinal 
Rodriguez. 
 
------------------ 
Cardinal Wants Out 
------------------ 
 
5. (SBU) In a September 9 meeting between the Cardinal and 
the Ambassador, visiting WHA Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan 
Fisk, and former Ambassador Cresencio Arcos, Director of 
International Affairs for the Department of Homeland 
Security, the Cardinal voiced his frustration with the GOH\'s 
commitment to fighting corruption, indicating his desire to 
resign as chairman of the CNA.  The Ambassador asked Cardinal 
Rodriguez to persevere another month until the CNA\'s future 
could be better assured.  The Cardinal\'s chief aide, Father 
Juan Jose Pineda also told PolCouns on August 30 that 
Cardinal Rodriguez will depart the CNA in October.  Pineda 
said the Cardinal was unhappy with the lack of concrete GOH 
support for the CNA and would not remain as a figure-head 
leader of an inactive and ineffective organization. 
 
6. (SBU) The CNA\'s small staff and other resources have been 
provided by international donors.  USAID has contributed 
roughly USD 25,000 to the CNA and the international donor 
community close to another USD 600,000.  The GOH\'s support 
has been limited to providing office space in a government 
building and one phone line.  (Comment:  Sadly, international 
donors have little to show for this investment.  End 
Comment.)  Maduro, and his Minister of the Presidency Luis 
Cosenza talked last year during a Transparency International 
country visit of increasing GOH funding for the CNA, but that 
never came to fruition. 
 
7. (SBU) International donor support for the CNA faltered due 
to the organization\'s inability to effect change and lack of 
a clear institutional mandate as the nation\'s leading 
anti-corruption entity.  Donors withheld future promises of 
financial support pending a reorganization of the CNA into an 
independent watch-dog organization managed by civil society. 
The GOH thwarted all civil society attempts at reorganization 
for over six months, preferring a plan to incorporate the CNA 
into the GOH, thus putting the organization under government 
control.  This deadlock contributed to recent speculation 
regarding the CNA\'s future.  (Comment: In ref B, Post 
highlighted the probable demise of the CNA if the donor 
community withdrew its support. End Comment). 
 
---------------------------------- 
CNA Not Alone In Being Ineffective 
---------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) In recent related public comments regarding the GOH\'s 
commitment to fighting corruption, Special Prosecutor for 
Corruption Soraya Morales, (who herself has received 
extensive training in the U.S. and whose office receives U.S. 
technical support) stated the GOH should close her office 
because of its ineffectiveness.  While Morales appears to be 
intent on bringing corruption cases to trial, she has 
privately confided to PolOff that her office\'s meager 
resources make it very difficult to effectively pursue cases. 
 She also indicated that her office does not receive 
sufficient support from top Public Ministry (PM) management, 
and in fact, at times is pressured by higher management to 
not pursue cases.  Apart from the challenges her office faces 
at the PM, Morales noted that even when the PM does move 
forward on corruption cases, they are inevitably thwarted by 
judicial interference or indifference. 
 
9. (SBU) To highlight the PM\'s ineffectiveness in prosecuting 
corruption cases, the Honduran press reports that in ten 
years of existence, the PM has only effectively prosecuted 
fifteen cases.  This statistic includes all corruption cases. 
 (Note: The GOH has not in recent memory convicted a single 
prominent individual on corruption charges, although a 
corrupt congressman was convicted on narcotrafficking 
charges.  End Note.)  Currently, the Special Prosecutors\' 
office for corruption at the PM is staffed with 15 corruption 
prosecutors, of which four are specifically dedicated to 
financial crimes, plus 13 auditors.  These individuals are 
responsible for all corruption/fraud cases in Honduras, both 
public and private. 
 
----------------------------------- 
The Partisan Finger-Pointing Begins 
----------------------------------- 
10. (U) Honduras\' first Attorney General, Liberal Party 
member Edmundo Orellana, who served under the Carlos Reina 
administration, also recently joined the fray.  In a 
September 17 interview with Honduran daily El Tiempo, 
Orellana castigated the GOH for its failure to combat 
corruption and questioned the GOH\'s true commitment to 
stemming corrupt practices.  In the interview, he highlighted 
Honduras\' failure to be an original signator to the UN\'s 
anti-corruption convention (among the very few Latin American 
and Caribbean countries not to sign at the original signing 
ceremony), the GOH\'s unwillingness to fund the CNA, and the 
comments of other disgruntled GOH officials tasked with 
fighting corruption.  These indicators, Orellana claimed, 
send a signal to the international community as to where the 
GOH truly stands on combating corruption. 
 
11. (U) In defense of Maduro\'s administration, Minister of 
the Presidency Luis Cosenza noted to El Tiempo that the GOH 
had no obligation to fund the CNA and that the Maduro 
administration was working on a proposal to fund a 
reorganized council.  (Note:  As highlighted in paragraph 
seven, this GOH proposed reorganization would stymie the 
independence and effectiveness of the CNA.  There are also 
rumors a reorganized CNA might fall under the Public 
Ministry.  End Note.)  He stated it is the GOH\'s desire that 
the international community continue to support a reorganized 
CNA. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Honduras\' Commitment to Combat Corruption Doubtful 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
12. (C) COMMENT: Post has commented extensively on the GOH\'s 
weak performance in combating corruption in Honduras and 
questioned the GOH\'s true commitment to doing so (refs A and 
B).  Recent troubles with the CNA and comments by 
disillusioned individuals directly involved in the fight 
against corruption illustrate how far Honduras still has to 
go. 
 
13 (C) COMMENT CONTINUED:  The Cardinal\'s pending resignation 
will certainly spark a media storm of public recrimination 
over who is responsible for the lagging fight against 
corruption in Honduras.  Post notes, however, there continues 
to exist broad-based support amongst the Honduran people for 
effective and more aggressive anti-corruption efforts.  As 
noted in ref B, if the GOH were to get serious about 
prosecuting a number of high-level, powerful, corrupt figures 
it would go a long way toward generating greater public 
support for government institutions and help break the 
current cycle of cynicism and despair about the inevitability 
of corruption in Honduras.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"20933","9/24/2004 10:30","04TEGUCIGALPA2722","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04USDAOTEGUCIGALPAHO021257ZNOV4","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA DAS FISK, WHA/CCA, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PRM, PRM/ENA, PRM/ECA, AND PRM/PRP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PREF, PGOV, PREL, MARR, CU, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SEEING INCREASING NUMBERS OF CUBAN 
RAFTERS; MOST USE COUNTRY AS WAY STATION TO THE U.S. 
 
REF: A. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA HO 021257Z NOV 04 
 
     B. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA HO 241030Z SEP 04 
 
1. (SBU) Honduras, for various reasons, is emerging as a new, 
preferred port for Cuban migrants by sea.  Primarily, 
Honduras acts as a way station for Cubans on their way to the 
U.S.  The route appears to usually be the same: migrants 
leave from Comaguey in the Santa Cruz province of Cuba, 
stopping for supplies and rest on Grand Cayman Islands, then 
continuing either to the Honduran Bay Islands or the north 
coast of Honduras, according to Government of Honduras (GOH) 
Immigration officials and local press reports. 
 
2. (SBU) There have been recent cases where Cuban migrants 
landed in the Honduran Swan Islands, which are even farther 
out to sea than the Bay Islands.  This new stopping point has 
created numerous problems for Honduran Immigration and the 
Honduran Navy, because there is neither the infrastructure 
nor the resources to deal with migrants who land in this 
remote location.  The only GOH presence on the Swan Islands 
is a small Navy detachment, which can barely feed itself, 
much less unanticipated visitors.  There are no immigration 
officials on the islands and basic communication with the 
mainland is sketchy. 
 
3. (U) Upon arrival in Honduran territory, the GOH has little 
to do with addressing the migrants\' day-to-day needs (the GOH 
lacks funds and facilities to do so).  Instead, while the 
migrants\' status is being established during first 60 days, 
the local NGO representative for the United Nations High 
Commission for Refugees (UNCHR) acts as a legal and 
humanitarian buffer, providing medical care, food, and 
shelter. 
 
4. (SBU) As a signatory to the various human rights 
conventions and the 1951 Convention for the Protection of 
Refugees, Honduran Immigration authorities must by law accept 
migrants who solicit refugee status, that is, until their 
individual circumstances are properly investigated.  Although 
each case is addressed individually, most of these migrants 
do not fulfill the requirements for refugee status.  Instead, 
based on the humanitarian or economic reasons of each 
migrant, the GOH often grants a different migrant status to 
each individual case, awarding migrants temporary or 
permanent residency, according to Honduran Immigration.  One 
status frequently granted by Immigration is territorial 
asylum, which is different from the status of political 
asylum given by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
5. (SBU) If the GOH does not grant residency, refugee, or 
some other status to the migrants, there are very few other 
options.  There is no formal immigration agreement between 
the GOH and the Government of Cuba (GOC).  In order for the 
GOH to deport migrants back to Cuba, they must request 
permission from the GOC.  These requests normally take 
between four and six months to process and are nearly always 
turned down.  As a result, there have been only a couple of 
cases where Cuban migrants voluntarily returned to Cuba, each 
time with the assistance of the Cuban Embassy in Honduras. 
 
6. (SBU) As of November 24, 140 Cuban rafters had landed on 
Honduran territory this year, double the number from 2003. 
(Another 13 landed in the Bay Islands the first week of 
December.)  Of those that have arrived this year, eighty 
percent have supposedly remained in Honduras, whereas the 
rest have moved on through Guatemala and Mexico in hopes of 
crossing the border into the U.S.  Honduran immigration 
officials tell EmbOffs, however, that almost all of the Cuban 
migrants (even those granted permission to stay long-term in 
Honduras) eventually try to immigrate, legally or illegally, 
to the U.S. 
Pierce 
"
"21302","10/5/2004 16:56","04TEGUCIGALPA2222","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PGOV, KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN POLICE DELIVER BLOW TO SUSPECTED 
NARCOTRAFFICKERS; SEIZE LOTS OF CASH 
 
 
1. (U) On October 2, Honduran police confiscated USD 
1,070,000 from suspected Honduran narcotraffickers near the 
city of San Pedro Sula (SPS) after discovering the cash 
during the search of a suspect truck at a police inspection 
stop.  The money was found concealed in spare tires inside a 
sealed compartment.  Police seized 107 packets containing USD 
10,000 each; all bills were USD 20 denomination.  There are 
reports of a few counterfeit bills among the cash. 
 
2. (SBU) According to Honduran press reports, prior to 
stopping at the police barrier, occupants of the truck, and a 
SUV possibly providing security for the truck, had apparently 
been in a fire-fight with members of another vehicle, 
resulting in a female occupant of the SUV being injured. 
When questioned by police, the vehicles\' occupants claimed 
they were the victims of an ambush.  Police, however, 
initially made no arrests.  (Note:  DEA reports that the 
vehicle\'s occupants left the scene in the SUV en route to a 
hospital in SPS prior to the search of the truck, thus 
accounting for no arrests being made.  End Note.)  Gladis 
Suyapa Castillo Hernandez, the wounded female in the SUV, is 
currently in a private clinic in SPS recovering from gunshot 
sounds.  The driver of the SUV, Juan Carlos Hernandez, has 
disappeared. Both suspects are Honduran nationals.  The 
driver of the truck remains unknown. 
 
3. (U) Organized Crime Special Prosecutor Doris Aguilar, 
convinced the money was intended to pay for a large drug 
shipment, intends to more fully investigate the case.  In the 
interim, Honduran authorities have charged Gladis Castillo 
with money laundering and police are reportedly waiting to 
interrogate her.  No visitors are being allowed into her 
hospital room.  Police, who have also issued an arrest 
warrant for the SUV\'s driver, Hernandez, believe that many 
other individuals may be involved. 
 
Pierce 
"
"21304","10/5/2004 19:17","04TEGUCIGALPA2223","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLAS 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
COMMERCE FOR MSIEGELMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: FAST-FOOD BOOM CONTINUES AS FIRST 
QUIZNOS OPENS 
 
 
1.     (SBU) Summary:  Honduras, fast-food sector continues 
to flourish and, with new entrant &Quiznos Sub,8 remains 
dominated by U.S. franchises.  Quiznos sees strong growth 
potential in Honduras, based on the strong market acceptance 
of U.S. brands and continuing economic growth.  Quiznos did 
not, however, benefit from an extremely generous tax 
exemption scheme under which many of the early entrants to 
the sector (based on the questionable justification that 
fast-food franchises boost tourism) received a ten-year tax 
holiday on income taxes, and a perpetual exemption from 
import duties on capital equipment and process inputs.  Those 
laws have been tightened to offer benefits only to true 
participants in the tourism sector, but it appears the early 
entrants ) overwhelmingly composed of a small group of 
economic elites ) will continue to receive those benefits 
and continue to earn windfall profits.  End Summary. 
 
2.    (SBU)  On September 23, EconChief and Ambassador 
participated in the ribbon-cutting ceremony for the first 
Quiznos franchise in Honduras.  In the works for over a year, 
the new outlet cost $350,000 to construct and has the largest 
footprint of any franchise outside the United States. 
Quiznos representatives would not divulge the cost of the 
national rights to the chain in Honduras, but indicated it 
was &substantially more8 than the construction fees spent 
to date.  The outlet was the brainchild of Luis Rock, 23-year 
old scion of Antonio Rock, the largest authorized distributor 
of major motion pictures for over 40 years in Honduras, a 
partner in the Multiplaza chain of movie theatres, and now 
the new franchise holder for Quiznos operations in Honduras. 
The younger Rock, a recent U.S. college graduate in Marketing 
and Finance, serves as the Manager of the flagship store. 
 
3.    (SBU) The franchise agreement calls for the 
construction of seven outlets countrywide, at a pace of at 
least two new outlets per year (and a franchise fee of over 
$20,000 per store).  The aggressive expansion plan by Quiznos 
Honduras is mirrored in other countries in the region, 
according to Richard Eisenberg, Latin American Regional 
President for Quiznos.  Eisenberg told EconChief that Quiznos 
is rapidly expanding beyond its regional base in Costa Rica, 
where they already have nine franchises.  Honduras is the 
first to open, but will be followed in quick succession by 
two stores in El Salvador later this year, and one in 
Guatemala early next year.  In all three countries, Quiznos 
is following a similar business model, according to Pablo 
Fernandez, Franchise Expansion Manager for Quiznos. 
Fernandez told EconChief that Quiznos prefers to identify a 
strong group or company in-country with whom they can sign 
multi-unit deals for continued strong growth.  Both the 
Salvadoran and Guatemalan contracts include multi-year, 
multi-unit deals, Fernandez said. 
 
4.    (SBU)  At first the Honduran fast-food market might 
appear saturated, yet receptivity to new chains remains high. 
 According to Eisenberg, the economic returns per outlet in 
Honduras are projected to be among the best in Latin America. 
 Quiznos views this as a significant opportunity to capture 
market share and remains enthusiastic about future prospects. 
 In the U.S., Quiznos reports it has risen to become the 
number one provider of sub sandwiches, and expects to do the 
same in Honduras. The entry of Quiznos should therefore 
introduce some additional competition into the fast-food 
market in Honduras, particularly for Jorge Siwady,s Subway 
franchises. 
 
5.    (SBU)  Though there are myriad U.S. franchised 
fast-food operations in Honduras already, most are owned by 
only a handful of firms or families.  Eduardo Kafati, for 
example, holds franchise rights to Burger King, Church,s 
Chicken, Popeye,s Chicken and Biscuits, Little Ceasars 
Pizza, Baskin-Robbins, and Dunkin Donuts.  Similarly, Roberto 
Larach (publisher of two major newspapers and a cousin of the 
Canahuati family) holds the rights to Pizza Hut, Kentucky 
Fried Chicken, and the Pepsi distributorship in San Pedro. 
Wendy,s Hamburgers and casual dining restaurant Applebees 
are owned by shopping-mall magnate Raymond Malouf.  The price 
impacts of this apparent market concentration vary with the 
degree of competition:  Little Ceasars, Dominos, and Pizza 
Hut -- fierce competitors -- have reasonable prices and 
frequently offer package deals and other specials.  The same 
rivalry can be seen between Burger King and McDonalds. 
Wendy,s, inexplicably, is nearly as expensive as in the 
U.S., and Dunkin Donuts, at nearly one dollar per donut, is 
even more expensive in Honduras than in the U.S.  Quiznos, 
operator, the Rock family, is a new entry to this sector, but 
is not without other connections:  Antonio Rock is 
brother-in-law to the powerful Canahuati clan, the family of 
Ambassador to the U.S. Mario Canahuati and owners of a 
multi-million dollar maquila operation. 
 
6.    (SBU) Most fast-food franchises arrived in Honduras 
within the last decade.  Two factors seem primarily 
responsible for this rapid growth:  First, the market, fed by 
a growing economy and strong remittances growth, remains a 
voracious consumer of fast food.  The popularity of U.S. 
chains in particular could be the result of the estimated one 
million Hondurans currently resident in the U.S. and the 
large numbers of Hondurans who have studied in the U.S. or 
who visit there regularly and who are therefore familiar with 
these brands.  Second, until recently the tax law encouraged 
this expansion of fast food chains by granting them 10 year 
tax holidays on income taxes and near blanket waivers on 
duties and taxes (using the dubious rationale that they boost 
tourism and therefore should get the same tax breaks as 
hotels.) 
 
7.    (SBU)  On October 1, EconChief met with Vice Minister 
of Commerce Salvador Melgar Ascencio, one of the drafters of 
the tax exemption, to discuss its origins and current status. 
 Melgar said that one of the first tax exemptions was granted 
to an early Burger King franchise.  To qualify, a business 
had to demonstrate that it was in a site of archeological, 
historical, or architectural interest -- Burger King failed 
that test on all counts.  Nevertheless, Melgar said, the 
exemption was granted.  This &acquired right8 quickly 
caught on and was granted to other similar franchises.  In 
its original form, the tax benefit was justified as promoting 
tourism and promoting the import of capital goods that would 
encourage growth of the sector. 
 
8.    (SBU) The benefits were subsequently memorialized in 
the Tourism Incentive Law of December 18, 1998, which granted 
ten-year tax holidays for tourism-related businesses, and 
near-blanket waivers on customs and import duties.  Melgar 
lamented the way the implementation had spun out of control, 
noting that the law was not intended to allow, for example, 
duty-free importation of foodstuffs.  When that law was 
revised on June 5, 2002, the revision tightened the classes 
of businesses that could benefit from the exemptions, 
limiting it to hotels, resorts, tourist transport, 
handicrafts, tourism promotion, and other clearly related 
pursuits.  Notable by its absence was the fast-food or 
restaurant sector.  While new businesses will not benefit 
from the old law, Melgar said it was his understanding that 
those fast-food franchises established under the old law 
would retain those tax benefits, and, in essence, continue to 
make windfall profits.  Quiznos reportedly did not benefit 
from the exemptions. 
 
9.    (SBU) Comment:  Post is pleased to see a new U.S. 
operation enter the market, not only to offer more selection 
to the consumer, but also to diversify (slightly) the 
ownership base of the sector.  The franchise sector is 
clearly a very successful U.S. export to Honduras, and Post 
will continue to support its growth.  Post will watch with 
interest any developments in the tax code regarding fast-food 
restaurants. Post suspects that as new entrants are forced to 
compete without benefit of the old tax exemptions, pressure 
will mount for closing that loophole to existing businesses 
as well.  End Comment. 
 
PIERCE 
 
Pierce 
"
"21307","10/5/2004 21:24","04TEGUCIGALPA2224","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, KDEM, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON THE FIRST PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE, 
OCTOBER 4, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 10/2, entitled \"Debate and reality.\"  \"Although 
the first of three presidential debates was won by the 
Democratic candidate John F. Kerry, his victory was far from 
being a decisive blow against President Bush, who also lost 
the first debate against Al Gore four years ago.\" 
 
\"Even though the focus of the debate was the issue of 
national security and foreign policy, the discussions were 
practically concentrated on Iraq.  Kerry attacked Bush for 
his `colossal misjudgments\' that diverted him from a real 
war against terrorism to invade a country that had nothing 
to do with 9/11 and didn\'t have weapons of mass destruction. 
On the other hand, Bush didn\'t change his position, 
stressing that the world is now a safer place.\" 
 
\"No matter what the result of the debate was, of Kerry\'s 
communication skills, or his inability to get a real 
advantage against a president who\'s being haunted by the 
reality of his failure in Iraq, the truth is that the White 
House\'s unilateral focus of imperialistic expansionism won\'t 
change regardless of who wins the November election.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 10/3, entitled \"First round.\"  \"Less than a month 
before the election, the first presidential debate between 
President Bush and Senator Kerry clearly showed that in the 
two key issues of foreign policy, Iraq and terrorism, the 
differences aren\'t significant.  They\'re very close in that 
regard, it\'s just a matter of perspective.\" 
 
\"Both candidates presented similar plans to achieve a common 
goal.  The Democratic candidate didn\'t dare to propose a 
different position, and he didn\'t address the real causes of 
the war in Iraq.\" 
 
\"So far, Kerry\'s victory in the debate hasn\'t improved his 
numbers in the polls.  We\'ll have to wait after the 
forthcoming debates on the U.S. domestic economy and social 
policy to find out about the actual outcome of the Miami 
debate.  The end of this contest will be known on November 
2.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"21345","10/6/2004 12:57","04TEGUCIGALPA2237","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04State210862","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002237 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/IL, AND EB/TPP/ABT 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EIND, ELAB, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras: ECA Postponement Demarche Delivered 
 
REF: A. State 210862 
 
     B. Hastings-Link e-mails 
 
1. (U) EconOff received ref A talking points by e-mail (ref 
B) on September 24, and delivered them on September 27 to 
Gerardo Salgado, Vice Minister for Natural Resources and 
Energy in the Minstry of Natural Resources and Environment. 
Salgado serves as acting Minister when Minister Panting is 
out of the country, as she was at the time, having not yet 
returned from Washington. 
 
2. (SBU) Salgado was aware that the signing ceremony for the 
Environmental Cooperation Agreement had been cancelled, but 
had not received a full account of the reasons why.  He 
therefore appreciated our explanation of the situation, and 
was pleased to hear of our continued commitment to the ECA. 
He also expressed surprise that the dispute with the 
Dominican Republic over the tax on high fructose corn syrup 
was serious enough as to place the DR\'s very inclusion in 
CAFTA in doubt. 
 
3. (SBU) The conversation then turned to CAFTA and 
environmental issues more generally.  In particular, Salgado 
asked EconOff for advice in what the GOH can do to improve 
its image in the United States regarding environmental 
regulation.  Salgado says he regularly receives e-mails from 
environmental NGOs in the United States which are opposed to 
CAFTA, and which publicize what he described as \"lies or 
half-truths\" about Honduran environmental laws and their 
enforcement.  Salgado expressed frustration that he cannot 
effectively counter these views and tell \"the other side of 
the story\", as he has no contact with pro-CAFTA 
environmental groups (if such exist) to weigh in on the 
other side.  EconOff replied that the Honduran embassy in 
Washington is naturally leading the effort of public 
relations for Honduras in the run-up to CAFTA ratification, 
but Post would welcome a wider discussion on this issue, 
including further ideas from Washington or other embassies 
in the region. 
 
Pierce 
"
"21417","10/7/2004 17:42","04TEGUCIGALPA2243","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO SARI; OEM/STEFFICK, BOND, HUTCHINSON, 
HARRINGTON, CEREN, CERNIGLIA, GARCIA, MENDEZ; 
SOD/OSM/BELOVICH 
DEA MEXICO FOR HOLIFIELD, BAEZA, GARAY AND WHITE 
STAT FOR INL/LP AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: N/A 
SUBJECT: TWO FAMILY MASSACRE BEGS DRUG TIES; 
GFTI-03-9276/QEZ1I; MONEY LAUNDERING 
CCX: TI-04-0003, RODRIGUEZ-LOZANO, JORGE 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA TWX 01379 DATED 171658ZJUN04 
 
1. (U) Within a five day period, Honduran police investigated 
two brutal murders in which two families (wives and children) 
were counted as victims.  Honduran police believe the murders 
were perpetrated by criminal elements in retaliation for 
actions by the deceased. 
 
2.  (U) Both murders took place after the June 9, 2004, 
seizure of 1,460 kilos of cocaine near the small town of 
Bajamar on the Honduran north coast (see ref).  The Honduran 
news media quickly associated the murders with the seizure, 
but hard connections have proved inconclusive. 
 
3.  (U) Honduran police discovered the first massacre at the 
residence of Edwin Edelvy REYES-Puerto (NADDIS NEGATIVE). 
REYES, along with his wife Nolia Ponce and three children, 
were found dead with their throats cut in La Colonia Jardines 
del Valle, San Pedro Sula, HD on June 17, 2004. 
 
4.  (U) A post investigation of the incident culminated in 
the seizure of $650,000 on June 28, 2004, from a safety 
deposit box attributed to REYES. 
 
5.  (U) On June 21, 2004, Police discovered another multiple 
homicide on a highway between Puerto Cortes and Choloma, HD 
in two vehicles.  Mario GARAY (NADDIS NEGATIVE), along with 
his wife Nubia Judith Zelaya-Sanchez, their three year old 
son, and two other individuals identified as David Esmelin 
and Milton Castellanos, were found shot to death in a Nissan 
Sentra bearing Honduran plate PBN1983.  A white Toyota Tacoma 
bearing Honduran plate PBL1054 was found abandoned 2.6 
kilometers in front of the Nissan.  The body of another 
victim identified as Allan Mejia was found some distance 
behind the Nissan.  The victims were found bound and gagged. 
Police believe the killers drove both of these vehicles to 
the road side locations and executed them under cover of 
darkness, making their escape in accompanying vehicles.  In 
the post investigation, Honduran authorities seized $115,650 
from the house of an associate of GARAY. 
 
6.  (U) Police sources from El Centro de Informacion Conjunto 
(CEINCO) indicated that GARAY, in cooperation with four other 
unknown associates, stole $600,000 and 100 kilos of cocaine 
from Ruberman TABORA (NADDIS 5808405), who is a known drug 
trafficker in Honduras. TABORA was believed to have given 
GARAY an ultimatum to return the drugs and money.  Criminal 
elements were believed to have kidnapped this group on Sunday 
evening and were subsequently discovered on Monday, June 21, 
2004.  In addition, GARAY was known to be involved in house 
robberies in the past. 
 
7.  (U) On June 24, 2004, Walter Flores Mencia, of La 
Direccion General de Investigacion Criminal (DGIC) in San 
Pedro Sula, HD, announced that both homicides were being 
investigated.  The DGIC did not indicate that the homicides 
were related, but indicated that the murders likely involved 
organized crime. 
 
8.  (U) Questions concerning this cable can be directed to 
Acting C/A Ivan Rios or I/A John Domingue at (301)985-9321. 
 
9.  (U) Pursuant to the DEA Agents Manual, section 6242.11 
this twx is submitted in lieu of a DEA-6. 
 
INDEXING 
 
1.  REYES-Puerto, Edwin Edelvy - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
DOB: December 11, 1970 
Honduran ID Number: 1807-1970-01804 
Address: Col Jardines del Valle, San Pedro Sula, HD 
         Col Los Alpez, 5Cll, 3 Ave, BL 6, 
         C-12, Amarilla Dos Plantas, San Pedro Sula, HD 
Family: Nolia Mabel Ponce (wife) 
Telephone Numbers: (504)982-5714, (504)979-6580, 
(504)551-5487 
 
2. GARAY, Mario - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
Pierce 
"
"21525","10/12/2004 20:02","04TEGUCIGALPA2267","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002267 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD, IO/EDA, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR IO/EDA (CCHANG) 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLAS 
COMMERCE FOR AVANVUREN, MSIEGELMAN 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/11/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, ECPS, EINV, PGOV, EWWT, KJUS, KMCA, HO, UNDP 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS:  UNDP PROCUREMENT DEBATE CONTINUES TO 
SIMMER 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 2165 (UNDP PROCUREMENT) 
 
Classified By: Economic Chief Patrick Dunn for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: On September 27, the Honduran National 
Association of Industries (ANDI) issued a two-page open 
letter denouncing the United Nations Development Program,s 
(UNDP) handling of the ongoing bid process for container 
inspection systems at Puerto Cortes.  Post has already 
received complaints from two U.S. firms about the conduct of 
this bid process and has raised this issue with the Minister 
of Transportation and the local UNDP representatives.  Post 
finds that while there is no evidence of corruption per se, 
it appears that the terms of reference and the conduct of the 
process could be viewed as giving undue advantage to one 
bidder.  On October 6, following allegations of corruption 
involving French telecommunications firm Alcatel in Costa 
Rica, the GOH announced it would launch an investigation into 
Alcatel behavior in Honduras, including in UNDP-managed 
procurements.  Post will report on this investigation septel. 
 End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) In a two-page open letter published September 27 in 
La Tribuna, the Honduran National Association of Industries 
(ANDI) issued a denunciation of the United Nations 
Development Program,s (UNDP) handling of the ongoing bid 
process for container inspection systems at Puerto Cortes. 
They further complained that their attempts to investigate 
allegations of bid-rigging have been stymied, saying that 
&unfortunately, the UNDP did not wish to give any 
information whatsoever to ANDI that would permit us to 
evaluate the allegations.8  Post spoke with UNDP ResRep Kim 
Bolduc, who told us that UNDP Copenhagen has completed its 
review of the matter, but that due to its sensitivity it has 
been sent to UNDP New York for a final review.  Bolduc had no 
further information about the status of the procurement, but 
she dismissed reports that the procurement was on the verge 
of failure and would be canceled. 
 
3. (SBU) Post has already received complaints from two U.S. 
firms about the conduct of this bid process (one firm that 
was ultimately not invited to bid and another that was 
invited but which is concerned the process is biased).  A 
third firm, also a U.S. firm, has publicly dropped its bid, 
claiming the process is rigged to yield a pre-determined 
winner (see paras 8-11).  Post has raised this issue with the 
Minister of Transportation and the local UNDP representatives 
(reftel) and finds that while there is no evidence of 
corruption per se, it appears that the terms of reference and 
the conduct of the process could be viewed as giving undue 
advantage to one bidder.  Post has raised the matter with the 
Department of Commerce Advocacy Center and understands the 
State Department Bureau of International Organizations has 
also raised it with UNDP headquarters. 
 
4. (SBU) On October 6, in the wake of the emerging corruption 
scandal allegedly involving OAS Secretary General Rodriguez 
and French telecommunications firm Alcatel, the GOH announced 
it will launch an investigation into Alcatel activity in 
Honduras.  Because Alcatel has won previous procurements that 
were administered in Honduras by the UNDP, the GOH has 
announced that UNDP procurement practices will also be 
examined.  Post will report on this investigation septel. 
 
---------- 
The Letter 
---------- 
 
5. (SBU) The open letter from ANDI lays out the results of 
ANDI,s investigation into the procurement of a container 
inspection system at Puerto Cortes and lists seven key 
findings: 
 
-     The Request for Proposals (RFP) did not adequately 
consider crucial technical evaluation criteria, while 
overweighting &trivial aspects8 that favor a specific 
technology.  As part of this finding, ANDI,s letter also 
references the complaints made on August 14 by Cargo Security 
Services (CSS), the local representative of U.S. firm 
American Science and Engineering (AS E), when it withdrew 
from the procurement process, alleging rigging (see paras 
8-11, below). 
 
-     The RFP included subjective evaluation criteria on 
points such as the financial health of the bidding firms, 
leaving the process vulnerable to &arbitrary and biased8 
decisions. 
 
-     There have been previous public complaints from 
Congressmen (Honduran) about the handling of this and other 
bid solicitations by the UNDP for the GOH.  (Note:  The GOH 
is one of the largest users of UNDP procurement management 
services, totaling over USD 114 million in procurement as of 
2003, according to figures supplied by State/IO.  End Note.) 
 
-     The initial bid documents called for inspection 
services at a price of not less than USD 38 per container. 
Former bidder and leading global supplier AS E alleges a 
competitive bid from a competent firm should offer those 
services at no more than USD 25 per container.  Similarly, an 
estimate by the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) determined that based on 
the characteristics, size, and volume of trade of the Port of 
Cortes, the service should cost USD 23.98 per container. 
According to ANDI, the difference in costs between the 
minimum cost specified in the bid package and what they 
consider a reasonable (lower) cost, at current trade volumes 
of 300,000 containers per year, would add an estimated USD 
3.9 million to the cost of shipping through the port, 
dramatically and unnecessarily reducing the port\'s 
competitiveness.  Under a barrage of criticism, UNDP 
reportedly removed that criterion.  Nevertheless, ANDI 
writes, &Even though the minimum price condition has been 
eliminated, ANDI views with concern and disagrees with 
continuing a subjective process of evaluation where greater 
importance is given to trivial technical aspects than the 
cost of services, and which could result in awarding the bid 
to more expensive bids.8 
 
-     The RFP incorrectly overweights technical aspects over 
cost of services, harming port competitiveness.  According to 
ANDI, given the world-class caliber of the bidders, there 
should be no doubt that the firms are capable of meeting and 
ensuring quality machinery and services. 
 
-     The determination of which firm receives the contract 
should, therefore, be based on costs. 
 
-     The announced goal of improving customs enforcement 
could be achieved just as effectively, and much more 
efficiently, with inspections of 50 percent of all containers 
passing through the port, rather than the current plan to 
inspect 100 percent.  Random spot inspections would cut the 
costs of enforcement in half, and steep fines for violations 
would provide a sufficiently strong deterrent. 
 
6. (SBU) Elsewhere in its letter, ANDI reiterates that it 
does not necessarily support the privatization of this 
service and would prefer to see a public, non-profit service 
established.  Furthermore, ANDI does not see the need for 
user fees, noting that the increased tax and customs revenues 
should be used in part to self-finance the inspections 
services. 
 
7. (SBU) ANDI concludes by writing, &ANDI demands that the 
...bid process be carried out in a manner that guarantees a 
just and transparent adjudication of the contract, under 
conditions that assure a high degree of competence, in such a 
way that the bidder that meets all the requirements and 
offers the best price wins.8 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
8. (SBU) The open letter from ANDI protesting this bid 
process follows a similar letter Cargo Security Services 
(CSS), which presented itself as the local representative of 
U.S. firm American Science and Engineering (AS E), published 
in local newspaper La Tribuna on August 14, withdrawing from 
what they called a &totally shameful8 process.  CSS wrote 
they would &not participate in, nor endorse by (their) 
presence8 the bid process, calling it &totally shameful and 
aimed at benefiting a specific manufacturer.8  The letter 
goes on to deride the USD 38 minimum price floor (as detailed 
above) and says that inspection of 30 percent of all 
containers would be more than sufficient to meet the goals of 
the program, while minimizing user fees. 
 
9. (SBU) Sergio Gonzalez, writing for CSS, reportedly said 
that another bidder, Swiss firm COTECNA, chose not to submit 
a bid for similar reasons. 
 
10. (SBU) In its most serious allegation, CSS,s letter says, 
&The direct insertion of those with ties to the government 
(into the process) to steer the bid specifications to a 
specific group and, by so doing gain personally, is 
unacceptable to us and we will not endorse acts of corruption 
in a matter as important as hemispheric security.8  Post 
contacted AS E to request further information regarding these 
allegations of corruption.  In a letter dated October 8, AS E 
responded that it &was not aware of the Open Letter, nor was 
it involved with the points described in the Letter or is 
familiar with bid selection process for this project. 
Therefore, the views and opinions expressed in this letter by 
Cargo Security Services (&CSS8) are in no way 
representative of the views of AS E.8  CSS had been the 
local representative of AS E, but that agreement expired last 
year.  The letter goes on to say that &AS E will officially 
withdraw this bid if it still active.8  For its part, CSS 
has not contacted Post, and Post has thus far been unable to 
reach Mr. Gonzalez. 
 
11. (C) CSS,s letter provoked other reactions, including 
Liberal Party Congressman Angel Valentin Suarez,s allegation 
that UNDP had &cooked8 the bid process.  Valentin 
complained that despite complaints, little information was 
available, since the process was designed and run out of 
Copenhagen.  In particular, he criticized the decision to 
remove the minimum cost, saying that a high minimum cost for 
services would guarantee that service providers would bring a 
modern system to Honduras.  (Comment:  Post finds this 
unconvincing, since the desired technology could easily have 
been specified in the terms of reference.  Since all bidding 
firms were required to take on local partners, and since 
higher fees mean higher commissions for those partners, Post 
questions whether padding the profit margins isn,t the true 
root of this particular complaint.  End Comment.)   Other 
vocal criticisms came from former Attorney General (1990-93) 
and National Party politician Leonardo Matute Murillo, who 
alleged that the UNDP is, &in an abusive manner violating 
the laws and court decisions of Honduras8 and violating the 
rights of workers under cover of its immunity.  He further 
alleges that UNDP routinely makes bids known to overseas 
bidders before national bidders, disadvantaging local firms. 
Those foreign firms, he said, are &interested only in taking 
our money.8 
 
12. (SBU) Comment:  The bureaucratic and hermetically sealed 
UNDP process for managing bid solicitations and awards was 
put in place by the GOH in large measure to prevent 
corruption or the appearance of corruption in the process. 
Following extensive discussions with the UNDP, the GOH, and 
firms involved in this bid process, Post has found no clear 
evidence of the corruption alleged by CSS.  That said, the 
opacity of the invitation-only, limited bid process, combined 
with the allegations (detailed in reftel) that the UNDP 
refused to alter bid specification even after their flaws 
were pointed out by competing bidders, leaves the GOH and the 
UNDP vulnerable to such claims of malfeasance. 
 
13. (SBU) Comment continued:  The UNDP system is rigorous, 
but fundamentally it carries out the terms of reference 
requested by the GOH, with assistance from technical advisors 
hired by UNDP Copenhagen.  If the original terms requested by 
the GOH reflected a desire to steer the bid to one firm, and 
if those terms were not altered by UNDP even after complaints 
by competing firms, then it is conceivable that the final 
terms of reference could have the effect of biasing the 
process in favor of one bidder.  Local UNDP reps cannot 
clarify this matter, as they recused themselves from the 
process and passed it on the UNDP Copenhagen for disposition. 
 UNDP Copenhagen is reportedly unwilling to discuss the 
matter, since the bids are still currently under review. 
Post has no credible evidence that UNDP has violated any 
Honduran laws, and does not find allegations that foreign 
bidders hear about bids first to be credible.  In our view, 
the populist and demagogic tone of Matute,s remarks speak 
for themselves.  Post will continue to follow with interest 
GOH inquiries into this matter, and will continue to press 
for transparent and trustworthy procurement practices.  End 
comment. 
 
PIERCE 
 
Pierce 
"
"21562","10/13/2004 14:47","04TEGUCIGALPA2276","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04State184238","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002276 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT:EHEARTNEY, WHA/CEN AND WHA/EPSC 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/OTEXA/MD\'ANDREA 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTEX, ECON, ETRD, ELAB, BEXP, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras: Textile and Apparel Statistics; Both 
Employment and Fear of China Growing 
 
REF: State 184238 
 
1.  Post provides the following information in response to 
reftel. 
 
---------------------------- 
The Limits of the Statistics 
---------------------------- 
 
2.  The two primary sources of information on the Honduran 
textile and apparel sector are the Central Bank, which 
collects statistics on the entire economy, and the Honduran 
Manufacturers\' Association (AHM), which collects statistics 
on the maquila sector only.  Unfortunately, neither of these 
institutions collects its information in sufficient detail 
to allow the separation of textile and apparel statistics 
from other maquila sector or manufacturing statistics. 
 
3.  The only breakdown of the maquila sector available is 
that provided below, in which the Central Bank counts all 
\"maquila businesses\" as belonging to one of four categories: 
 
Category             # of Companies    Percent 
--------             --------------    ------- 
Textile Industry          162           59.3% 
Suppliers                  46           16.9% 
Services to 
  Other Businesses         17            6.2% 
Other Manufacturing 
  Activities               48           17.6% 
 
TOTAL                     273          100.0% 
 
4.  From this breakdown, it is clear that the majority of 
maquila sector activity in Honduras is related to textile 
and apparel production: nearly 60 percent of businesses are 
directly involved, and presumably a similar share of 
suppliers and service companies are as well.  However, there 
is still no way to translate this headcount of companies 
into an accurate accounting of the textile and apparel 
industry per se when it comes to production, value added, or 
employment.  As a result, it is not possible to provide 
precise responses to many of the specific questions posed in 
paragraphs 5 and 6 of reftel.  Where the specific 
information requested is not available, we have provided 
below the closest information possible, with an explanation 
of exactly what is being measured. 
 
---------------------- 
Responses to Questions 
---------------------- 
 
5.  Total industrial production in USD value: 
 
-- 1.27 billion in 2003, according to the Central Bank. 
 
6.  Total textiles and apparel production in USD value: 
 
-- Not available, as such.  According to the Central Bank, 
the value added by the maquila sector in 2003 was USD 705 
million, or 56 percent of the country\'s total industrial 
production.  However, the Central Bank considers the maquila 
sector as a service industry (in which value is added to 
imported materials for re-export) and not as a group of 
manufacturing industries.  It therefore provides annual 
figures for \"value added by the maquila sector\", but does 
not disaggregate textile and apparel production from other 
maquila activities. 
 
-- The AHM also provides an annual figure for value added by 
the maquila sector, which uses a different methodology than 
the Central Bank, and as a result is almost always higher 
than the Central Bank\'s figure.  Post regards the Central 
Bank figure to be the more reliable of the two, as it 
follows standard international practices for collecting 
national accounts.  However, the AHM\'s figures are more 
frequently quoted in the Honduran press, and even, at times, 
used in official GOH publications.  For sake of comparison, 
below are the two series of estimates for the last ten 
years. 
 
Value Added by Maquila Sector, USD million 
------------------------------------------ 
 
          According to      According to AHM (Honduran 
Year      Central Bank      Manufacturers\' Association) 
 
1994          125                     186 
1995          163                     242 
1996          204                     284 
1997          313                     390 
1998          455                     455 
1999          539                     552 
2000          575                     662 
2001          561                     716 
2002          613                     819 
2003          705                     881 
 
7. Textiles and apparel\'s share of the host country\'s 
imports and exports: 
 
-- The closest approximation available is the value added of 
the entire maquila sector as a share of imports and exports 
of goods and services.  In the statistics below, maquila 
value added is itself included as a service export, and 
maquila-related imports are excluded from import figures. 
 
in USD million                 2001       2002       2003 
--------------                 ----       ----       ---- 
Maquila Value Added             561        613        705 
Imports                       3,742      3,758      4,061 
Exports                       2,511      2,571      2,711 
Maquila/(Im + Ex)              9.0%       9.7%      10.4% 
 
Source: Central Bank. 
 
8. Total manufacturing employment; Total textiles and total 
apparel employment: 
 
-- Total manufacturing employment was 337,317 in September 
2002, and 381,160 in September 2003 was 385,506, according 
to the National Statistical Institute, which is the GOH 
agency with primary responsibility for collecting employment 
data.  Data is collected by means of a household survey 
conducted in May and September of each year.  However, 
employment data is broken down into only ten broad 
categories, with the textile and apparel sector included in 
the \"manufacturing employment\" number given above.  Starting 
next year, INE plans to disaggregate its data further to 
include a figure for textile and apparel sector. 
 
-- The Central Bank and the Honduran Manufacturers\' 
Association each provide annual data for employment in the 
\"maquila sector,\" defined as those companies which are 
incorporated under either the Industrial Processing Zones 
legislation or Free Zones legislation.  For the reasons 
explained above, \"maquila sector\" employment statistics 
would overstate employment specific to the textile and 
apparel sector.  Again, figures from the Central Bank and 
the AHM differ slightly, as follows. 
 
Employment in \"Maquila Sector\" 
------------------------------ 
          According to      According to AHM (Honduran 
Year      Central Bank      Manufacturers\' Association) 
 
2001         94,416                  110,000 
2002        105,556                  107,000 
2003        114,237                  123,000 
 
9. A brief description of the relative importance of 
textiles and apparel in overall production and employment: 
 
-- In 2003, value added by the maquila sector accounted for 
26% of Honduras\' exports of goods and services (USD 705 
million out of total exports worth USD 2,711 million).  Long 
dependent on traditional exports, such as coffee and 
bananas, the Honduran economy now earns more than twice as 
much from the maquila sector as it does from coffee and 
bananas combined.  As explained above, most maquila activity 
is in the textile and apparel sector, though there have been 
some maquilas established recently which are engaged in 
other activities: for example, assembly of wire harnesses 
for automobiles, other automotive parts, or electrical 
components.  While the hope is that the sector will continue 
to diversify into other forms of light manufacturing, 
textile and apparel production still dominate.  Within the 
textile and apparel sector, the move is increasingly toward 
a full-package model in which businesses import thread from 
the United States and then export a finished product ready 
for market, taking care of the knitting, dyeing, cutting, 
assembly, and printing processes in country. 
 
10. How frequently does the industry or government collect 
and report textile and apparel employment data, i.e., 
monthly, quarterly, annually? 
 
-- The National Statistical Institute (INE) collects and 
publishes national employment data twice a year.  The AHM 
collects data for the maquila sector only and publishes it 
annually.  Neither group collects information on employment 
in the textile and apparel sector specifically. 
11. If monthly employment is unavailable, what is Post\'s 
assessment of the institutional capacity of the host country 
to collect such data: 
 
-- INE could not move to monthly collection of employment 
data without a complete restructuring of their current 
system for administering national household surveys.  The 
AHM, which gathers its data by means of an annual survey, 
could move to monthly data collection, but at the moment has 
no plans to do so. 
 
12. Comment:  Despite the strength and continued growth of 
the Honduran textile and apparel sector in recent years, 
producers here, whether Honduran or American, view the 
expiration of worldwide quotas as a serious threat to the 
viability of the industry.  One American maquila-owner 
recently reported to EconOff that he has already lost 
several of his regular customers to China, is having 
difficulty getting new orders, and does not know if he will 
be able to hold on until early 2005 when, it is hoped, the 
more flexible sourcing rules of CAFTA-DR come to the rescue. 
Meanwhile, with a nervous eye on Asian competition, 
especially the lower labor costs and higher volumes that 
China will soon bring to the world market, textile and 
apparel producers in Honduras see speed-to-market and 
responsiveness, especially for more complicated orders 
requiring printing or other specialized work, as key to 
sustained future competitiveness.  End comment. 
 
Pierce 
"
"21570","10/13/2004 16:48","04TEGUCIGALPA2288","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IO/SHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, AORC, HO, UN 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS\' CANDIDACY TO THE ICTY: POLCOUNS AND FM 
DISCUSS ISSUE 
 
REF: A. OLSEN/IO/SHA FAX 10/08/04 
 
     B. GENEVA 2780 
 
1. Post received a diplomatic note from the Honduran Foreign 
Ministry, similar to the one received by US Mission Geneva 
from the Honduran Mission in Geneva (ref B), informing Post 
that the Government of Honduras will present the candidacy of 
Dr. Rigoberto Espinal Irias for election to the International 
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at 
elections to be held in New York during the 59th General 
Assembly in November 2004. 
 
2. A copy of the diplomatic note was faxed to IO/SHA on 
October 8. 
 
3. In an October 8 meeting, PolCouns and PolOff thanked 
Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista for the diplomatic 
note and told him that it had been forwarded to the 
Department for consideration.  PolCouns noted that the USG 
does not generally announce its vote for prior to an 
election.  The FM understood this and thanked PolCouns for 
the USG\'s consideration of Honduras\' candidacy. 
Pierce 
"
"21577","10/13/2004 18:25","04TEGUCIGALPA2289","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1741","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002289 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
TRREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/12/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: TAX MAN IS MOVED BACK INTO MINFIN 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1741 
 
Classified By: Classified By: Economic Chief Patrick Dunn for reasons 1 
.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (C) Summary: The Honduran National Congress has decreed 
that the Executive Revenue Directorate (DEI) will no longer 
be a semi-autonomous tax agency and will instead be folded 
into the Ministry of Finance (MOF).  The DEI is overstaffed 
and highly politicized, as alleged in the justification to 
move it back into MOF, but the move will not solve, and could 
exacerbate, these problems.  In addition, the move gives MOF 
greater control over GOH revenue collection efforts, where 
they could be subject to abuse as the campaign season 
approaches.  The loss of DEI autonomy concerns Post, and we 
will continue to monitor the situation closely, in particular 
for any signs of weakening resolve on fiscal restraint or any 
effect of the restructuring on our bilateral technical 
assistance program on tax administration.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) On September 30, the Honduran National Congress issued 
a decision that the Executive Revenue Directorate (DEI, the 
GOH equivalent of the USG,s Internal Revenue Service) will 
no longer be a semi-autonomous agency and will instead be 
folded into the Ministry of Finance (MOF).  The DEI, formerly 
composed of the Customs Authority and the Tax Authority under 
the MOF, became independent in 1994 with the goal of 
improving the efficiency and credibility of tax collection. 
In recent testimony, Minister of Finance William Chong Wong 
called for the reintegration of the DEI into MOF, citing the 
DEI,s lack of responsiveness to the MOF, the rapid growth in 
both its personnel and budget, and its politicization.  In a 
conversation with EB Deputy Assistant Secretary Greenwood, 
however, Chong included in his list of motivations the fact 
that DEI employees were seeking to unionize.  Moving them 
into the Ministry of Finance could impede this unionization, 
a concern that was protested by DEI employees on October 5 
with a work-stoppage, supported by a peaceful demonstration 
by leftist Bloque Popular members.  In settling the strike, 
Chong agreed there would be no reprisals against strikers, 
and former benefits, including salary and tenure, would be 
carried over in the DEI move to MOF. 
 
3. (C) Post spoke on October 1 with Vice Minister of Trade 
and Industry Salvador Melgar Ascencio about the 
restructuring.  Melgar noted that the bill was pushed through 
with very little debate, and in his view the situation is now 
&worse than it was before.8  He admitted the DEI is 
inefficient and terrifically overstaffed, and said that the 
politicization of the staff continues to be a problem.  (DEI 
staff positions experienced an earlier staff turnover once 
during the current administration for mostly political 
reasons.)  However, he said, moving it to the MOF fails to 
address these core problems and introduces another. 
According to Melgar, Chong continues to operate an accounting 
consultancy in addition to his job as Minister, and as such 
he is in a position to &clean up tax messes8 for clients or 
potential future clients.  (Note:  According to the Honduran 
Constitution, it is illegal for a government official to have 
two paid jobs in the public sector at the same time.  It is 
unclear if there is a similar statute in force prohibiting 
such conflicts of interest involving a paid position in the 
private sector.  In any case, this standard appears to be 
laxly or selectively enforced.  For example, Minister of 
Investment Promotion, Camilo Atala also continues to manage 
Banco Ficohsa.  End note.) 
 
4. (C) The solution to the DEI,s problems, Melgar said, is 
right-sizing and professionalization of the staff through 
adequate pay, job tenure, training, and promotion tracks that 
attract and retain qualified investigators.  The current 
restructuring, by placing the DEI securely within the 
antiquated and inflexible Civil Service system, makes this 
kind of reform much more difficult and therefore unlikely. 
 
5. (C) Another concern voiced by Melgar and echoed in the 
local press is that the restructuring will in some way also 
bring greater control over revenue accountability and 
disbursements to the MOF, where they could be subject to 
abuse as the campaign season approaches.  He compared former 
Minister of Finance Alvarado with Chong, noting that rather 
than break the budget by &finding8 an additional unbudgeted 
USD 30 million for the electoral commission, Alvarado 
resigned.  (Note:  As noted reftel, the reality is somewhat 
more complex, but Post believes this issue did play a role in 
his decision to resign.  End Note.)  Chong, on the other 
hand, is inclined to disburse the funds, and is currently in 
talks with donors seeking additional contributions for this 
purpose.  Melgar concludes that Chong will be far more 
responsive to National Party demands for increased spending 
as the elections draw near than Alvarado would have been, and 
Chong,s assumption of direct control over the DEI could 
further facilitate this process. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  The loss of DEI autonomy concerns us, and we 
find many of Melgar,s worries well-founded.  A USG tax 
advisor, resident in the DEI, has previously told post that 
allegations continue to swirl within the DEI that Chong has 
blocked or otherwise disposed of tax cases against persons or 
firms with whom he has personal ties (reftel).  Post is aware 
of no smoking gun, but continues to monitor the situation 
closely.  Chong is also widely regarded as a member of the 
&dark side,8 the old-guard of the National Party, 
reportedly willing to apply questionable tactics (such as the 
off-budget spending noted above) to ensure continued access 
to power.  If Chong loosens the reins on fiscal restraint at 
the behest of the National Party to improve their chances at 
the polls, he risks increasing inflation, alienating donors, 
and potentially even breaking the pact with the IMF -- as 
happened in 2001 when the GOH,s last IMF deal collapsed over 
irresponsible spending in the run-up to the 2002 elections. 
Post, the IMF, and the entire donor community will continue 
to press the GOH to restrain spending and comply with its IMF 
terms.  We expect it will do so at least until it reaches 
HIPC completion point early in 2005.  There is some concern 
at the IMF, however, that once that milestone is reached the 
GOH could lose its self-control and undo all its hard work to 
date. Given political pressures in the run up to the November 
2005 elections, Post shares the Fund,s concern that the GOH 
could fall off some elements of its IMF program at that time. 
 
7. (C) Comment (continued):  Post will also monitor the 
effect of this restructuring on our bilateral technical 
assistance program on tax administration.  To date this 
program has been very successful in encouraging the DEI to 
take small but meaningful internal reforms aimed to improve 
collections and professionalize the tax service.  DEI 
director Mario Duarte has been an enthusiastic (if not always 
effectual) supporter of the program.  Duarte has made few 
public comments about the DEI reorganization, and some 
speculate that Duarte might be tapped to fill the 
Vice-Minister of Finance position vacated by Chong Wong in 
September when he became Minister.  If he is not named Vice 
Minister, it is unclear what position Duarte would hold in 
the post-reorganization DEI.  Post will watch to see whether 
Duarte is named to a Vice Ministership under Chong -- with 
whom there was reportedly tension when Chong was still Vice 
Minister of the Budget before becoming Minister -- and 
whether the DEI,s move into MOF hampers Duarte,s ability to 
pursue even the meager reforms we,ve seen to date.  End 
Comment. 
 
PIERCE 
Pierce 
"
"21604","10/14/2004 13:03","04TEGUCIGALPA2297","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA DAS FISK, WHA/CCA, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PRM, PRM/ENA, PRM/ECA, AND PRM/PRP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/13/2014 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, SMIG, MARR, CU, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS GIVES TENTATIVE YES TO RESETTLEMENT OF 
PROTECTED CUBAN MIGRANTS FROM GUANTANAMO; NUMBERS TBD 
 
REF: A. POPE/OLSEN E-MAILS/TELCONS/FAXES 10/8/04 AND 
 
        10/12/04 
     B. STATE 216668 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1524 
     D. STATE 139422 
 
Classified By: Acting Deputy Chief of Mission Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) PolCouns and PolOff met October 8 with Foreign 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista to follow-up on his September 
15 meeting with WHA A/S Noriega and the Honduran Embassy in 
Washington\'s communications with the Department October 5 
regarding the resettlement of protected Cuban migrants at 
Guantanamo Naval Base to Honduras (ref B).  PolCouns 
reiterated that the USG will pay for the migrants transport 
and first six months of living expenses via IOM.  PolCouns 
also indicated that Costa Rica planned to take 20 Cuban 
migrants.  The FM replied that the GOH would take Cuban 
migrants and tentatively agreed that the GOH would take 21 
migrants (the number of Cuban migrants needing resettlement 
that PolOffs were working with at the time of the meeting). 
The FM said they would likely be granted \"economic refugee\" 
status, which he thought would probably not entail any 
paperwork fees initially.  Unfortunately, he said he did not 
think the migrants would have immediate work authorization as 
\"economic refugees,\" but once the initial excitement of the 
Cubans\' resettlement died down they could apply for residency 
and/or permission to work.  This secondary paperwork would 
likely involve fees.  He said that of course, the GOH agreed 
not to repatriate the migrants to Cuba. 
 
2. (C) Rosa Bautista said that he had previously discussed 
the issue in general with President Ricardo Maduro who wants 
to accept the Cuban migrants.  The FM said he would re-check 
with Maduro about the specific number of migrants the GOH was 
willing to accept.  Embassy delivered to the FM at his house 
the biographic data for 16 Cuban migrants (ref A) the evening 
of October 8.  The FM also said he would seek a meeting on 
October 11 or 12 to coordinate with the Minister of 
Government and Justice, Jorge Ramon Hernandez Alcerro, the 
details of any possible resettlement, as Minister Hernandez 
Alcerro oversees Honduran Immigration. 
 
3. (C) Acting PolCouns spoke October 12 with MFA Director 
General for Foreign Affairs Mario Fortin about the GTMO 
Cubans, and faxed him a copy of the biographic data for 16 
Cuban migrants, as well as the bio data for a 17th Cuban 
migrant (ref A).  Acting PolCouns informed Fortin that the 
Embassy would provide bio data for an 18th Cuban migrant 
prior to the end of the week.  Fortin said he had spoken to 
the FM October 11 regarding the issue and understood that the 
FM had held meetings at the presidential palace on the issue 
of the GTMO Cubans, but that he did not know the substance of 
those talks. 
 
4. (C) As of the afternoon of October 13, Post was still 
waiting to hear back from the FM on the issue.  Post will 
press the MFA for an answer October 14/15. 
Pierce 
"
"21607","10/14/2004 13:49","04TEGUCIGALPA2299","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEGUCIGALPA 002299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC AND EB/EPPD 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
COMMERCE FOR MSIEGELMAN AND AVANVUREN 
STATE PASS USAID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAID, EAGR, KMCA, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras:  Progress Toward an MCC Compact 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  MCC representatives visited Honduras 
October 4-8 to continue due diligence investigations in 
preparation for evaluating and signing a Compact agreement 
in the next several months.  This visit is the 5th visit 
since May, when Honduras was short-listed as a country 
invited to apply for MCC funds.  This visit focused on value- 
added agriculture and irrigation components.  Other visits 
have focused on 1) explaining the process for submitting a 
proposal, 2) assessing the potential for economic growth, 3) 
evaluating financial oversight mechanisms, and 4) presenting 
MCC CEO Paul Applegarth to President Maduro and the GOH. 
Additional visits are scheduled for late October to conduct 
due diligence on the transportation infrastructure portion 
of the proposal and early November to conduct a similar 
review of the financial sector and its role in maximizing 
the impact of any MCC project.  Next steps include due 
diligence on the project elements, consideration of 
conditionality - such as progress on anti-corruption efforts 
-- for future disbursements, and the need for progress on 
MCC\'s administrative concerns, including preparations for or 
procurement of housing, office space, and locally hired 
employees.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
Honduras:  Might be the First 
----------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) MCC representatives told Post that Honduras is 
likely to be one of the first countries to sign a Compact 
with the MCC.  Not only was it among the first to submit a 
proposal, Honduras also prepared a thorough, well-organized 
proposal with obvious GOH political support for 
implementation.  Thanks in large part to previous efforts 
under its Poverty Reduction Strategy and Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) application -- not to mention vigorous 
efforts at donor coordination and rationalization following 
the Hurricane Mitch Reconstruction (1998-2001) -- the GOH 
had in hand a prioritized list of development objectives 
that they used to frame their MCC proposal. (Note:  That 
proposal is available on the web at 
http://www.sierp.hn/docs/MCAespanol.pdf. End Note.) This 
approach helped ensure a minimum of overlap with existing 
development efforts, maximum ability to create synergies 
with established project priorities, and an internally 
consistent approach to overall development.  Perhaps most 
importantly, the strategy also benefited from civil society 
and donor community review and approval. The GOH will be 
conducting additional civil-society outreach events on 
October 14-15. 
 
3. (SBU) Several issue areas remain to be addressed, 
including the role of the financial sector, a detailed 
review of the transportation infrastructure proposal, 
consideration of the scope and depth of environmental impact 
analyses, development of methodology for evaluation and 
monitoring, and a legal review.  It should be noted that, 
since this could be the first Compact proposal completed, 
the precise level of detail on these and the other areas of 
focus (\"workstreams,\" in MCC parlance) that must be included 
in the Compact itself remains undecided.  As a legal 
obligating document, a certain level of detail is required, 
but likely less detail than would be the case for a project- 
planning document.  The decision on the level of detail 
needed in the Compact could dramatically affect the time 
needed to complete due diligence reviews and prepare a 
document for signature. 
 
4. (SBU) MCC and Post are also considering the degree of 
conditionality to be made inherent or explicit in the 
Compact.  MCC officials note that there might be value in 
undertaking project elements in prioritized tranches, with 
specific performance or policy triggers for moving to 
successive tranches.  The policy reforms MCC has in mind 
fall into two areas of concern:  (1) reforms that are 
necessary to ensure maximal impact from the program (such as 
reducing red tape, rationalizing pricing, and customs 
reform) and (2) reforms whose goals are continued 
improvement on the 16 key eligibility indicators.  Regarding 
the latter, in the case of Honduras, MCC is considering 
concrete commitments that could be incorporated into the 
Compact as milestones in the fight against corruption.  This 
type of conditionality would provide an extremely forceful 
lever for reform, while also decreasing the threat of 
reduced MCC project effectiveness due to losses to 
corruption.  Post strongly supports strengthened anti- 
corruption efforts be included as bases for review of the 
Honduran Compact prior to any disbursements. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Towards a Compact:  We\'ve Come a Long Way in Five Months 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
5. (SBU) The MCC approach in Honduras has been based on the 
approach used in the private sector:  MCC is prepared to 
obligate large quantities of funding, on a no-year basis, to 
programs that promote economic growth and reduce poverty. 
However, the MCC will act only after being convinced that: 
(1) the problem (the obstacle to economic growth) has been 
well defined; (2) a viable solution that targets and solves 
that problem in a way that benefits society as a whole has 
been identified; and (3) the economic rate of return 
justifies singling this activity out as a top-priority 
activity.  In short, the funds should be used to resolve a 
problem that other donor programs or private sector efforts 
cannot or will not resolve, and the choice of activities 
should yield the greatest bang for MCC\'s buck. 
 
6. (SBU) By focusing on economic rate of return, rather than 
the financial rate of return used by the private sector, MCC 
attempts to take full account of all benefits and costs that 
accrue to society even if they do not have a direct cash- 
flow associated with the project. (Examples would include 
the benefits of customs reform or a cleaner environment, or 
the costs of providing more subsidized water as a result of 
increasing demand of farmers that have been taught to grow 
new crops.)  The MCC recognizes the importance of other 
development objectives that are pursued by other donors, but 
has a mandate to focus exclusively on sustainable economic 
growth that results in poverty reduction. 
 
7. (SBU) The GOH\'s initial ideas quickly focused on what 
they called the \"dry canal\" idea.  The plan is to improve 
road infrastructure between Puerto Cortes on the Atlantic 
coast and Puerto Cutuco, on the Pacific, just across the 
border in El Salvador.  The road would link Tegucigalpa and 
San Pedro Sula (the political and business centers of 
Honduras, respectively) to their largest export hubs, and 
would promote the development of export-oriented businesses 
by lowering transport costs and increasing efficiency. 
Secondary and tertiary roads would link farms and smaller 
towns to these major markets, and would ease labor 
shortages, without promoting uncontrolled urbanization, by 
linking population centers with industrial zones. 
 
8. (SBU) To capitalize on this basic infrastructure idea the 
GOH quickly added an initiative to improve agricultural 
productivity, move into higher value-added crops, and 
encourage a shift from subsistence agriculture to export- 
oriented agribusiness that could also benefit from the new 
road network.  This proposal played to MCC\'s strengths, in 
particular its ability to fund the entire range of economic 
activities from farm to market, crossing sectoral boundaries 
in a rational and linked way, and over a prolonged (five 
year) implementation period.  This would complement a model 
of this type pioneered by USAID. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Paring Back the Proposal:  Status of the Core Elements 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
9. (SBU) Perhaps predictably, as drafting of the Compact 
proposal went forward within the GOH, additional programs 
were added to placate powerful political interests.  The GOH 
proposal identified nine impediments to economic growth. 
MCC staff distilled these down to five essential 
impediments:  (1) high transportation costs; (2) low 
agricultural productivity; (3) uncertain land tenure; (4) a 
shortage of supervisors and technicians in the light 
assembly sector and an overall labor shortage in the Sula 
Valley; and (5) a mismatch between the location of hotel 
facilities and tourist attractions.  One of the early MCC 
visits, therefore, was aimed at tightening the focus of the 
proposal to just one or two core objectives.  Thanks to 
extensive meetings with the GOH by EconOffs, USAID, and MCC 
representatives, Post gradually succeeded in convincing the 
GOH of the need to take most of the ornaments off the tree. 
What follows is a brief description of the current elements 
of the GOH Compact proposal and MCC views on the relative 
merits of those elements. 
 
9. (SBU) The logistical corridor:  MCC inquired broadly 
throughout the GOH, private sector, and civil society, and 
found strong support for the proposed upgrade to Honduras\' 
transportation infrastructure.  As currently envisaged, this 
proposal would include three elements:  the main highway; 
improvements, maintenance, and expansion of the secondary 
road network; and a tertiary-level expansion of rural and 
urban access roads. 
 
-- The highway:  If approved, MCC would pay up to $80 
million to finance two segments of the logistical corridor. 
Other segments would be financed by other donors, and loans 
from the Interamerican Development Bank (IDB) and the 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI).  (By 
pooling these loans with the grant portions of the project, 
the GOH buys down the overall interest rates to stay below 
IMF-imposed borrowing limits as it approaches HIPC decision 
point.) 
 
-- The secondary roads:  These would be key to extending the 
benefits of the logistical corridor to communities further 
afield, and to developing local capacity for appropriate 
road maintenance.  MCC feels that additional consideration 
must be given, however, to how the qualifying roads would be 
selected.  This portion of the program is currently budgeted 
at $19.5 million. 
 
-- The tertiary roads:  These roads complete the linkage of 
the port to the local farm and village level, facilitating a 
rural transformation from subsistence farming to value-added 
agricultural exports.  In the urban setting, access roads 
allow underutilized labor to more easily commute to regions 
of higher employment and relative labor scarcity.  This 
approach increases employment overall without the need to 
relocate the labor force and therefore without the 
consequent strain on existing public services infrastructure 
in those locations.  This portion of the program, covering 
1,320 kilometers of road, is currently budgeted at $22.5 
million. 
 
10. (SBU) Improving Agricultural Productivity:  This 
proposal consists of six elements:  fixing the land titling 
and tenure system; establishing a \"millennium challenge 
fund\" to fund smaller projects on a rotating-fund basis; 
expanding drip irrigation; providing technical assistance in 
the agricultural sector; improving flood control in the Sula 
Valley; and establishing agricultural \"value-added chains.\" 
 
-- Land titling:  This element would provide a revolving 
fund to settle contested land titles, allowing households to 
use clean land titles as collateral for loans for activities 
such as home construction, education, or starting a 
business.  MCC is unconvinced that this is an activity that 
could not be carried out by the private financial sector, 
and notes that the World Bank is also actively working on 
improving land registries.  That said, MCC is interested in 
considering the proposal further, given the centrality of 
land titling issues to economic growth throughout the 
region.  This portion of the program is currently budgeted 
at $10 million. 
 
-- Millennium Challenge Fund:  This element would establish 
a revolving fund to support small projects that arise during 
Compact implementation, to fill any unexpected gaps and add 
program flexibility.  This component was included by the GOH 
to provide a mechanism to receive unsolicited proposals, 
which they understood might be required by the MCC\'s 
authorizing legislation.  The MCC General Counsel has 
determined that such a mechanism is not required by law. 
The GOH technical team and MCC staff discussed establishing 
a more focused fund to provide financing for projects in the 
agriculture sector.  While, this portion of the program was 
budgeted at $10 million, it will likely be scaled down. 
 
-- Expanding Drip Irrigation:  In selected areas of high 
potential agricultural productivity, on-farm drip irrigation 
systems would be supported to increase yield while 
potentially decreasing total water usage compared to 
traditional gravity-fed irrigation techniques.  MCC favors 
this element, if implemented in conjunction with technical 
assistance training in use and maintenance of these 
technologies.  This portion of the program is currently 
budgeted at $25 million. 
 
-- Technical Assistance:  This element would train farmers 
in modern farming techniques, pest management, crop 
rotation, market analysis, business management, drip 
irrigation operations and maintenance, and other key aspects 
of enhanced productivity.  MCC favors this element, 
particularly in conjunction with drip irrigation systems. 
This element could build on or follow the best practices 
established by proven USAID-funded systems.  This portion of 
the program is currently budgeted at $7.5 million. 
 
-- Flood Control in the Sula Valley:  This element would 
fund construction of the El Tablon Dam, to control flood 
waters and generate electricity in the Sula Valley.  MCC 
notes that this project is not intuitively linked to the 
other central elements of the compact proposal, and is 
potentially contentious for political and environmental 
reasons.  MCC does not intend to fund this item. This 
portion of the program is currently budgeted at $35 million. 
 
-- Agricultural Value Added Chains:  This element would 
support collaboration among vertical components of 
agricultural commodity sectors, such as palm oil or sugar, 
with the intent of collecting funds to enhance production 
and marketing of the commodity.  MCC remains unconvinced the 
structure of such efforts is clearly defined or would be 
successful in preventing major players in the sectors from 
benefiting disproportionately.  While the MCC will probably 
not directly fund the value added chains, these chains (as 
well as other entities) would be eligible to submit 
proposals to a fund to support the provision of public goods 
to promote the growth of the agricultural sector as 
described under the Millennium Challenge Fund. 
 
11. (SBU) Other Programs:  Programs added to the core 
objectives of transportation infrastructure and agricultural 
productivity include an apparel training center, pre-school 
funding, small and medium enterprise development funds, and 
tourist centers in Tela and Tegucigalpa.  MCC seeks overall 
to minimize the number of projects it is involved in, both 
to limit overhead administrative costs, and to keep the 
funded projects tightly focused on the core objectives of 
the Compact.  Therefore, MCC does not plan to fund the 
following proposals: 
 
-- Apparel Training Center:  This element would train 
supervisors and technicians for the light assembly sector. 
MCC notes that in addition to being tangential to the core 
Compact objectives, this proposal should be funded primarily 
by the private sector.  Additionally, such a project could 
be seen as violating the MCC prohibition on funding any 
activities that displace U.S. jobs. This portion of the 
program is currently budgeted at $1.5 million. 
 
-- Pre-School Education:  This initiative would fund pre- 
schools, linked to a foundation created by the President, 
thus allowing mothers to enter the workforce.  MCC notes 
that this element is tangential to the core objectives 
established in the Compact proposal and suffers from dubious 
political optics by contributing to a charity founded by the 
President.  This portion of the program is currently 
budgeted at $7.5 million. 
 
-- Small and Medium Enterprise Development Financing:  This 
element is poorly linked to core objectives contained in the 
Compact proposal.  While financing will likely be an 
integral part of the agricultural portion of the Compact, 
MCC does not intend to fund this broadly defined initiative. 
This portion of the program is currently budgeted at $4 
million. 
 
-- Tela Bay Infrastructure:  This element would fund 
development of roads, sewers, drainage systems, and water 
and electricity services to support the development of a 
luxury resort complex in Tela (on Honduras\' northern 
Caribbean coast).  MCC feels this project should be financed 
by the project developers and does not intend to fund it. 
($15 million.) 
 
-- \"Royal Mines\" Tourism Center:  This element would convert 
a former prison into a tourism center and shopping area in 
Tegucigalpa, to provide additional attractions to attempt to 
balance the mismatch between the location of hotel 
facilities (overbuilt in Tegucigalpa) and the location of 
tourist attractions (such as the Bay Islands or the Copan 
Ruins).  This element is poorly linked to core objectives 
contained in the Compact proposal. MCC does not intend to 
fund this initiative, currently budgeted at $7.5 million. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Looking Forward, MCC Needs to Focus on Logistics 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
11. (SBU) Comment:  Post welcomes and continues to support 
the extraordinary progress made to date on the substance of 
a proposed Compact.  However, it is increasingly urgent that 
progress also be made on a number of internal administrative 
matters facing the new MCC program.  MCC indicated it 
expects to place a direct-hire representative in-country as 
soon as possible after the signing of a Compact.  This will 
require completion of an NSDD-38 process.  Post encourages 
MCC to begin this process as soon as possible.  Post also 
raised with visiting MCC representatives the possibility of 
contracting a local-hire, part-time administrative assistant 
who could manage logistics and paperwork for the 
increasingly heavy MCC visitor load to Honduras in the run- 
up to Compact signing.  Establishing such a position, with 
local office space, would not only facilitate overall 
progress of the proposal by providing a stable workspace for 
MCC visitors, it would also lay the foundation for the 
permanent MCC office, which would then be ready for the MCC 
representative upon assignment.  Both Embassy and USAID 
management offices stand ready to discuss ICASS or other 
options for contracting or procurement for staff, office 
space, housing with MCC.  End Comment. 
 
PIERCE 
 
 
Z:\\econ\\DunnPM\\MCC update 100904 jw.doc 
"
"21660","10/15/2004 14:07","04TEGUCIGALPA2312","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/CIP, EB/CBA, L/EB 
STATE FOR L/EB (LSVAT) 
STATE PASS AID (LAC/CAM) 
COMMERCE FOR MSIEGELMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EINV, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: ACTION REQUEST:  LUCENT SEEKS USG CONCURRENCE TO 
DONATE TELECOMMS EQUIPMENT 
 
 
This cable contains proprietary business information and 
should be protected accordingly ) not for internet 
distribution. 
 
1. (U) This is an action cable.  Please see para 5. 
 
2. (SBU) On October 7, EconChief met with Carlos Aviles, 
Senior Manager for Lucent in Latin America, and Juan Carlos 
Galan, New Business Manager for Lucent, to discuss a pending 
Lucent proposal to donate CDMA-based switching technology to 
Honduran state telephone monopoly Hondutel.  As Aviles and 
Galan explained, Lucent established a presence in Honduras in 
1993 with a contract to install 110,000 lines between the 
capital Tegucigalpa and the business center San Pedro Sula. 
That equipment used now-outdated AMPS technology.  Following 
several years of poor relations with the GOH in which Lucent 
failed to secure additional contracts, Lucent in 2003 won a 
nine-month contract for upgrade and expansion of 11,000 
lines.  Their new management team, on-time delivery, and 
strong customer service on that contract have allowed them to 
repair relations with the GOH and Hondutel, which Lucent now 
hopes to leverage into a re-entry into the Honduran market. 
However, Lucent fears that its future bids could be judged in 
light of their currently deployed (AMPS based) technology, 
rather than on their latest, third-generation compatible CDMA 
technologies. 
 
3. (SBU) To remedy this, Lucent proposes to donate USD five 
million worth of switching equipment to Hondutel, to be used 
to upgrade the Tegucigalpa-San Pedro corridor.  This gesture 
would earn good will, while also showcasing Lucent,s latest 
technology.  For its part, Aviles told us, the GOH would have 
to purchase approximately USD 2 million of additional system 
equipment (base stations, etc).  Similar offers have been 
made and accepted by Ericsson and Siemens, each of which has 
already launched GSM-based demonstration projects in more 
remote regions along the borders with Guatemala, El Salvador, 
and Nicaragua.   Lucent wishes to compete on an equal 
footing, defend its existing market share, and prevent de 
facto lockout of CDMA technologies in the Honduran market. 
Lucent is also positioning itself for December 2005, when 
Hondutel loses its fixed-line telephone service monopoly. 
 
4. (SBU) Lucent officials are requesting that the USG 
publicly endorse the donation as transparent and entirely 
above-board.  Lucent emphasizes that there is no quid-pro-quo 
expressed or implied in the donation (though obviously they 
hope to position themselves for future sales opportunities). 
In the interest of full disclosure, Lucent officials told us 
that they have also submitted a bid for an unrelated October 
28 microwave contract worth approximately USD seven million. 
However, that is a public, competitive bid being managed by 
UNDP, and therefore its outcome should not be influenced by 
Lucent,s proposed donation to Hondutel. 
 
5. (SBU) Action request:  To initiate the donation process, 
Lucent has prepared a letter to Hondutel (an informal 
translation of which appears in para 6) offering the 
equipment and specifying the terms of the donation.  Lucent 
requests that the U.S. Embassy provide a cover letter 
endorsing the donation, thereby protecting them somewhat from 
any potential future allegations of improper behavior. 
(Note:  Lucent is well aware of FCPA constraints and insists 
its lawyers have fully vetted both the proposal and the draft 
letter and found them fully compliant.  End Note.)  Post 
requests L/EB concurrence that the proposed donation does not 
violate FCPA, and suggested wording on a brief cover letter 
to Hondutel endorsing the donation. 
 
6. (SBU) Informal translation of text of Lucent draft: 
 
Dear Mr. Valenzuela: 
 
Understanding Hondutel,s current situation and its need to 
increase tele-density to support governmental objectives, 
Lucent Technologies, with the support of the USG and the U.S. 
Embassy in Honduras, is pleased to announce its desire to 
donate to Hondutel communications equipment sufficient to 
provide CDMA-based fixed wireless telephone service to 
approximately 11,000 subscribers.  This equipment is valued 
at an estimated USD five million. 
 
The equipment includes: 
 
-- Central switching hardware and software for fixed wireless 
telephony (5ESS, Access Manager, OMP/FX, FMS) 
 
-- Replacement parts for Flexent Modcell 4.0 Compact OD 3S/1C 
switches and base stations. 
We bring to your attention the professional services, 
necessary for the proper functioning of the abovementioned 
equipment being offered, as well as related additional 
equipment that are required for optimal system function, and 
to indicate the cost of each. 
 
We consider it our duty to tell you that to reach the zones 
of social interest that Hondutel considers it necessary to 
cover, and for obvious reasons the equipment offered above 
will not be sufficient, whether it be for reasons of 
technology, economics, or any other reason.  If you would 
like to expand the system under discussion, that expansion 
can only be accomplished using equipment manufactured 
exclusively by Lucent Technologies. 
 
Most respectfully, allow us to suggest that one efficient use 
of the products and services being offered would be to use 
them to provide telephone service in the Tegucigalpa-San 
Pedro Sula corridor, where there is already a Lucent 
Technologies WSS system in place. 
 
If this offer is accepted, we sincerely hope that the use of 
the donated products, however Hondutel chooses to use them, 
promote the interests of Honduras, and support reaching the 
economic, financial, and social goals that undoubtedly will 
translate into direct benefits for the people of Honduras. 
 
We respectfully request confirmation of your acceptance of 
this offer, so that we might proceed with the legal 
formalization of the donation. 
 
(Complimentary close).  End text. 
 
PIERCE 
Pierce 
"
"21661","10/15/2004 14:10","04TEGUCIGALPA2313","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002313 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
STATE PASS USTR 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ELAB, EINV, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: \"Cumple y Gana\" Labor Project Advances CAFTA 
Understanding with Private Sector 
 
 
1.  Summary: The U.S. Department of Labor-funded \"Cumple y 
Gana\" project held two recent public outreach events in 
Honduras, aimed at informing the private sector as to the 
contents and implications of CAFTA-DR with regards to 
protection of labor rights and enforcement of labor laws. 
EconOffs participated in the program, along with Honduran 
Minister of Labor and private sector representatives. 
Turnout was good, press coverage was positive, and overall 
the events marked a strong first step in the important 
effort of educating the Honduran public about CAFTA-DR, and 
correcting the many misperceptions that persist.  End 
summary. 
 
2.  The \"Cumple y Gana\" project held two recent public 
outreach events in Honduras: in Tegucigalpa on September 29 
and in San Pedro Sula on September 30.  The project, whose 
full title is \"Strengthening Labor Systems in Central 
America: Cumple y Gana (Comply and Win)\", is funded by the 
U.S. Department of Labor, and being carried out in Central 
America by the Costa Rican NGO FUNPADEM (Foundation for 
Peace and Democracy) and by Abt Associates.  Within 
Honduras, FUNPADEM is partnering with the private sector 
umbrella organization COHEP (Honduran Private Enterprise 
Council).  The launch of the project in March was attended 
by President Maduro and Ambassador Palmer. 
 
3.  While the Cumple y Gana project has various objectives, 
including providing training to strengthen Ministry of Labor 
inspection services and strengthening alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms, the September events were focused on 
increasing public awareness of the labor provisions 
contained in CAFTA-DR.  Each event was attended by roughly 
75 people from the private sector - not CEOs and company 
presidents, but rather personnel officers and people closely 
involved with the day-to-day management of labor issues. 
(FUNPADEM plans to hold additional outreach events aimed at 
workers and labor unions in the future.) 
 
4.  The two key presentations at the event were delivered by 
Armando Urtecho, a lawyer for COHEP who explained the labor 
chapter of CAFTA-DR, and by EconOffs, who explained the 
dispute settlement mechanisms outlined in the agreement. 
Given the low level of knowledge that prevails among the 
private sector as to exactly what the CAFTA-DR agreement 
says regarding the enforcement of labor laws, these two 
presentations were very positively received.  The average 
Honduran businessman seems to have only a vague sense that 
CAFTA-DR will reduce Honduran sovereignty by giving the 
United States the right to ultimately impose \"fines\" of USD 
15 million at will if Honduras fails to meet first-world 
labor standards.  EconOffs took pains to dispel the myths 
and correct the many misperceptions inherent in this view. 
Specifically, EconOffs emphasized that CAFTA-DR requires 
only the enforcement of member countries\' own labor 
legislation; requires the protection of fundamental, 
internationally recognized, labor rights which are contained 
in the core conventions of the ILO (International Labor 
Organization); establishes a dispute-settlement process that 
focuses on consultation and cooperation, and can assess 
monetary contributions only as a last resort. 
 
5.  At the Tegucigalpa event, other speakers included 
Executive Director of FUNPADEM Dr. Rodolfo Piza, President 
of COHEP Jose Maria Agurcia, and Honduran Minster of Labor 
German Leitzelar.  Leitzelar took pains to counteract the 
perception that CAFTA-DR represents a loss of Honduran 
sovereignty, by pointing out that under Honduran law, 
international treaties do not supersede the Honduran 
constitution, but rather become incorporated into the 
constitution.  As he often does, Leitzelar also emphasized 
that Honduras\' labor legislation already protects the 
fundamental labor rights which CAFTA-DR covers, and that 
Honduras has ratified all eight of the core ILO conventions 
(he pointedly stressed that the United States has ratified 
only two).  But he urged participants to place a greater 
emphasis upon enforcement, not because of CAFTA-DR, rather 
because it is necessary for the economic transformation of 
Honduras, to ensure that the benefits of economic growth are 
shared by all.  \"The treaty is not important\", he concluded, 
\"what is important is our conduct and our commitment, with 
or without CAFTA.\" 
 
6.  At the event in San Pedro Sula the following day, 
EconChief represented the embassy, and Minister Leitzelar 
was not present, leaving significant time for audience 
participation.  The question and answer session was 
generally polite, but exposed a number of private sector 
concerns.  Many questions were technical in nature, and were 
fielded by Urtecho of COHEP.  In addition, audience members 
inquired about the \"fines\" that could be imposed, in 
response to which EconChief stressed the numerous other 
options for settlement of a dispute, the fact that any 
compensation levied would be as a last resort, and the fact 
that all funds would be directed to programs within the 
country to address the enforcement problem.  EconChief also 
highlighted that the U.S. interest is in promoting regional 
integration, supporting stable, prosperous neighbors, and 
improving the enforcement of labor laws, not in somehow 
\"punishing\" its neighbors. 
 
7.  Asked how a developing country could afford to enforce 
\"these new laws\", EconChief reiterated that CAFTA-DR imposes 
no new laws, but only the requirement that Honduras enforce 
its own laws.  These are standards that Honduras has already 
decided are important and therefore passed into law - now it 
is up to Honduras to adequately enforce them.  That said, 
the USG has historically been eager to support such efforts 
in our partners, and can likely be counted on to continue 
doing so under CAFTA-DR.  Again, EconChief noted, the goal 
is to improve how the system works, not to point fingers. 
In one of the best exchanges of the morning, one audience 
member asked how CAFTA-DR would prevent corruption from 
undermining the system.  Urtecho turned it back on the 
audience, in effect asking them how they will fight 
corruption.  As he listed the symptoms and societal costs of 
corruption, and called the business community to action in 
doing its part to combat corruption, heads throughout the 
audience were nodding in assent.  Following the event 
EconChief was approached by audience members, and 
interviewed by several reporters, providing an additional 
opportunity to set the facts straight and to promote CAFTA- 
DR as a strongly positive step for the region. 
 
8.  Comment: Nearly ten months after Honduras\' part in the 
CAFTA-DR negotiations concluded, the level of knowledge 
among the business community, not to mention the general 
public, regarding the agreement remains very low.  (EconOff 
was interviewed by one television journalist who apparently 
did not realize that CAFTA-DR is distinct from the FTAA.) 
For many of those in attendance, the event was obviously the 
first time they had received a clear description of the way 
that the agreement sets out to protect and enforce 
fundamental labor rights.  Further outreach of this nature, 
including future events aimed at workers and unions, will be 
of great value in counteracting widespread misinformation 
and building public support for CAFTA-DR, as the GOH 
prepares for ratification.  End comment. 
 
Pierce 
"
"21662","10/15/2004 14:12","04TEGUCIGALPA2314","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04State168991","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002314 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EAGR, PGOV, HO, WTO 
SUBJECT: Honduras\' Reaction to July Framework: Cautiously 
Positive 
 
REF: A) State 168991 
 
     B) Tegucigalpa 778 
     C) Tegucigalpa 1567 
     D) Montevideo 1459 
 
1. (U) Summary: GOH trade officials are reasonably satisfied 
with the WTO July Framework, regarding it as an agreement 
that recognizes Honduras\' key interests but nonetheless 
defers most difficult decisions for future negotiation. 
Honduras will support the candidacy of Perez de Castillo of 
Uruguay for the position of next WTO Director General.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) Speaking with EconOff on October 12, Director of 
Trade Policy Melvin Redondo spoke favorably of the 
negotiating framework adopted by the WTO General Council on 
August 1 (ref A).  He specifically cited the successful 
efforts of the G-33, of which Honduras is a member, to 
establish recognition in the framework of two key issues. 
First, the framework (in paragraph 42) calls for the 
establishment of a Special Safeguard Mechanism for use by 
developing countries.  Second, the framework (in paragraph 
41) allows developing countries to designate certain 
products as Special Products eligible for more flexible 
treatment, based on criteria including rural development 
needs.  (Note: As reported in reftels B and C, and as 
evidenced by Honduras\' strategy in the CAFTA negotiations, 
the securing of special treatment for sensitive products is 
one of Honduras\' top priorities in any trade agreement, due 
to the domestic political sensitivities attached to 
agricultural products such as maize, rice, poultry and dairy 
products.  End note.) 
 
3. (U) Redondo tempered his enthusiasm, however, by saying 
that the framework is only a basic guide for future 
negotiations, and that most of the difficult decisions still 
lie ahead.  The July framework, for example, does not 
address one of Honduras\' outstanding concerns, that of 
establishing a tariff-reduction formula that will not 
discriminate against countries such as Honduras that already 
have low bound tariff rates.  Still, given the failure of 
talks at Cancun, Redondo views the July framework as a 
positive step. 
 
4. (SBU) Regarding the selection of a successor to WTO 
Director General Supachai, Redondo confirmed that Honduras 
supports the candidacy of Ambassador Carlos Perez de 
Castillo of Uruguay (ref D).  Redondo had heard press 
reports that Brazil was putting forth a rival candidate, but 
did not know the Brazilian candidate\'s name or anything 
about him.  Redondo said that he believes Perez de Castillo 
has the support of the other Central American countries as 
well, as they have worked with him in the past and are 
comfortable and familiar with him. 
 
Pierce 
"
"21688","10/17/2004 14:45","04TEGUCIGALPA2318","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE223457","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002318 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, NU, OAS 
SUBJECT: CONVOKING A SPECIAL SESSION OF THE OAS PERMANENT 
COUNCIL ON NICARAGUA 
 
REF: STATE 223457 
 
A/DCM spoke with Honduran Vice Foreign Minister (VFM) Anibal 
Quinones at 0900 October 17 about the Central American 
Presidents\' call for a special OAS Permanent Council session 
to demonstrate support for the elected government in 
Nicaragua.  VFM Quinones welcomed U.S. support and urged the 
U.S. to be in contact with other countries in the region. 
A/DCM explained that U.S. was seeking support for the Central 
American Presidents\' initiative in other capitals.  Quinones 
said he would relay our support to the President and be in 
touch if the Government of Honduras had any additional ideas 
on how the OAS could support President Bolanos in Nicarauga. 
Pierce 
"
"21802","10/19/2004 20:21","04TEGUCIGALPA2321","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/USOAS AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KWMN, PHUM, AORC, HO, OAS 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS\' CANDIDACY TO OAS WOMEN\'S COMMISSION 
GOVERNING COMMITTEE 
 
 
1. Post received a diplomatic note from the Honduran Foreign 
Ministry informing Post that the Government of Honduras will 
present the candidacy of Ambassador Soledad Funez de Ramirez 
Soto for election to the OAS Women\'s Commissions Governing 
Committee at elections to be held in at the OAS October 27-29. 
 
2. A copy of the diplomatic note was faxed to WHA/USOAS 
October 19.  Post will inform the MFA that the diplomatic 
note was forwarded to the Department for consideration. 
 
3. Comment:  Ambassador Ramirez is an excellent contact of 
the Embassy, and has been the most active force in the GOH\'s 
effort to improve its actions against trafficking in persons 
(TIP).  In particular, she has focused on prevention of TIP 
through public outreach and improving prosecution by 
strengthening anti-TIP legislation.  Post highly recommends 
her.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"21804","10/19/2004 21:28","04TEGUCIGALPA2330","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002330 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, OCTOBER 15, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 10/12, entitled \"Towards CAFTA.\"  \"The warning 
about the negative consequences of CAFTA made by the World 
Bank and the turn this issue may take if Bush loses the 
November elections should be a matter of concern and of 
immediate action for the governments of the region, 
particularly for Honduras.\" 
 
\"Although the toughest opponents of CAFTA, the FTAA and the 
whole globalization process have been the so-called 
`globophobics\', a diverse mixture of Orthodox Marxists, 
conservatives and hard-line nationalists, the truth is that 
they\'ve now been joined by other moderate sectors that have 
found flaws in these agreements, as well as agricultural 
producers that would be the most affected, as has been 
acknowledged by the WB.\" 
 
\"As a matter of fact, the Democratic candidate for the U.S. 
presidency, John Kerry, has warned that if he\'s elected, 
he\'ll push for a renegotiation, as was confirmed by 
Congressmen Dennis Kucinich and Hilda Solis last week.\" 
 
\"The Honduran government needs to create a framework to 
improve production, to take advantage of open markets, to 
assist those who would be affected, and to get ready for an 
eventual renegotiation that would correct the mistakes of 
the current agreement, which would improve our balance of 
costs and benefits.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"21855","10/20/2004 22:28","04TEGUCIGALPA2356","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA2123","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC, AND DS 
STATE FOR INL, INL/LP, INR/C, INR/AN/IAA, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG/ROL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/20/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCOR, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, PHUM, PINR, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PUBLIC MINISTRY DROPPING CORRUPTION 
CHARGES AGAINST FORMER PRESIDENT CALLEJAS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2123 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1690 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 729 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 400 
 
Classified By: Ambassasador Larry L. Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: While other countries in the region have 
taken steps to arrest and/or prosecute high-level corrupt 
individuals, Honduras appears to be moving in the opposite 
direction.  On October 18, the Public Ministry officially 
dropped all pending corruption charges against ex-president 
(and National Party leader) Raphael Leonardo Callejas and a 
number of other Callejas associates, some of whom continue to 
hold prominent positions within the GOH.  These actions 
appear to have been orchestrated by the Honduran Attorney 
General (AG), Ovidio Navarro, who once served as Callejas\' 
attorney and who continues to maintain a close relationship 
with him.  This latest action, unfortunately, once again 
raises serious questions regarding Honduras\' commitment to 
fighting corruption and upholding the rule of law.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
Navarro Shows His True Colors 
----------------------------- 
 
2. (C) On October 18, the Honduran Public Ministry officially 
dropped all pending corruption charges against ex-president 
Raphael Leonardo Callejas (1990-94) and a number of other 
Callejas associates, some of whom continue to hold prominent 
positions within the GOH.  In all, 15 cases were dismissed. 
Many cases were over 10 years old; others, however, were as 
recent as 2003.  The cases appear to have been dismissed over 
the objection of prosecutors responsible for these cases.  In 
fact, PolOff received a desperate phone call from Martha 
Valladares, acting special prosecutor for corruption at the 
PM, pleading that the Embassy intervene with the GOH to have 
the decision reversed.  (Note:  Special Prosecutor for 
Corruption Soraya Morales is in Japan for training.  The 
timing of the announcement is unlikely to be a coincidence. 
End Note.)  Valladares told PolOff that AG Navarro ordered 
the cases be dropped because of his connections with 
Callejas.  Valladares went on to note that she believed the 
pending cases at the PM were strong and the only thing 
holding back successful prosecutions was the lack of interest 
by high level officials in moving the cases forward.  The 
official reason given by the PM for dismissing the cases was 
that they were old and cluttering up the system.  By 
dismissing these 15 cases, out of a total of approximately 
over 1,300 pending corruption cases, the PM claimed that the 
justice system in Honduras would work more smoothly. 
 
3. (C) When AG Navarro assumed control of the Public Ministry 
(PM) in February 2004, he assured the Honduran people and the 
Ambassador that he would aggressively pursue cases against 
corrupt individuals, regardless of their status in Honduran 
society (ref C).  This has not been the case.  Continuing in 
the path of his predecessor, Roy Medina, Navarro has chosen 
to obfuscate and eschew rather than pursue meaningful cases 
against \"big fish.\"  In this recent case,  AG Navarro claims 
he had recused himself because of his known connections to 
Callejas.  However, it appears certain he was behind the 
decision to have the cases dismissed. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PM\'s Undistinguished Record Gets Worse 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The dismissal of cases against Callejas and his 
associates continues an unimpressive record at the PM in 
fighting corruption.  Post notes that in ten years of 
existence, the PM has only effectively prosecuted fifteen 
corruption cases (refs A and B).  In the past, the PM has 
claimed that lack of resources, personnel, and other 
logistical constraints have hindered effective action on 
corruption cases.  It should be noted that the Public 
Ministry, while part of the GOH, is an independent 
organization, a fact the GOH often cites when the PM makes 
controversial decisions.  However, it is clear that little, 
if any, political will exists at higher levels within the GOH 
to effectively pursue meaningful cases. 
 
----------------------------- 
Other GOH Officials Speak Out 
----------------------------- 
 
5. (C) On October 14, PolOff met with German Espinal, 
ex-Executive Director of the now defunct National 
Anti-Corruption Council (ref A).  Espinal reiterated his 
frustration in working with the GOH on corruption issues, 
noting that in almost every area, the GOH is either unable or 
unwilling to make meaningful progress.  Espinal said he still 
believed many individuals within the GOH wanted to \"do the 
right thing\" but they do not out of fear of losing their 
jobs, or worse. 
 
6. (SBU) Also on October 14, PolOff met with Doris Aguilar, 
head of the PM\'s Organized Crime Unit.  Aguilar expressed 
some exasperation in working with high-level GOH officials, 
particularly the Honduran judiciary, in moving cases forward. 
 However, in a surprise move, Aguilar, together with six 
other prosecutors, publicly supported the PM leadership on 
the latest corruption decisions, arguing that the PM\'s 
dropping of corruption charges against Callejas and his 
associates should not be reversed. 
 
------------------------------- 
U.S. Anti-Corruption Assistance 
------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) In an effort to improve anti-corruption efforts, U.S. 
anti-corruption assistance in Honduras seeks to build more 
responsive, effective, and professional institutions in the 
legal system, including the Public Ministry.  Through USAID\'s 
regional strategic objective for ruling justly, Embassy 
programs seek more responsive and transparent governance, to 
include the strengthened rule of law and respect for human 
rights, and the greater transparency and accountability of 
government.  These programs seek to lay the groundwork for 
greater respect for the rule of law and improved functioning 
of the judicial system, both essential elements of democratic 
governance. 
 
8. (U) Other Embassy programs sponsored through POL/INL, DEA, 
ECON, and PAS seek to expand anti-corruption training and 
promote better law enforcement techniques.  Of particular 
interest, USAID is in the process of finalizing a 4.5 year 
contract on improving transparency and anti-corruption 
activities to Honduras.  PAS is also sponsoring an 
anti-corruption speaker, Dr. Edmundo Orellana Mercado, who, 
apart from delivering remarks at an upcoming civil society 
forum, will also be meeting with various GOH officials. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
GOH Must Re-Focus Anti-Corruption Efforts 
----------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Comment:  While the GOH remains rhetorically committed 
to fighting corruption, its record in prosecuting corruption, 
unfortunately, remains undistinguished.  At a time when its 
neighbors are moving forward, however painfully, on 
corruption charges against high-level individuals, Honduras 
increasingly risks being portrayed as out of step.  Without 
doubt, a vast majority of Hondurans would support a more 
active push by the Public Ministry to demonstrate a 
commitment to the rule of law and greater accountability. 
The time has come for the GOH, if it wants to do something 
concrete about the pervasive corruption that permeates 
Honduras, to demonstrate a commitment to prosecuting 
high-level corruption.  The place to start would be to work 
to reverse the PM\'s recent decision to dismiss corruption 
cases against Callejas and his associates.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"21888","10/21/2004 12:43","04TEGUCIGALPA2357","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA2123","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC, AND DS 
STATE FOR INL, INL/LP, INR/C, INR/AN/IAA, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG/ROL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/20/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCOR, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, PHUM, PINR, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PUBLIC MINISTRY DROPPING CORRUPTION 
CHARGES AGAINST FORMER PRESIDENT CALLEJAS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2123 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1690 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 729 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 400 
 
Classified By: Ambassasador Larry L. Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: While other countries in the region have 
taken steps to arrest and/or prosecute high-level corrupt 
individuals, Honduras appears to be moving in the opposite 
direction.  On October 18, the Public Ministry officially 
dropped all pending corruption charges against ex-president 
(and National Party leader) Raphael Leonardo Callejas and a 
number of other Callejas associates, some of whom continue to 
hold prominent positions within the GOH.  These actions 
appear to have been orchestrated by the Honduran Attorney 
General (AG), Ovidio Navarro, who once served as Callejas\' 
attorney and who continues to maintain a close relationship 
with him.  This latest action, unfortunately, once again 
raises serious questions regarding Honduras\' commitment to 
fighting corruption and upholding the rule of law.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
Navarro Shows His True Colors 
----------------------------- 
 
2. (C) On October 18, the Honduran Public Ministry officially 
dropped all pending corruption charges against ex-president 
Raphael Leonardo Callejas (1990-94) and a number of other 
Callejas associates, some of whom continue to hold prominent 
positions within the GOH.  In all, 15 cases were dismissed. 
Many cases were over 10 years old; others, however, were as 
recent as 2003.  The cases appear to have been dismissed over 
the objection of prosecutors responsible for these cases.  In 
fact, PolOff received a desperate phone call from Martha 
Valladares, acting special prosecutor for corruption at the 
PM, pleading that the Embassy intervene with the GOH to have 
the decision reversed.  (Note:  Special Prosecutor for 
Corruption Soraya Morales is in Japan for training.  The 
timing of the announcement is unlikely to be a coincidence. 
End Note.)  Valladares told PolOff that AG Navarro ordered 
the cases be dropped because of his connections with 
Callejas.  Valladares went on to note that she believed the 
pending cases at the PM were strong and the only thing 
holding back successful prosecutions was the lack of interest 
by high level officials in moving the cases forward.  The 
official reason given by the PM for dismissing the cases was 
that they were old and cluttering up the system.  By 
dismissing these 15 cases, out of a total of approximately 
over 1,300 pending corruption cases, the PM claimed that the 
justice system in Honduras would work more smoothly. 
 
3. (C) When AG Navarro assumed control of the Public Ministry 
(PM) in February 2004, he assured the Honduran people and the 
Ambassador that he would aggressively pursue cases against 
corrupt individuals, regardless of their status in Honduran 
society (ref C).  This has not been the case.  Continuing in 
the path of his predecessor, Roy Medina, Navarro has chosen 
to obfuscate and eschew rather than pursue meaningful cases 
against \"big fish.\"  In this recent case,  AG Navarro claims 
he had recused himself because of his known connections to 
Callejas.  However, it appears certain he was behind the 
decision to have the cases dismissed. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PM\'s Undistinguished Record Gets Worse 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) The dismissal of cases against Callejas and his 
associates continues an unimpressive record at the PM in 
fighting corruption.  Post notes that in ten years of 
existence, the PM has only effectively prosecuted fifteen 
corruption cases (refs A and B).  In the past, the PM has 
claimed that lack of resources, personnel, and other 
logistical constraints have hindered effective action on 
corruption cases.  It should be noted that the Public 
Ministry, while part of the GOH, is an independent 
organization, a fact the GOH often cites when the PM makes 
controversial decisions.  However, it is clear that little, 
if any, political will exists at higher levels within the GOH 
to effectively pursue meaningful cases. 
 
----------------------------- 
Other GOH Officials Speak Out 
----------------------------- 
 
5. (C) On October 14, PolOff met with German Espinal, 
ex-Executive Director of the now defunct National 
Anti-Corruption Council (ref A).  Espinal reiterated his 
frustration in working with the GOH on corruption issues, 
noting that in almost every area, the GOH is either unable or 
unwilling to make meaningful progress.  Espinal said he still 
believed many individuals within the GOH wanted to \"do the 
right thing\" but they do not out of fear of losing their 
jobs, or worse. 
 
6. (SBU) Also on October 14, PolOff met with Doris Aguilar, 
head of the PM\'s Organized Crime Unit.  Aguilar expressed 
some exasperation in working with high-level GOH officials, 
particularly the Honduran judiciary, in moving cases forward. 
 However, in a surprise move, Aguilar, together with six 
other prosecutors, publicly supported the PM leadership on 
the latest corruption decisions, arguing that the PM\'s 
dropping of corruption charges against Callejas and his 
associates should not be reversed. 
 
------------------------------- 
U.S. Anti-Corruption Assistance 
------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) In an effort to improve anti-corruption efforts, U.S. 
anti-corruption assistance in Honduras seeks to build more 
responsive, effective, and professional institutions in the 
legal system, including the Public Ministry.  Through USAID\'s 
regional strategic objective for ruling justly, Embassy 
programs seek more responsive and transparent governance, to 
include the strengthened rule of law and respect for human 
rights, and the greater transparency and accountability of 
government.  These programs seek to lay the groundwork for 
greater respect for the rule of law and improved functioning 
of the judicial system, both essential elements of democratic 
governance. 
 
8. (U) Other Embassy programs sponsored through POL/INL, DEA, 
ECON, and PAS seek to expand anti-corruption training and 
promote better law enforcement techniques.  Of particular 
interest, USAID is in the process of finalizing a 4.5 year 
contract on improving transparency and anti-corruption 
activities to Honduras.  PAS is also sponsoring an 
anti-corruption speaker, Dr. Edmundo Orellana Mercado, who, 
apart from delivering remarks at an upcoming civil society 
forum, will also be meeting with various GOH officials. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
GOH Must Re-Focus Anti-Corruption Efforts 
----------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) Comment:  While the GOH remains rhetorically committed 
to fighting corruption, its record in prosecuting corruption, 
unfortunately, remains undistinguished.  At a time when its 
neighbors are moving forward, however painfully, on 
corruption charges against high-level individuals, Honduras 
increasingly risks being portrayed as out of step.  Without 
doubt, a vast majority of Hondurans would support a more 
active push by the Public Ministry to demonstrate a 
commitment to the rule of law and greater accountability. 
The time has come for the GOH, if it wants to do something 
concrete about the pervasive corruption that permeates 
Honduras, to demonstrate a commitment to prosecuting 
high-level corruption.  The place to start would be to work 
to reverse the PM\'s recent decision to dismiss corruption 
cases against Callejas and his associates.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"21952","10/22/2004 15:14","04TEGUCIGALPA2373","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA2131","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002373 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, MCAP, PGOV, PARM, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS DECLARED MINE FREE 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 02131 
 
1. On Friday, October 8, the Government of Honduras (GOH) 
convened a ceremony at the Headquarters of the First Infantry 
Battalion (Primer Batallon de Infanteria) on the outskirts of 
Tegucigalpa to officially declare Honduras mine free.  U.S. 
participation in the demining efforts was directed through 
the Assistance Mission for Mine Clearance in Central America 
(MARMINCA), which coordinated through the Organization of 
American States (OAS) and the Inter-American Defense Board 
(IADB).  Mine clearance began in 1994 and lasted a total of 
nine years.  The demining team finalized its work along the 
Honduras/Nicaragua border, specifically focusing on the 
wartime remnants left over from the Central American civil 
wars of the 1980s.  There has been no confirmed findings of 
mines in Honduras since June 30, 2004. 
 
2. The team was responsible for cleaning an area that totaled 
nearly 1,479 square kilometers.  All told, the program 
resulted in the removal of approximately 2,191 mines, 214 
explosive artifacts, and 60,521 pieces of war refuse.  With 
the land now clear of danger, the GOH estimates that more 
than 67,000 families will likely move into the area and start 
farming. 
 
3. Nonetheless, IADB personnel report that due to Hurricane 
Mitch, there may be some deep-seated mines that have yet to 
be discovered.  These mines would only pose a potential 
problem if the area were to undergo major construction 
projects, which could disturb and perhaps set off the mines. 
 
4. The Ambassadors of Germany, Denmark, Spain, France, and 
Italy were present at the ceremony; PolMilOff attended the 
ceremony for the Embassy. 
Palmer 
"
"22030","10/26/2004 13:12","04TEGUCIGALPA2383","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002383 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, OCTOBER 15, 2004 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 10/12, entitled \"Towards CAFTA.\"  \"The warning 
about the negative consequences of CAFTA made by the World 
Bank and the turn this issue may take if Bush loses the 
November elections should be a matter of concern and of 
immediate action for the governments of the region, 
particularly for Honduras.\" 
 
\"Although the toughest opponents of CAFTA, the FTAA and the 
whole globalization process have been the so-called 
`globophobics\', a diverse mixture of Orthodox Marxists, 
conservatives and hard-line nationalists, the truth is that 
they\'ve now been joined by other moderate sectors that have 
found flaws in these agreements, as well as agricultural 
producers that would be the most affected, as has been 
acknowledged by the WB.\" 
 
\"As a matter of fact, the Democratic candidate for the U.S. 
presidency, John Kerry, has warned that if he\'s elected, 
he\'ll push for a renegotiation, as was confirmed by 
Congressmen Dennis Kucinich and Hilda Solis last week.\" 
 
\"The Honduran government needs to create a framework to 
improve production, to take advantage of open markets, to 
assist those who would be affected, and to get ready for an 
eventual renegotiation that would correct the mistakes of 
the current agreement, which would improve our balance of 
costs and benefits.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"22047","10/26/2004 19:35","04TEGUCIGALPA2393","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE228229","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA DAS FISK, WHA/CCA, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR PRM, PRM/ENA, PRM/ECA, AND PRM/PRP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/26/2014 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, SMIG, MARR, CU, HO 
SUBJECT: DETAILS OF RESETTLEMENT OF PROTECTED CUBAN 
MIGRANTS FROM GUANTANAMO TO HONDURAS STILL TBD 
 
REF: A. STATE 228229 
 
     B. MANDOJANA/PALMER E-MAIL 10/21/04 
     C. GEHRING/OLSEN E-MAILS/TELCONS/FAXES 10/15/04 AND 
        10/20-21/04 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 2297 
     E. POPE/OLSEN E-MAILS/TELCONS/FAXES 10/8/04 AND 
        10/12/04 
     F. STATE 216668 
     G. TEGUCIGALPA 1524 
     H. STATE 139422 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger Pierce; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Post continues to work closely with the 
Honduran Ministry of Foreign Affairs concerning the proposed 
resettlement of 20 protected Cuban migrants in Guantanamo to 
Honduras.  While the GOH has repeatedly said yes to the 
resettlement in general, the details of the resettlement, 
including exact numbers and immigration status/work 
authorization upon arrival in Honduras, remain to be 
determined.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) Acting PolCouns on October 20 raised the USG\'s 
concerns on immigration status/work authorization (ref C) 
with MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin and talked to 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) Representative 
Norberto Giron about the possible acceptance by Honduras of 
up to 20 GTMO Cubans.  Giron said that if the GOH accepted 
GTMO Cubans, IOM could help facilitate the immigration 
details as they had done with a previous group of GTMO Cubans 
that came to Honduras in 2001.  Acting PolCouns underlined to 
Fortin USG concerns about the immigration status the GTMO 
Cubans would be granted (especially U.S. concern over 
\"economic refugee\" vs. refugee/permanent residency status, 
and the importance of the GTMO Cubans having authorization to 
work).  Acting PolCouns suggested that the arrangement that 
was used for the 2001 group of GTMO Cubans be used again, 
since IOM had said it had been without problems and done with 
a low profile.  Fortin said he would relay these points to 
the FM. 
 
3. (C) DCM and Acting PolCouns met October 22 with Foreign 
Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista to discuss several issues, 
including the GTMO Cubans.  DCM noted that the Embassy 
understood that during their October 22 meeting in Washington 
the Secretary had thanked Honduran President Ricardo Maduro 
for agreeing to take Cuban migrants from GTMO, and that 
Maduro had said he was happy to do so (ref B).  The FM said 
that he was awaiting Maduro\'s return to Honduras October 23 
before moving ahead on the details of resettling the GTMO 
Cubans.  Acting PolCouns underlined to the FM USG concerns 
about the immigration status the GTMO Cubans would be 
granted, noting that economic refugee status without work 
authorization was problematic, and suggesting that 
refugee/permanent residency status with work authorization 
would be far preferable (refs A and C). 
 
4. (C) Comment:  EmbOffs will continue to work with the FM 
and other MFA officials for clarification of the details on 
the proposed resettlement, including the exact number the GOH 
will accept and what immigration status/work authorization 
will be granted upon arrival in Honduras.  Post is guardedly 
optimistic that all outstanding issues will be resolved 
favorably.  End comment. 
Palmer 
"
"22106","10/27/2004 17:32","04TEGUCIGALPA2406","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA2356","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DS/IP/WHA - M.FLYNN, DS/ITA - K.HALL, DS/IP/FPO - 
F.GARDNER, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, KSAC, PGOV, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: NON-FUNCTIONING BOMB DISCOVERED AT PUBLIC MINISTRY 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 2356 
 
1. Summary. At approximately 1000 hours on Friday, October 
22, an explosive device was discovered outside the Public 
Ministry by a guard assigned to that location. The guard 
contacted the local bomb squad who responded to the scene to 
evaluate the device. RSO was told by police contact device 
lacked a power source. End Summary. 
 
2. An explosive device was discovered October 22 outside the 
Public Ministry offices (Attorney General and prosecutors) by 
a guard assigned to the ministry. The device was in a plastic 
bag and contained approximately one pound of TNT connected to 
a wrist watch with wires. Police contacts stated there was no 
power source such as a battery discovered on the device. 
Note: RSO is attempting to obtain photographs of the device 
and if so will forward photographs back to DS headquarters. 
End Note. Once RSO received information about an explosive 
device being discovered embassy local guard force (LGF) was 
alerted. LGF conducted a sweep of the inside as well as the 
outside perimeter of the embassy facility with negative 
results. 
 
3. RSO believes the device was planted in conjunction with 
the firing of several public prosecutors on Thursday. This 
issue stems from the GOH dismissal of over 100 cases 
involving corruption which included cases involving the 
former president of Honduras (reftel and septel). RSO 
believes that this device was placed outside the ministry to 
bring more attention on this issue which has been covered 
extensively in the press the last few days. With police 
contacts saying no power source was found the device could 
not function yet, it sent a message that some people are not 
in agreement with the decision to dismiss these corruption 
cases and fire the prosecutors. RSO believes the TNT was 
likely stolen from one of the many mine sites located around 
the country. Once again, if RSO can obtain photographs Post 
will have a better idea of the devices make up and where the 
explosives came from. 
 
4. Should you have further questions/comments please contact 
RSO Lizzi. 
 
3 
Palmer 
"
"22206","10/29/2004 15:44","04TEGUCIGALPA2424","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002424 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS, RWARFIELD 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, KCOR, ETRD, PGOV, PINR, KMCA, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS:  TAX SERVICE STRENGTHENS INTERNAL 
AFFAIRS UNIT TO CRACK DOWN ON CORRUPTION 
 
 
Classified By: Classified By: Economic Chief Patrick Dunn for reasons 1 
.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  The tax authority,s internal affairs unit, 
known as the Transparency Unit, has mounted a vigorous effort 
over the last 18 months to investigate and combat corruption 
within the tax and customs services.  Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that the dismissals for corruption have had an 
appreciable impact in lowering the incidence of corruption 
within the organization. At Director Duarte,s request, 
Department of Treasury is providing technical assistance to 
strengthen this unit, equipping it with better investigative 
techniques.  Foremost among these will be investigating 
employees living champagne lifestyles on cheap-beer incomes. 
The GOH judiciary remains weak, and successfully prosecuting 
these cases in court continues to be an uphill battle at 
best.  Yet improved investigative techniques, a dedicated 
corps of agents, and a willingness to root out and fire 
corrupt officials strike us as excellent first steps. End 
Summary. 
 
2. (C) The Executive Revenue Directorate (DEI, the GOH 
equivalent of the USG,s Internal Revenue Service) Internal 
Affairs Unit, known as the Transparency Unit (TU), is charged 
with investigating fraud or corruption in the customs and tax 
services, as well as responding to complaints from taxpayers. 
 Divided into three units (taxes, customs, and complaints, 
respectively), the Transparency Unit was formed five years 
ago in an attempt to curb rampant corruption in the tax 
service.  Most agents were recruited from police departments, 
but were inexperienced in internal investigations techniques. 
 The unit got off to a slow start, until about 18 months ago 
when then-Director of the DEI, Mario Duarte, tasked them with 
mounting an anti-corruption investigation into the customs 
service.  That highly successful investigation led to the 
dismissal of over 20 customs inspectors for corruption. 
According to Department of Treasury representatives who have 
spoken with him, it is one of Transparency Unit Chief Carlos 
Gomez,s primary frustrations that, despite passing their 
investigatory findings to the prosecutor,s office, no 
suspects were convicted of a crime.  Nonetheless, the TU,s 
efforts appear to be having an impact, as anecdotal evidence 
indicates a sharp drop-off in corruption within the DEI. 
 
3. (SBU) To strengthen the TU, Duarte requested USD 35,000 in 
additional technical assistance from the U.S. Department of 
Treasury.  On October 17, three Treasury agents arrived for 
three weeks of intensive instruction of TU members.  The lead 
instructor comes from the Treasury Department,s Inspection 
General for Tax Administration, the Internal Affairs Unit for 
the U.S. IRS, where she is currently the director of training 
and formerly a special agent in charge.  She and her team 
will teach courses on internal security and technical skills 
(such as investigation and interrogation techniques), 
interview skills for auditors and tax collectors, and 
financial investigations related to employees.  This last 
class will be key in anti-corruption efforts, as it teaches 
the TU investigators to focus on employees with unexplained 
luxury lifestyles, far beyond the standard of living for the 
positions they hold in government. 
 
4. (C) The financial investigation approach to 
anti-corruption being adopted by the TU closely mirrors 
comments made by Vice Minister of Justice Luis Fernando Suazo 
in an October 18 conversation with EconChief.  Asked about 
the weak record of corruption prosecutions to date, Suazo 
lamented the difficulty of finding sufficient evidence of 
corruption to bring to court.  Firms, he said, are careful to 
ensure that their financial books are in order, and it is 
extremely difficult to find a record or receipt of a bribe or 
other corrupt practice.  To remedy this, he said, the GOH is 
considering, instead, requiring GOH employees with luxury 
lifestyles to justify their incomes.  Rather than corruption 
per se, officials that fail to explain the source of their 
wealth could be charged with illicit earnings. 
 
5. (C) Finally, Post has learned that the TU has reportedly 
been mounting an investigation into corruption by a senior 
DEI official in its San Pedro Sula office involving 
underpayment of customs fees on imports entering Honduras by 
land.  According to information provided to a Treasury 
representative active in fighting money laundering, the DEI 
TU attempted to collect conclusive evidence to prove its 
case, but was rebuffed in San Pedro.  The TU has reportedly 
now secured the cooperation of the prosecutor,s office, 
which is reportedly preparing for an October 21 raid on the 
suspect,s office. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  Post is encouraged by these concrete efforts 
to strengthen anti-corruption efforts within the DEI and is 
pleased to be supporting these initiatives via Treasury,s 
technical assistance.  We also welcome Vice Minister Suazo,s 
idea of improving results by attacking the same problem from 
a different angle.  The GOH judiciary remains weak, and 
successfully prosecuting these cases in court continues to be 
an uphill battle at best.  Yet improved investigative 
techniques, a dedicated corps of agents, and a willingness to 
root out and fire (if not send to jail) corrupt officials 
strike us as excellent first steps.  Post will continue to 
work with the DEI and encourage other parts of the GOH to 
deepen the fight against corruption.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
 
Palmer 
"
"22208","10/29/2004 15:52","04TEGUCIGALPA2426","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA2289","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CEN 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS, RWARFIELD 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, ETRD, PGOV, PINR, KMCA, HO 
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY:  HONDURAS CASHIERS ITS TAX MAN; 
FINANCE MINISTER,S COMMENTS ON THE REVENUE SERVICE SHAKE-UP 
AND REORGANIZATION 
 
REF: A. (A) TEGUCIGALPA 2289 
 
     B. (B) TEGUCIGALPA 1741 
 
Classified By: Classified By: Economic Chief Patrick Dunn for reasons 1 
.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  On October 15, it was reported that Mario 
Duarte, head of the Executive Revenue Directorate (DEI, the 
GOH equivalent of the USG,s Internal Revenue Service) will 
be moved out of his position effective November 1.  Duarte 
will become the new Director of the National Ports Company. 
Duarte will be replaced by Jose Manuel Carcamo, previously a 
former DEI tax lawyer and a partner with Minister Chong in an 
accounting consultancy.  In an October 19 meeting, Minister 
of Finance Chong explained his reasons for the sweeping 
changes -- improved efficiency and personnel reform chief 
among them.  Chong expressed continued support for the 
Treasury technical assistance program to the DEI and 
encouraged Post to work closely with the new Director. 
Carcamo is thus far an unknown quantity, but Post is 
encouraged by Chong,s strong professed support for 
anti-corruption, institutional reform, and especially for 
continuing Treasury,s technical assistance efforts.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (C) On October 15, it was reported that Mario Duarte, 
former head of the Executive Revenue Directorate (DEI, the 
GOH equivalent of the USG,s Internal Revenue Service), will 
be moved out of his position and will instead become the new 
Director of the National Ports Company.  This follows the 
September 30 announcement (ref A) that the DEI would be moved 
back into the Ministry of Finance (MOF).  Post reported at 
that time that previous tensions between new Minister of 
Finance William Chong Wong and Duarte made his continued 
tenure at MOF uncertain.  (Note:  Chong assumed office on 
September 1, ref B.)  Current Ports Director Fernando Alvarez 
told Post that he was surprised Duarte received the posting, 
since there are powerful political and business interests 
active in the port that dislike him. 
 
3. (C) The National Ports Directorship is a relatively 
high-profile position, and Puerto Cortes has become 
increasingly important following its security certification 
by the U.S. Coast Guard (one of the first in the world to be 
certified) and its role as the anchor of the proposed 
logistical corridor infrastructure project -- the largest 
component of Honduras\' USD 257 million proposal to the 
Millennium Challenge Account.  Duarte, in his public remarks, 
indicated that a key focus of his tenure would be full 
consideration of both the pros and cons of port 
privatization.  In our October 19 meeting, Minister of 
Finance Chong scoffed at Duarte,s remarks, noting that the 
issue of port privatization will be decided by Minister of 
the Presidency Luis Cosenza, Minister for Social Policy Mauro 
Membreno, and the President, not by Duarte.  While the move 
to Ports could be viewed as plum for Duarte, it appears 
designed to move Duarte aside as the new Minister 
consolidates his hold, particularly over the revenue 
functions within MOF.  Of more concern, outgoing Ports 
Director Alvarez told Post that one reason he chose to resign 
was increasing pressure from the National Party to squeeze 
additional funds out of the port to fill party coffers 
heading into the February 2005 primaries and November 2005 
national elections.  In our view, Duarte is no more likely to 
succeed at rebuffing these pressures. 
 
4. (C) Duarte will be replaced as of November 1 at MOF by 
Jose Manuel Carcamo, previously a former DEI tax lawyer and a 
partner with Minister Chong in an accounting consultancy. 
Minister for Investment Camilo Atala told Post that most 
recently Carcamo established a private practice and has been 
practicing financial law as an advisor to several major 
banks.  EconChief and Treasury representative met with Chong 
on October 19 to ask about the motives for and likely impacts 
of the DEI reorganization and leadership change.  Chong told 
us that Carcamo is a legal expert with experience in both the 
DEI and the private sector (Ernst and Young), but admitted 
that his lack of administrative experience could be &a 
handicap.8  Nevertheless, he said, it is easier, in his 
opinion, to find a tax expert and teach him to manage than to 
find a manager and teach him tax law.  In contrast, he said, 
former DEI Director Duarte spent the first year of his tenure 
getting up to speed on the substance of his portfolio. 
 
5. (C) Asked about the impetus for such a sweeping 
reorganization effort, Chong pointed to the October 13 
Congressional decree incorporating DEI into the MOF and 
giving DEI four months to restructure and improve its 
efficiency.  Chong said the DEI had become inefficient and 
poorly organized and in need of re-engineering.  In 
particular, he pointed to the need to reform the auditing arm 
of DEI, which investigates as few as one case per 
investigator, can take as long as ten months to complete an 
audit that a private firm could do in just one month, and too 
frequently generates no revenues (implying that the auditors 
are paid-off to close the case.)  Anyone involved in 
corruption, Chong emphasized, will be fired.  To motivate 
those merely underperforming, Chong has proposed performance 
bonuses in lieu of some portion of formerly guaranteed 
raises. Chong expressed continued support for the Treasury 
technical assistance program to the DEI and encouraged Post 
to work closely with the new Director. 
 
6. (C) Chong also said the need to bring the DEI workforce 
into the Civil Service system was a key factor in the 
restructuring.  Under the CS law, Chong seeks to define 
career ladders, position descriptions, and salary scales for 
DEI employees, to replace the current ad-hoc system.  The 
DEI, he said, is overstaffed and full of political 
appointees.  EconChief noted that other ministries were 
seeking ways to remove their employees from the civil service 
system to improve hiring and retention and better protect 
them from political pressures.  (Note:  Minister of Trade and 
Industry Norman Garcia, for example, recently raised this 
issue with us.  He is seeking to follow the Central Bank,s 
personnel model, which is not under the CS system, in order 
to create a core group of technical experts in trade that can 
remain in place beyond the next elections to implement CAFTA. 
 End Note.)  Chong replied that it was &a first class lie8 
to say that CS positions are more politicized than those in 
the autonomous agencies.  He strongly defended the DEI move 
into Finance as a step to depoliticizing the service. 
 
7. (C) It was also announced that the second Vice Minister 
position, vacant since Chong left it on September 1 to become 
Minister, was filled on October 19 by German Donald Dubon 
Trochez, seconded to MOF from the Honduran Central Bank 
(BCH). Dubon, an accountant with a master,s degree in 
business financial administration, was formerly the Chief of 
the Accounting and Controls Division at the BCH.  Vice 
Minister Ralph Oberholzer will remain in his current position 
as the other Vice Minister, responsible for debt and finance 
issues. 
 
8. (C) Comment:  Carcamo is thus far an unknown quantity, but 
his previous association with Chong has led some to allege 
implication in helping tax offenders evade justice.  Post has 
no evidence that this is the case, but will keep a close eye 
on this as it develops.  Post is encouraged by Chong,s 
strong professed support for anti-corruption, institutional 
reform, and specifically for continuing Treasury,s technical 
assistance efforts to improve collections practices at the 
DEI.  Post will discuss the Treasury program with 
Director-designate Carcamo at the earliest opportunity, and 
will continue to monitor any impacts the shake-up could have 
on that program.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
Palmer 
"
"22215","10/29/2004 17:11","04TEGUCIGALPA2427","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA2312","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002427 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD, IO/EDA, WHA/EPSC, EB, CBA, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR IO/EDA (CCHANG) AND DRL/IL 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
COMMERCE FOR AVANVUREN, MSIEGELMAN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, ECPS, EINV, PGOV, ELAB, KJUS, KMCA, HO, UNDP 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS TELECOMMS UPDATE OCTOBER 2004 
 
REF: 04 TEGUCIGALPA 2312 
 
Classified By: Classified by EconChief PDunn for reasons 1.4(b,d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  On October 12, EconChief met with Jose Renan 
Caballero, Chief Telecommunications Advisor on the 
President,s Modernization Commission, to discuss recent 
developments in the telecommunications sector.  Caballero was 
candid regarding Alcatel, Communitel, Megatel, the new 
telecommunications law, and his views of the future of the 
sector in Honduras.  Over the last two weeks, Post has also 
met with representatives of Motorola to discuss Motorola,s 
participation in Honduras, Communitel regarding its 
continuing struggle to begin operations, Lucent on its 
proposed donation of telecomms infrastructure, and Project 
Finance Advisors (PFA) to discuss its feasibility study on 
creating a fibre-optic backbone for the Honduran telecomms 
sector.  This cable incorporates all of these views to 
present a snapshot of the telecomms sector in Honduras.  The 
Alcatel/UNDP procurement issue will be reported septel.  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Communitel:  Champing at the Bit 
-------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Communitel is a consortium, made up of Airway and 
Motorola, that is in the process of securing permission to 
provide fixed wireless services in Honduras as a sub-operator 
to state-owned Hondutel.  (Note:  By law, Hondutel has a 
monopoly on fixed-line services throughout the country until 
December 2005, though it has recently been approving 
investments by &sub-operators8.  End Note.)  Communitel is 
eager to get moving on its project, but its request has been 
bound up in red tape for nearly eight months.  Post has been 
active in urging GOH progress on the case.  According to 
Caballero, Communitel,s license has now been approved by GOH 
telecomms regulators Conatel.  What remains in dispute is the 
fee Communitel will be asked to pay for the spectrum.  Post 
is in regular contact with Hector Nunez, General Manager for 
Communitel, who provided much the same readout.  According to 
Nunez, technical experts within Conatel were recommending a 
spectrum fee of approximately USD 817,000 per year, whereas 
cellular service provider Megatel pays only USD 19,000 and 
fixed wireless service provider Multifon pays only USD 
10,000.  Nunes said that the proposed fee, if approved, 
&would be another way of saying no to our project.8 
According to Caballero, Conatel director David Matamoros is 
seeking a reasonable fee that recognizes the value of the 
spectrum while not being as prohibitively high as that being 
proposed currently. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Megatel Sale:  Not (only) Windfall Profits for the Elites 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
3. (C) Megatel is the second-largest provider of cellular 
phone service in Honduras.  Established about a year ago, 
Megatel grew quickly to approximately 80,000 subscribers, and 
succeeded in driving down prices for cellular service by 
injecting badly needed competition into the market previously 
dominated by Celtel.  Megatel was formed by a consortium that 
included a Swedish telecomms company and local business 
tycoons Miguel Facusse and Fredy Naser.  Megatel acquired 
spectrum rights for approximately USD six million, under a 
concession that reportedly prohibited re-sale for a period of 
five years.  Despite this prohibition, Naser and Facuse 
announced in July 2004 that they were selling out to 
Americamovil (the cellular service arm of Carlos Slim,s 
Telmex) for USD 60 million.  According to Caballero, such a 
sale was inevitable, since given its small size and 
consequent lack of economies of scale, Megatel could not 
compete over the long term without the backing of a much 
larger firm with lower procurement costs. 
 
4. (C) Asked if the sale price did not represent windfall 
profits, Caballero told us he thought the sale price 
reasonable, and said the sale was legal following the notably 
quick alterations to the concession agreement pushed through 
Congress to facilitate the deal.  The sale price, he said, 
includes the entire firm, not just the spectrum, and so the 
proper baseline is not the USD six million often cited in the 
press.  One should add to that figure, he said, some USD 13 
million in infrastructure (supplied by Ericsson), 
installation of approximately 120 cellular towers costing an 
estimated USD six million, and the revenue stream from 80,000 
subscribers, which even at only USD 15 per month is over USD 
14 million per year.  Totaling that, and adding something 
more for an established brand-name, Caballero found that a 
price of USD 50 to 60 million is not unreasonable.  Plus, he 
added wryly, there were the payments necessary to get 
approval for the sale from Congress in record time, including 
all necessary changes to the original concession agreement. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
New Telecomms Law:  Sounds Good, But Let,s See It 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
5. (C) Caballero said the Modernization Commission and 
regulatory authorities are crafting a new telecommunications 
law, which was completed in draft on October 12 and is now 
circulating for comment with a view to formally introducing 
it before Congress goes out of session at the end of October. 
 The new law will set maximum fees for services that are not 
currently regulated (such as installation fees) and these 
regulations will apply sector-wide.  More interesting, it 
reforms the licensing process, such that a firm, once granted 
an operating license, will be free to propose offering any 
service directly to regulators for approval.  (Note: 
Currently each new service first requires a new concession 
from Congress.  End Note.)  Caballero explicitly recognized 
that free access to the WiFi spectrum in the U.S. had led to 
an explosion of new technologies.  Nevertheless, he said, 
while the new Honduran law leaves the WiFi spectrum free, 
that free-spectrum model will not be applied to any other 
bands.  In response to points raised by EconChief, Caballero 
emphasized that the new law will be technology neutral. 
Caballero will provide Post with a copy of the draft law. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Sector Future:  Strong, But Not As Strong as Figures Imply 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
6. (C) In December 2005, Hondutel will lose its monopoly over 
fixed-line telephone services.  It is currently anticipated 
that Hondutel will be privatized thereafter, but a previous 
attempt to privatize Hondutel in 2000 failed when no bidders 
would meet the minimum (reserve) price.  Hondutel 
infrastructure is aging and inadequate, and there is some 
doubt about whether a future privatization effort will be 
successful.  Hondutel has been plagued by repeated GOH\'s 
raids of its profits to subsidize other GOH operations, 
robbing Hondutel of the money needed to invest in 
improvements, a fact Hondutel\'s labor union has repeatedly 
bemoaned to LabAtt.  (Caballero mentioned Telefonica de 
Espana as a potential suitor, noting that they are flush with 
cash and active in nearly every country in the region except 
Honduras.)  Hondutel is also one of the largest employers of 
technical and white-collar workers in Honduras, and there are 
limited opportunities for them in other sectors.  The 
rightsizing that would be needed to make Hondutel an 
attractive target could prove to be too politically painful 
to carry out, further jeopardizing any future privatization. 
 
7. (C) Hondutel has begun authorizing &sub-operatorships8 
to entice new entrants into the fixed-line services sector in 
the run-up to de-monopolization.  To date, 37 licenses have 
been approved.  However, Caballero said that figure is 
somewhat misleading since permission for interconnectivity ) 
the key next step ) has been requested in only 18 cases, and 
only 5 of those firms have actually begun offering services 
to the public.  In his view, this implies that the majority 
of sub-operatorships were obtained for speculative purposes, 
by investors who do not intend to provide services themselves 
but hope to re-sell the concession for a profit in the 
future.  Those who are serious entrants, on the other hand, 
upon receiving permission to interconnect, have only 90 days 
to begin to offer services.  Since it often takes six months 
or more to install the network architecture, firms are placed 
in the awkward position of initiating capital expenditures 
before receiving interconnectivity licenses.  Caballero cited 
Communitel as an example, saying that they have already begun 
work on their main building in Tegucigalpa.  According to 
Caballero, the 13 remaining firms have applied for 
interconnectivity in the last 90 days, but have not yet begun 
operations.  Asked why there seems to be a sudden rush into 
the market, he told us that there is a race for market share. 
 Once some entrants move forward none wants to be last, so 
all are rushing to get in now.  Caballero agreed, however, 
that eventually there will need to be a consolidation of the 
market in Honduras; the market simply is not big enough to 
justify 37 separate fixed-wireless service providers. 
 
----------------------------- 
Motorola:  A Foot in the Door 
----------------------------- 
 
8. (C) On October 8, EconOffs met with Motorola officials 
John Magee, Director for Central America and Caribbean, and 
David Archilla, Area Sales Manager for Central America and 
Caribbean, to discuss ongoing projects.  In addition to being 
a supplier to the telecommunications industry here and an 
occasional consortium partner (as in the Communitel effort), 
Motorola is also engaged in an Inter American Development 
Bank project associated with the Chiminike Children,s Museum 
to provide communications links to 100 remote centers 
throughout Honduras.  The required satellite dish has now 
been set up and test communications have been established 
with about half of the sites.  Motorola has requested that 
the Ambassador attend the project inauguration in November. 
Privately, Motorola admits the project is a loss-leader, but 
they hope the good will and name recognition engendered will 
assist them in expanding their market base in Honduras. 
 
9. (C) Motorola is also pushing forward with a USD five 
million sole source supply contract to the Ministry of Public 
Security for emergency communications.  The contract was 
approved in 2003, but must still be approved by both the 
Minister and the President.  According to Magee, the approval 
from the Minister has not been forthcoming, despite clear 
recognition by the communications experts at the ministry 
that the new system is needed.  Police forces currently use a 
ten-year-old outdated Motorola system with insufficient 
capacity, and for which it is increasingly difficult to find 
spare parts.  Furthermore, the current system operates in the 
800 MHz band, while the new equipment could operate in the 
700 MHz band, which is rapidly becoming a suggested world 
standard for emergency operations.  Post has requested 
additional information on this contract from Motorola, and 
upon receipt will make appropriate inquiries. 
 
10. (C) On October 14, Managing Director Richard Rubin and 
Senior I.T. Specialist Martin Morell of Project Finance 
Advisors, LLC (PFA) updated EconChief on the status of PFA,s 
proposal to build a fibre-optic backbone for the Honduran 
telecommunications sector between the capital Tegucigalpa, 
the business center San Pedro Sula, the north coast city of 
Puerto Cortes, and thence connecting directly to the subsea 
international cable.  The pre-feasibility study for this 
project, financed by the U.S. Trade Development Agency (TDA) 
with a USD 300,000 grant, revealed strong economic and market 
justifications for such a project.  The backbone would 
provide services to the service providers, and therefore 
would not incur the &last mile8 costs of installation, 
billing, or marketing.  Rubin said PFA has approached a 
number of major telecommunications firms within Honduras and 
elsewhere in the region and found interest in both joining 
the consortium and/or using the service.  According to 
Morell, the fibre-optic cables themselves would be strung 
along the poles and rights-of-way owned by the parastatal 
electricity company ENEE, yielding a cheaper and faster 
installation than would be possible with buried cables. 
According to Rubin, ENEE would like to be a member of the 
consortium as well, but is currently prohibited by its 
authorizing legislation from owning any assets outside of the 
energy generation, transmission, or distribution sectors. 
PFA will provide additional information on this project once 
the full study is made available in about a month. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Lucent:  Looking for Our OK to Give It Away 
------------------------------------------- 
 
11. (C) On October 7, EconChief met with Carlos Aviles, 
Senior Manager for Lucent in Latin America, and Juan Carlos 
Galan, New Business Manager for Lucent, to discuss a pending 
Lucent proposal to donate USD five million worth of 
CDMA-based switching technology to Honduran state telephone 
monopoly Hondutel.  Similar offers have been made by and 
accepted from Ericsson and Siemens, each of which has already 
launched GSM-based demonstration projects in more remote 
regions along the borders with Guatemala, El Salvador, and 
Nicaragua.  Lucent wishes to compete on an equal footing, 
defend its existing market share, and prevent de facto 
lockout of CDMA technologies in the Honduran market.  Lucent 
officials requested that the USG publicly endorse the 
donation as transparent and entirely above-board.In 
particular, Lucent requested that the U.S. Embassy provide a 
cover letter endorsing the donation, thereby protecting them 
somewhat from any potential future allegations of improper 
behavior.  Post has requested (reftel) L/EB concurrence that 
the proposed donation does not violate FCPA, and requested 
suggested wording on a brief cover letter to Hondutel 
endorsing the donation. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Bio Information:  Jose Renan Caballero 
-------------------------------------- 
 
12. (C) In August 2004, Caballero became the Advisor on 
Telecommunications on the President,s Commission on the 
Modernization of the State.  From 2003 through August 2004, 
Caballero worked for the Nasser Economic Group,s 
telecommunications arm in Nicaragua (Note:  This is the same 
group that was for a time a member of the founding consortium 
of Megatel.  End Note.)  From 2002 to 2003, he was the Deputy 
Director of state telecommunications firm Hondutel.  Prior to 
that, Caballero was from 1999 until 2002 the Managing 
Director and Country representative for Sprint (later Global 
One) in Honduras.  From 1993-1999, he held a number of 
middle-management positions in Hondutel.  In the early 1990s, 
Caballero received a Master,s degree from a U.S. university 
(NFI), prior to which he worked as an engineer in Hondutel 
from the mid-1980s onward.  Caballero is in his late 40s and 
is married. 
 
Palmer 
Palmer 
"
"22218","10/29/2004 20:26","04TEGUCIGALPA2434","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC, AND DS 
STATE FOR INL, INL/LP, INR/C, INR/AN/IAA, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG/ROL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCOR, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, PHUM, PINR, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR URGES GREATER ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS; 
MADURO ASSERTS PROGRESS EXCEPT ON \"POLITICAL CORRUPTION\" 
 
REF: A. LINDWALL-PALMER E-MAIL 10/25/04 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2356 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2123 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 1690 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 729 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 400 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY: On October 27, Ambassador and DCM raised U.S. 
concerns with President Maduro about perceptions that 
Honduras is backsliding on anti-corruption efforts, its 
potential impact on MCC eligibility, and the recent decision 
by the Public Ministry (PM) to dismiss corruption cases 
against leading political figures.  Maduro, visibly agitated, 
stated Honduras had made many significant strides in the 
fight against corruption but was not getting the credit it 
deserves.  Maduro claimed his administration was committed to 
fighting corruption and reiterated comments he made to the 
Secretary during their October 21 meeting stating he fears a 
 
SIPDIS 
regional conspiracy to destabilize governments by prosecuting 
ex-presidents and attacking/destroying the political class. 
Maduro did concede, however, that Honduras needed to do a 
better job in addressing what he termed \"political 
corruption.\"  Post believes that President Maduro and his 
inner circle, for a myriad of reasons, lack both the 
political will and leadership skills necessary to tackle 
high-level corruption in Honduras.  Maduro should confront 
the issue head-on by calling for a high-level review of the 
PM\'s recent decisions and of alleged corrupt sitting judges. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
President Claims Honduras Making Strides Against Corruption 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
2. (C) On October 27, Ambassador and DCM met with President 
Maduro, Minister of the Presidency Luis Cosenza, and Minister 
of Government and Justice Jorge Ramon Hernandez Alcerro 
regarding perceptions that Honduras is backsliding on 
anti-corruption efforts and the recent crises at the Public 
Ministry (PM) (ref B).  Maduro, visibly agitated, stated that 
Honduras had made many significant strides in the fight 
against corruption but was not getting the credit it 
deserves.  He listed as examples the recent passage of 
legislation stripping immunity from senior government 
officials, allowing the UNDP to oversee public procurement 
projects, and increased success on clamping down on tax 
fraud.  (COMMENT:  It is ironic that Maduro cites the UNDP 
procurement process as an anti-corruption success.  The 
Government of Honduras\' (GOH) recourse to UNDP management for 
its bid solicitations is fundamentally an admission that the 
GOH cannot control corruption in its own ranks.  While the 
GOH does deserve credit for removing immunities, the 
implementing legislation allowing the GOH to prosecute 
formerly immune officials has not yet been drafted.  Also, 
while the GOH has done a better job of collecting taxes from 
small businesses and ordinary private citizens, there have 
been no large-scale convictions although recent reports 
suggest that tax fraud - involving large businesses and 
benefiting both major political parties - continues on a 
massive scale.  END COMMENT.) 
 
3. (C) Maduro did admit to Ambassador that Honduras still 
needed to do a better job of fighting what he termed 
\"political corruption\", acknowledging Honduras\' poor record 
in successfully prosecuting high-level individuals on 
corruption charges.  Maduro claimed his administration was 
doing all it could, but that other \"independent\" GOH 
entities, such as the judiciary, the PM, and the Supreme 
Court of Accounts (Tribunal Superior de Cuentas - TSC) could 
do a better job, although he believed the incumbent Attorney 
General was doing a much better job than his predecessor. 
(COMMENT:  Power in Honduras remains extremely concentrated 
in a few powerful political figures.  For some time, GOH 
officials have blamed inaction on uncooperative independent 
agencies.  However, Post believes that if the President was 
determined to tackle high-level corruption these agencies 
could be \"persuaded\" to move cases forward.  END COMMENT) 
 
4. (C) Maduro also noted that his administration was in the 
process of seeking a USD one million World Bank loan to hire 
more qualified people to make the TSC (the government agency 
tasked with auditing public accounts) more effective.  The 
TSC currently employees over 600 people, many of whom have no 
 
SIPDIS 
knowledge of standard accounting or public procurement 
practices.  In two years of existence, the TSC has yet to 
uncover a single meaningful case of corruption.  It is also 
of some concern that the GOH is seeking World Bank support 
for what should be a key budgeted recurring expenditure.  If 
it is ever to be effective, the TSC must, among other things, 
have a secure and predictable budget. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Whither Honduras\' Anti-Corruption Commission? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) Ambassador raised U.S. concerns over the ongoing 
demise of Honduras\' independent National Anti-Corruption 
Council (CNA) and rumors that the GOH was considering placing 
a reformed CNA under the control of the PM.  Maduro 
vehemently denied the GOH ever considered putting the CNA 
under the PM and queried Ambassador on who was spreading such 
rumors.  Minister of the Presidency Cosenza told Ambassador 
that he knew Roman Catholic Cardinal Oscar Andres Rodriguez 
was considering stepping down as Chairman of the CNA, but 
claimed that this was related to the Cardinal\'s concerns over 
a dispute regarding the GOH\'s recognition of several 
homosexual rights NGOs, not with corruption.  Cosenza also 
claimed that German Espinal, ex-executive director of the 
CNA, was unanimously dismissed by the CNA\'s board because of 
his poor leadership.  Cosenza\'s explanation regarding the 
reasons for Cardinal Rodriguez\'s possible resignation from 
the CNA contradicts statements made to PolCouns by the 
Cardinal\'s executive assistant, who stated that the Cardinal 
was aware of corruption in Honduras and would not continue to 
participate in the moribund CNA.  Cosenza went on to say that 
the administration has a plan for a reformed CNA that would 
keep the entity independent. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Callejas Vindicated of Political Charges?? 
------------------------------------------ 
 
6. (C)  Cosenza informed Ambassador that the politically 
motivated charges against ex-president Rafael Leonardo 
Callejas (1990-94) of the National Party and his associates 
were legitimately dismissed by the PM after several 
tribunals, including the Honduran Supreme Court, ruled to 
dismiss charges.  The Supreme Court voted over a year ago, 
8-7, along strict party lines, with the Nationalists in the 
majority.  Also, Maduro claimed no prior knowledge of the 
PM\'s decision, stating that, just like Attorney General 
Ovidio Navarro, he felt the need to recuse himself because of 
his past involvement as head of the Honduran Central Bank 
during the Callejas administration.  This statement by Maduro 
directly contradicts reports that Navarro met with Maduro and 
President of the Supreme Court Vilma Morales to discuss his 
proposed dismissal of these cases.  While Cosenza felt the PM 
no longer had any reason to pursue corruption charges against 
Callejas, he did acknowledge that the PM\'s timing was poor. 
(COMMENT:  Maduro, like many figures in the National Party, 
owes his political allegiance to Callejas.  It is clear that 
Callejas enjoys a patron/client relationship with many 
National Party figures who have a vested interest in 
protecting him.  It is widely believed in and outside of 
Honduras that Callejas was one of the most corrupt Honduran 
presidents since the re-establishment of democracy.  END 
COMMENT). 
 
------------------------------- 
Maduro Sees Regional Conspiracy 
------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Recalling comments he made to the Secretary during 
their October 21 meeting, Maduro told Ambassador he believed 
there was a region-wide conspiracy to destabilize the 
governments of Central America by prosecuting ex-presidents 
on corruption issues.  Maduro was not specific about who the 
organizers of this conspiracy are.  In Honduras, fewer than 
500 members of the Popular Block and other popular 
organizations and labor groups have demonstrated in support 
of the dismissed fiscales and against corruption.  He told 
Ambassador that this movement intended to replace the ruling 
classes and, if successful, could throw the region into 
turmoil. 
 
--------------- 
MCC Eligibility 
--------------- 
 
8. (C) Ambassador reminded Maduro both of the necessity for 
Honduras to continue making meaningful progress on the 
anti-corruption front, noting Transparency International (TI) 
had given Honduras a poor score on its latest survey and that 
public perception is growing that Honduras is backsliding on 
corruption issues.  While granting that Honduras had made 
some progress on structural issues, Ambassador reminded 
Maduro that even when overwhelming corruption evidence is 
presented (as in the case of Deputy Attorney General Yuri 
Melara and a list of 16 judges that the Minister of Public 
Security provided to the Supreme Court President), the GOH 
has found reasons not to act.  Ambassador emphasized that the 
GOH must do a better job of fighting high-level corruption. 
Minister Cosenza told Ambassador that the Maduro 
administration was well aware of the MCC eligibility criteria 
and felt that on more measurable issues, Honduras was doing 
fine.  He added that it would be a shame if Honduras were not 
selected to receive funds based on distorted misperceptions 
that Honduras was not doing enough to fight corruption. 
Cosenza did note, however, that the GOH was open to the MCC 
requiring certain anti-corruption benchmarks be met to 
receive MCA funding, saying he had discussed this with two 
MCC Vice Presidents during recent meetings in Washington. 
 
------------------------------------- 
A Clear Lack of Leadership at the Top 
------------------------------------- 
 
9. (C) COMMENT: While the GOH remains rhetorically committed 
to fighting corruption, at the highest levels the political 
will and required leadership to address high-level corruption 
in Honduras falls short of what is needed.  Maduro was 
visibly put-off by the Ambassador\'s suggestion that Honduras 
needed to do more on the anti-corruption front.  Apart from 
the fact that Honduras could be found ineligible to receive 
future MCA funds based on its undistinguished anti-corruption 
record, Maduro appears more preoccupied with maintaining the 
political status quo.  Post also notes that Maduro\'s strawman 
of a conspiracy to threaten the political stability of 
Honduras and other Central American countries has been a 
constant throughout his administration whenever Maduro is 
facing political controversy.  While this alleged conspiracy 
has been attributed to many (public teachers unions, the 
leftist Popular Block currently protesting the PM 
controversy, the Cubans, etc.), the GOH has never presented 
concrete evidence to support its claims.  Post believes 
Maduro should confront the issue head-on by calling for a 
high-level review of the PM\'s recent decisions and of alleged 
corrupt sitting judges.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"22220","10/29/2004 21:00","04TEGUCIGALPA2435","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS TO USAID AND USTR 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EINV, EFIN, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras: 2003 Trade Overview 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Post submits its annual trade overview for 
Honduras for the year 2003, based on the official economic 
statistics released by the GOH in the fall of 2004.  This 
cable contains information on imports, exports and the trade 
deficit; information on macroeconomic, monetary and 
financial developments will follow septel.  Unless cited 
otherwise, all figures are from the Central Bank of 
Honduras\' annual report. 
 
2.  Honduras\' trade deficit increased in 2003, both in real 
terms and as a share of GDP, as a 6 percent increase in the 
value of exports was offset by an 8 percent increase in the 
value of imports.  Value added from the maquila sector grew 
by 15 percent and remains the largest source of Honduran 
export income, accounting for 26 percent of all export 
earnings.  Among exports of goods, revenues from coffee were 
up slightly, while shrimp replaced bananas as Honduras\' 
second most profitable export commodity.  The import bill 
was swelled largely by increased purchases of machinery and 
rising fuel costs.  END SUMMARY. 
 
3.  Honduras\' trade deficit increased by 13.7 percent in 
2003, from USD 1,187 million to USD 1,350 million.  Exports 
by value (both goods and services) increased by 5.5 percent, 
while imports by value increased by 8.1 percent.  As a share 
of GDP, the trade deficit increased only slightly, from 18.5 
percent to 20.1 percent. 
 
TRADE DEFICIT AS PERCENT OF GDP 
------------------------------- 
         Total        Total       Trade     As Percent 
Year    Exports      Imports     Deficit      of GDP 
 
1998    2,504.1      3,119.8       615.7       12.2 
1999    2,310.9      3,288.7       977.8       18.0 
2000    2,600.7      3,593.2       992.6       16.7 
2001    2,510.7      3,742.2     1,231.6       19.4 
2002    2,570.6      3,757.9     1,187.4       18.5 
2003    2,711.1      4,060.9     1,349.9       20.1 
 
Note: Trade figures in 2003 USD millions. 
 
4.  Earnings from goods exports (which does not include 
maquila sector exports) were practically unchanged in 2003, 
rising by only 0.8 percent, to USD 1,332.3 million.  Roughly 
45 percent of Honduran goods exports go to the United 
States, down slightly from 2002. 
 
EXPORTS OF GOODS (FOB, IN USD MILLIONS) 
--------------------------------------- 
                                   To U.S. as Pct. 
           Total        To U.S.       of Total 
 
1996      1,316.0        612.4          46.5 
1997      1,445.7        666.2          46.1 
1998      1,532.8        626.3          40.9 
1999      1,164.4        457.4          39.3 
2000      1,380.0        534.1          38.7 
2001      1,324.5        571.4          43.1 
2002      1,321.2        616.5          46.7 
2003      1,332.3        595.3          44.7 
 
EXPORTS OF GOODS BY DESTINATION 
------------------------------- 
                       1999    2000    2001    2002    2003 
                       ----    ----    ----    ----    ---- 
United States           39%     39%     43%     47%     45% 
Central America         22%     19%     25%     22%     23% 
Other Latin America      8%     10%      8%      7%      9% 
Europe                  23%     25%     20%     21%     22% 
Rest of World            8%      7%      5%      3%      2% 
 
Note: Figures do not include maquila exports (maquila value- 
added is counted as a service). 
 
5.  Coffee remains Honduras\' most important export product, 
accounting for 13.8 percent of goods export earnings.  While 
the volume of coffee exported fell by 10.5 percent in 2003, 
a rise in the world price compensated for this decrease, 
meaning that revenues were virtually unchanged (a small 
increase of 0.5 percent, up to USD 183.3 million).  Prices 
and revenues are still well below historical levels. 
 
COFFEE EXPORTS 
-------------- 
Year     Volume in      Price       Revenue 
        100 lb bags      USD     (USD million) 
 
1998       3,039       141.44        429.8 
1999       2,591        98.84        256.1 
2000       3,787        89.63        339.4 
2001       3,119        51.52        160.7 
2002       3,536        51.61        182.5 
2003       3,163        57.96        183.3 
6.  Shrimp replaced bananas as the country\'s second most 
important export product in 2003, with revenues growing by 
17.3 percent to USD 158.8 million.  The amount of sea-caught 
shrimp exported fell sharply in 2003, by 52 percent, as 
Honduras was decertified from being allowed to export shrimp 
to the United States for much of the 2003 season (due to its 
failure to adequately follow U.S. environmental regulations 
regarding sea turtles), and was only recertified in 
December.  However, the 27 percent increase in revenues from 
farmed shrimp more than compensated for the loss in revenues 
from sea-caught shrimp.  In years past, between 80 and 90 
percent of Honduran shrimp exports have been farmed shrimp 
rather than sea-caught shrimp; in 2003, farmed shrimp 
accounted for 95 percent of the value of shrimp exports. 
 
SHRIMP EXPORTS 
-------------- 
           FARMED SHRIMP         CAUGHT SHRIMP 
Year    Volume      Revenue    Volume     Revenue 
        in kgs       USD m     in kgs      USD m 
 
1998    10,037       135.9      1,549       21.0 
1999     9,200       127.4      1,620       22.4 
2000     8,250       122.7      2,222       33.0 
2001     9,966       140.3      1,456       20.5 
2002    12,046       119.5      1,600       15.9 
2003    16,522       151.2        834        7.6 
 
7.  While the volume of bananas exported rose by 4 percent 
in 2003, a reduction in price led to a sharp fall in export 
earnings, from USD 172.4 million in 2002 to USD 132.7 
million in 2003, a 23 percent drop.  Apart from 1999 when 
Hurricane Mitch largely destroyed the year\'s banana crop, 
this marks the first year in recent memory that coffee and 
bananas have not been the two most important Honduran export 
goods. 
 
BANANA EXPORTS 
-------------- 
Year       Volume       Avg. Unit       Revenue 
        (40 lb. box)    Price(USD)   (USD million) 
 
1998       28,234          7.78          219.6 
1999        6,750          5.64           38.1 
2000       20,686          6.01          124.2 
2001       25,487          8.01          204.2 
2002       23,453          7.35          172.4 
2003       24,389          5.44          132.7 
 
8.  Honduras\' fastest growing export product, and fifth most 
important overall, is African palm oil, exports of which 
grew by 88 percent, though export earnings grew by only 77 
percent, due to a small drop in price.  Sugar exports and 
export revenues fell for the second straight year, to 53,603 
metric tons and USD 11.3 million, respectively.  Export 
revenues from pineapples, melons, soap and tobacco rose, 
while revenues from lobster and wood manufactures fell. 
 
AFRICAN PALM EXPORTS 
-------------------- 
Year       Volume       Price        Revenue 
           in kgs      per kg     (USD million) 
 
1999        21,380       0.62          13.4 
2000        27,000       0.60          16.2 
2001        35,205       0.73          25.7 
2002        57,212       0.53          30.3 
2003       107,790       0.50          53.9 
 
SUGAR EXPORTS 
------------- 
Year      Volume        Price        Revenue 
          in kgs       per kg     (USD million) 
 
1998      21,033        0.48          10.2 
1999      10,509        0.50           5.3 
2000      25,499        0.31           7.8 
2001     160,083        0.19          30.4 
2002      94,289        0.18          17.2 
2003      53,603        0.21          11.3 
 
9.  The mining sector showed declining export volumes in 
2003, resulting in export earnings from Honduras\' top three 
mineral exports - gold, zinc, and silver - falling, even as 
world prices rose. 
GOLD EXPORTS 
------------ 
Year      Volume in      Price per         Revenue 
        \'000 Troy Oz.     Troy Oz.      (USD Million) 
 
1998         0              --                -- 
1999         0              --                -- 
2000        24            260.32             6.2 
2001       244            261.68            63.8 
2002       265            303.89            80.5 
2003       187            356.00            66.6 
 
ZINC EXPORTS 
-------------- 
Year      Volume in      Price per         Revenue 
           pounds          pound        (USD Million) 
 
1998       85,659           0.42             36.3 
1999       94,786           0.53             50.2 
2000       97,396           0.56             54.5 
2001      101,334           0.38             38.5 
2002       93,557           0.31             29.0 
2003       79,899           0.34             27.2 
 
SILVER EXPORTS 
-------------- 
Year      Volume in      Price per         Revenue 
        \'000 Troy Oz.     Troy Oz.      (USD Million) 
 
1998      1,525            5.14              7.8 
1999      1,085            4.94              5.4 
2000      1,733            4.77              8.3 
2001      1,846            4.26              7.9 
2002      1,814            4.39              8.0 
2003        897            4.82              4.3 
 
10.  In sharp contrast to the near-zero growth in exports of 
Honduran goods, value added from the maquila sector (counted 
by the GOH as a service export) increased by 15 percent in 
2003, to over USD 700 million.  The maquila sector, 
therefore, accounted for greater earnings than the combined 
exports of Honduras\' top eight export commodities (coffee, 
shrimp, bananas, gold, palm oil, melons, soap, and lobster.) 
 
MAQUILA SECTOR - VALUE ADDED 
---------------------------- 
                          Percent Growth 
Year    USD millions    Over Previous Year 
 
1999        538.5              18.4 
2000        575.4               6.9 
2001        560.8              -2.5 
2002        612.8               9.3 
2003        704.7              15.0 
 
11.  The value of Honduran goods imports rose by 9.9 percent 
in 2003, from USD 2.98 million to USD 3.26 million.  Imports 
of machinery and other industrial equipment, the largest 
category of imports by value, rose by 16.3 percent to USD 
559 million.  Imports of fuels and lubricants, the second 
largest category, rose by 25.6 percent in value terms, to 
USD 519 million.  The share of Honduran imports of U.S. 
origin was practically unchanged at 37.5 percent. 
 
IMPORTS (CIF, in USD Millions) 
------------------------------ 
                                   From U.S. as 
Year     Total        From U.S.    Pct of Total 
 
1996     1,840.0         857.6         46.6 
1997     2,148.6       1,033.0         48.0 
1998     2,534.8       1,177.3         46.4 
1999     2,676.1       1,182.7         44.1 
2000     2,854.6       1,220.2         42.7 
2001     2,983.9       1,097.9         37.3 
2002     2,981.1       1,104.6         37.1 
2003     3,275.6       1,227.3         37.5 
 
IMPORTS OF GOODS BY ORIGIN 
-------------------------- 
                       1999    2000    2001    2002    2003 
                       ----    ----    ----    ----    ---- 
United States           44%     43%     37%     37%     37% 
Central America         20%     21%     20%     20%     20% 
Other Latin America     21%     23%     26%     28%     24% 
Europe                   8%      6%      8%      6%      8% 
Rest of World            7%      7%      8%      8%     10% 
 
Note: Figures do not include imported inputs for the maquila 
sector. 
 
Palmer 
"
"22255","11/1/2004 12:44","04TEGUCIGALPA2440","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002440 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, EB/EPPD, AND WHA/CEN 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, SMIG, ECON, KMCA, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON PRESIDENT MADURO\'S VISIT TO 
WASHINGTON, OCTOBER 27, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 10/23, entitled \"Amnesty.\"  \"President Maduro is visiting 
Washington, and because President Bush is probably busy with 
his electoral campaign, he met with Secretary of State Colin 
Powell to discuss several issues of interest to both 
countries.\" 
 
\"Before leaving Honduras, Maduro announced that he was going 
to lobby for another TPS extension and to request more aid 
from the U.S. to fight drug trafficking. In addition, the 
discussions with Powell dealt with the high oil prices, the 
OAS General Secretariat, the situation in Haiti, and the 
fact that some Central American countries are planning to 
send troops as a result of a request from the U.S.\" 
 
\"Even though all these issues are important, we\'re aware 
that the U.S. won\'t be able to help us that much to ease the 
crisis we\'re going through because of the high oil prices, 
and we already know that additional assistance to combat 
drug trafficking won\'t be significant, although they are the 
ones most affected by it.  Therefore, the most important 
issue for us will be the extension of TPS, which Washington 
has said will be decided after the elections.\" 
 
\"We hope the negotiations carried out by President Maduro 
are useful for the country, and we\'re satisfied to know that 
he\'s personally taken over the negotiation on this issue 
that is essential for us.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 10/25, entitled \"Two in the Bush.\"  \"Honduras is one of 
the few countries to benefit from the MCA, which will 
distribute about a billion dollars for social projects among 
16 poor countries that have qualified.  This was one of the 
issues discussed by President Maduro in his recent meeting 
with Secretary of State Colin Powell, considering the fact 
that the first funds would be disbursed early next year.\" 
 
\"Honduras needs an extraordinary amount of resources to 
stimulate its economic growth, since the package of measures 
implemented to achieve an agreement with the IMF are far 
from strengthening the economy.\" 
 
\"Another issue discussed with Powell was the extension of 
TPS.  The U.S. government said the decision will be 
announced in 10 days, and we expect it to be positive since 
Bush himself has proposed in his campaign a mechanism 
similar to TPS for all immigrants.\" 
 
\"The Democrats have a broader initiative in this matter, 
because they\'re proposing an amnesty that appears to be what 
most immigrants aspire to.  For the time being, it\'s better 
to have a bird in the hand than two in the bush, and a new 
TPS extension will give a breather to our countrymen living 
in the U.S.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"22311","11/2/2004 12:30","04TEGUCIGALPA2452","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa2435","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002452 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, DRL/IL, AND EB 
STATE PASS TO USAID AND USTR 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, ELAB, ETRD, PGOV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras: 2003 Macroeconomic Overview 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 2435 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Post submits its annual macroeconomic summary 
for Honduras for the year 2003, based on the official 
economic statistics released by the GOH in the fall of 2004. 
Reftel contains information on imports, exports, and the 
trade deficit; this cable contains information on economic 
growth, prices, wages, and employment.  Unless cited 
otherwise, all figures are from the Central Bank of 
Honduras\' annual report. 
 
2.  The rate of economic growth in Honduras increased from 
2.5 percent in 2002 to 3.2 percent in 2003, with the maquila 
sector, tourism, and family remittances all registering 
strong growth.  The inflation rate reached 6.8 percent, its 
lowest level in over a decade, and flows of foreign direct 
investment increased by 39 percent.  However, unemployment 
rose, with the broadest measure of unemployment (the 
percentage of the economically active population with 
\"employment problems\") showing a sharp increase from 33 to 
42 percent.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------- 
ECONOMIC GROWTH AND ACTIVITY 
---------------------------- 
 
3.  The Honduran economy grew at a rate of 3.2 percent in 
2003, up from 2.5 percent in 2002.  This was the second 
highest growth rate in Central America, after Costa Rica\'s. 
However, population growth of 2.6 percent meant that per 
capita GDP growth was only 0.6 percent.  The expansion has 
been driven by growth in the maquila industry (offshore 
assembly for re-export), family remittances, and tourism. 
All sectors of the economy registered growth except for 
public administration and defense, which fell by 2 percent 
due to the public spending austerity policy implemented by 
the GOH.  The sector that increased the most in percentage 
terms was the construction sector (13.8 percent), which is 
recovering after three years of stagnation; public 
construction grew 17.2 percent while private construction 
grew by 10.9 percent.  The manufacturing sector grew by 3.7 
percent, a similar rate to that of last year, and the 
agricultural sector, which currently accounts for 12.8 
percent of GDP, increased by only 1.9 percent.  Within the 
service sectors, telecommunications grew by 3.5 percent, 
reflecting the recent expansion of cellular telephony and 
increased investment in the sector. 
 
REAL GDP GROWTH RATE 
-------------------- 
Year      Percent    Per capita 
 
1997         5.1         2.5 
1998         2.9         0.3 
1999        -1.9        -4.4 
2000         5.2         2.5 
2001         2.6         0.0 
2002         2.5         0.0 
2003         3.2         0.6 
 
REAL GDP BY ECONOMIC ACTIVITY: 
PERCENTAGE INCREASE OVER PREVIOUS YEAR 
-------------------------------------- 
Activity                     2001      2002       2003 
 
Agriculture                  -0.5       4.8        1.9 
Mining                       -0.8       5.0        3.2 
Manufacturing Industry        5.2       2.8        3.7 
Construction                 -5.2     -14.6       13.8 
Electricity, Water, Gas      -1.8       5.6        7.9 
Transportation, Storage       5.3       3.2        3.7 
Stores, Restaurants, Hotels   3.0       2.8        3.1 
Financial Institutions        3.1       2.2        1.7 
Housing                       3.9       3.9        4.2 
Public Admin. and Defense     8.7       7.2       -2.0 
Other Services               12.6       7.2        3.5 
---- 
Real GDP (All Activities)     2.6       2.7        3.2 
---- 
 
4.  The GOH has given priority to increased tourism 
development and hopes it will generate economic growth and 
substantial employment.  The key geographic areas of focus 
include the Bay Islands and the northern coast, and the 
\"Mayan Route\" from Copan to other archeological sites in 
Guatemala and Mexico.  The government\'s goal is to reach one 
million tourists and USD 500 million in income in 2004. 
According to data released by the Honduran Institute of 
Tourism, the number of tourist arrivals rose by 12.4 percent 
in 2003, to 886,600.  Cruise ship visitors increased by 10.6 
percent over 2002, to reach 135,000 people.  The tourist 
industry continues to recover following the September 11, 
2001 attacks and has become the third largest economic 
activity in the country after the maquila and agricultural 
sectors. 
 
5.  In early 2004, the Minister of Tourism announced that 
the Honduran Institute of Tourism plans to proceed with the 
USD 140 million Tela Bay project, which will include a 
luxury resort, golf courses, access to local Garifuna 
villages, scuba diving, and (pending completion of an 
airport in Copan) day trips to the Mayan ruins of Copan. 
The project was given a boost in 2003 by the announcement of 
the Spanish and Italian governments confirming the necessary 
financing.  In January 2004, Congress authorized the 
transfer of 311 hectares of government land to a mixed- 
equity company, in which the Honduran Institute of Tourism 
will be a partner.  In September 2004, President Maduro led 
a senior GOH delegation to the Dominican Republic to drum up 
additional private sector interest in investing in the 
project. 
 
TOURISM: VISITORS AND INCOME 
---------------------------- 
           Visitors          Foreign Exchange 
Year        (\'000)         Income (USD Million) 
 
1999         428.1                195.0 
2000         688.4                259.8 
2001         672.0                274.6 
2002         788.1                341.5 
2003         886.6                373.2 
 
Source: Ministry of Tourism. 
 
------------------------------- 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI) 
------------------------------- 
 
6.  According to Central Bank data, FDI flows to Honduras in 
2003 totaled USD 198 million, a 39 percent increase over 
2002, though still well off the historical high of USD 282 
million reached in 2000.  The U.S. continues to be the 
dominant source of FDI in Honduras; while a country 
breakdown for 2003 is not yet available, 2002 figures show 
that 38 percent of total FDI flows to Honduras were from the 
United States. 
 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT BY COUNTRY OF ORIGIN 
--------------------------------------------- - 
(USD \'000s) 
 
                 1999        2000        2001        2002 
 
United States 113,855.1    64,240.6    52,600.0    54,500.0 
Canada         55,099.6    36,057.9    15,057.0    18,115.0 
El Salvador    13,907.7     7,878.8     9,240.0    11,798.0 
Costa Rica      6,442.5    21,186.6    24,106.6     9,831.5 
Panama         19,474.8    15,099.7    18,088.0     8,795.0 
Italy          -3,606.0    13,624.8     7,624.0     6,175.0 
Guatemala       3,354.5    11,084.8    10,847.0     6,046.0 
Spain           5,884.3     7,784.5     9,784.5     5,390.0 
United Kingdom  2,567.4    14,956.7     4,289.0     4,790.0 
Japan             124.0         0.0     1,150.6     1,188.2 
Switzerland     6,948.1    -4,050.9    -1,250.0       543.0 
Germany           156.7       218.6       188.6       219.0 
Mexico          4,612.9      -138.8       207.0       223.0 
Other countries 8,515.6    94,056.3    43,068.9    15,246.9 
 
Total         237,337.2   281,999.6   195,001.2   142,860.6 
 
Country breakdown for 2003 not yet available. 
 
--------------- 
PRICES AND WAGES 
---------------- 
 
7.  Inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, rose 
by 6.8 percent in 2003, the lowest annual inflation rate in 
over a decade, and 1.3 percentage points lower than the rate 
in 2002.  (Note:  Sharp rises in energy inputs have led to a 
spike in inflation in 2004, with rates currently estimated 
at nearly 9 percent annualized - higher than in 2003, but 
still moderate by recent historical standards.  End note.) 
Factors contributing to the low inflation rate included the 
stability of the real exchange rate (carefully maintained 
through a crawling peg nominal exchange rate that devalues 
at approximately 6 percent per year), the application of 
prudent monetary policy, and an increased domestic supply of 
basic grains due to increases in national production. 
 
8.  Prices of telecommunications and cement fell due to 
increased competition in both sectors: specifically, the 
launching in November of Megatel, a Swedish-Honduran company 
in the telecommunications sector, and in September of 
Cemento Uno, a Honduran partner with Taiheyo Cement, the 
leading Japanese cement manufacturer.  (Note:  By mid 2004, 
unfair competition and predatory pricing practices had 
driven Cemento Uno out of business, with a resultant sharp 
rise in cement prices.  Lacking an effective competition 
law, the GOH has had to resort to setting prices for cement 
to restrain monopoly rent-seeking by the surviving firm. 
End note.)  However, increases in the prices of gasoline and 
public transportation partially offset the low inflation 
rates in other parts of the economy. 
 
9.  The latest revision of the minimum wage (an increase of 
12 percent for workers in agriculture and approximately 9 
percent for most other workers) was implemented in spring 
2004, and more than compensated for the annual rate of 
inflation.  Wage and benefits packages for other 
professions, notably teachers and doctors, grew far faster 
than inflation, since they are based on multiples of the 
minimum wage.  New negotiations are expected to start in 
November of this year for the 2005 minimum wage increase. 
 
INFLATION 
--------- 
Year       Percent 
 
1994         29.1 
1995         26.9 
1996         25.2 
1997         12.7 
1998         15.7 
1999         11.0 
2000         10.1 
2001          8.8 
2002          8.1 
2003          6.8 
 
---------- 
EMPLOYMENT 
---------- 
 
10.  Employment data is collected by the National Institute 
of Statistics (INE) through a household survey conducted 
each May and September.  INE calculates four measures of 
unemployment: open unemployment, visible sub-unemployment, 
invisible sub-unemployment, and, most broadly, the 
percentage of the economically-active population with 
employment problems.  On all four measures, unemployment 
increased from 2002 to 2003, and early figures from 2004 
show the increase continuing.  By the most narrow 
definition, open unemployment rose from 3.8 percent in 
September 2002 to 5.1 percent in 2003, and to 5.9 percent in 
May 2004, with the majority of the unemployed living in 
urban areas and belonging to the younger segment of the 
labor force.  The broadest measure of unemployment, the 
percentage of the economically active population with 
employment problems, showed a significant increase of 8.6 
percentage points in 2003, from 33.2 percent to 41.8 
percent.  Employment in the maquila sector, however, 
continued to rise, growing 8.2 percent to 114,237 employees 
in 2003. 
 
EMPLOYMENT INDICATORS 
---------------------                    2002       2003 
 
Economically Active Population (million) 2.44       2.56 
Open Unemployment (percent)               3.8        5.1 
Visible Sub-employment (percent)          4.8        7.1 
Invisible Sub-employment (percent)       26.6       29.6 
Economically-Active Population with 
  Employment Problems (percent)          33.2       41.8 
 
Source: National Institute of Statistics (INE). 
 
OPEN UNEMPLOYMENT 
----------------- 
 
Year      Percent of Labor Force 
 
September 1998           3.0 
September 1999           3.3 
September 2000           N/A 
September 2001           3.9 
May 2002                 4.1 
September 2002           3.8 
May 2003                 5.4 
September 2003           5.1 
May 2004                 5.9 
 
Source: National Institute of Statistics (INE). 
 
MAQUILA SECTOR EMPLOYMENT 
------------------------- 
 
Year       Employees    Pct Change 
 
1998         98,905        18.5% 
1999        103,271         4.4% 
2000        106,530         3.2% 
2001         94,416       -11.4% 
2002        105,556        11.8% 
2003        114,237         8.2% 
 
Palmer 
"
"22393","11/2/2004 20:35","04TEGUCIGALPA2456","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002456 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, KDEM, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON THE U.S ELECTIONS, NOVEMBER 1, 
2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based moderate daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 11/1, entitled \"Elections and Terror.\"  \"The U.S. 
election process on the first Tuesday in November has become 
an anachronism, since millions of Americans will have voted 
before that date despite the suspicion that the winner won\'t 
be known during the night, as happened in the last 
election.\" 
 
\"Another novelty of this election is that both parties have 
already hired hundreds of lawyers who are ready to take 
action if the election goes to the courts once again.\" 
 
\"In such an uncertain environment, Osama bin Laden has just 
launched another threat against the U.S., which attempts to 
influence this election, just as happened a few months ago 
in Spain.\" 
 
\"If in Spain, terror decided the outcome of the election, in 
the U.S. it will find a determined and tenacious enemy no 
matter who wins tomorrow.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"22394","11/2/2004 20:35","04TEGUCIGALPA2457","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002457 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, WHA/CEN 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, SMIG, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON TPS, NOVEMBER 1, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 10/30, entitled \"TPS.\"  \"The decision of President Bush 
to extend TPS until June 6, 2006, is vital because of the 
critical economic and social situation the country is going 
through, where the problem of unemployment is significant 
and without an apparent solution in the short term.\" 
 
\"We\'re well aware that the key to the problem of illegal 
immigration by Hondurans resides in creating the appropriate 
conditions to develop our production, to improve our trade 
relationships, and to establish a democratic society that 
creates opportunities for all here.\" 
 
\"However, in the meantime, these aspirations would be 
frustrated if the U.S. doesn\'t offer an alternative like 
TPS, or better yet, granting a permanent status to all 
undocumented Hondurans.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 11/1, entitled \"Fifth Time.\"  \"The fifth TPS 
extension, which benefits more than 90,000 Hondurans, is 
very good news for our countrymen, their relatives, and the 
country in general, because not only are we still 
experiencing high unemployment levels, but also the our 
economy increasingly depends on the remittances sent by 
those who have fled from poverty.\" 
 
\"An obviously excited President Maduro made the announcement 
on Friday in a press conference broadcast by radio and 
television, where he said that this generous gesture of the 
U.S. government was `the most important success of our 
foreign policy and even of our economic and social policy.\' 
The Maduro Administration has achieved three TPS extensions, 
and the negotiations for the next one will be carried out by 
his successor.\" 
 
\"Until the day comes when no Honduran has to leave the 
country due to the lack of opportunities here, we must keep 
aiming for a permanent status for those registered in TPS 
and an agreement with the USG to allow Hondurans to work 
temporarily in the U.S. to avoid more tragedies occurring to 
those still seeking the `American dream\'.\" 
 
3. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 11/1, entitled \"Fifth Extension.\"  \"As was foreseen a few 
days ago by Ambassador Larry Palmer, the USG, in response to 
a petition by the Maduro government, has granted a fifth 
extension of TPS to our undocumented countrymen living in 
the U.S.\" 
 
\"No one knows how many more extensions we can get, and 
that\'s why the next administration has to look for an 
amnesty or any other kind of permanent solution.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"22395","11/2/2004 20:36","04TEGUCIGALPA2458","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04A:Tegucigalpa2435","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002458 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS TO USAID AND USTR 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, ELAB, ETRD, EINV, HO 
SUBJECT: Honduras: 2003 Monetary and Financial Overview 
 
REF: A: Tegucigalpa 2435 
 
     B: Tegucigalpa 2452 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Post submits its annual monetary and financial 
overview for Honduras for the year 2003, based on the 
official economic statistics released by the GOH in the fall 
of 2004.  Ref A contains information on imports, exports, 
and the trade deficit, and ref B contains information on 
economic growth, prices, and wages; this cable contains 
information on balance of payments, currency, money supply, 
interest rates, and government spending.  Unless cited 
otherwise, all figures are from the Central Bank of 
Honduras\' annual report. 
 
2.  Honduras\' current account deficit increased by 18 
percent in 2003, as a growing trade deficit was only 
partially offset by growth in net transfers, mainly family 
remittances.  The capital account and overall balance of 
payments were also negative.  Interest rates continued their 
decline of recent years, while the monetary position 
remained stable and the GOH continued its policy of a 
gradual, controlled devaluation of the lempira.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------- 
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 
------------------- 
 
3.  Honduras ran a current account deficit in 2003 of USD 
258.3 million, 18 percent higher than in 2002, as an 
increase in net transfers was not sufficient to offset a 
growing trade deficit.  The trade deficit increased by 14 
percent in 2003 to USD 1,349.9 million, and net transfers - 
mostly family remittances from Hondurans living abroad - 
increased by 13 percent to USD 1,091.6 million.  Remittances 
rose by 21 percent in 2003, to account for 12.8 percent of 
GDP. 
 
4.  Long term direct foreign investment increased by 39 
percent over 2002, to reach USD 198.0 million.  However, a 
net outflow of USD 110.2 million in short term investment, 
coupled with an increase in private sector loans, combined 
to create a capital account deficit of USD 32.5 million. 
Honduras\' total balance of payments in 2003 was therefore a 
deficit of USD 231.2 million, and net international reserves 
fell by USD 88.2 million. 
 
CONDENSED BALANCE OF PAYMENTS (USD MILLIONS) 
-------------------------------------------- 
                          2001         2002        2003 
 
Exports                  2,510.7      2,570.6     2,711.1 
Imports                  3,742.2      3,757.9     4,060.9 
Trade Balance           -1,231.6     -1,187.4    -1,349.9 
Net Transfers              929.2        968.7     1,091.6 
Current Account           -302.4       -218.7      -258.3 
Capital Account            228.7        232.7       -32.5 
Balance of Payments         -0.3         63.5      -231.2 
Change in Int. Reserves 
(Decrease +, Increase -)  -147.3        -214.0       88.2 
 
REMITTANCES, IN USD AND AS SHARE OF GDP 
--------------------------------------- 
            Remittances       As percent 
Year       in USD million       of GDP 
 
1999            319              5.9 
2000            409              6.9 
2001            533              8.5 
2002            711             11.1 
2003            860             12.8 
2004 (est.)    1075             15.5 
 
Note: 2004 figures based upon estimates through September 
2004: 3.75 percent annual rate of GDP growth and 25 percent 
growth in remittances. 
 
------------------------- 
CURRENCY AND MONEY SUPPLY 
------------------------- 
 
5.  The Central Bank continued its policy of a controlled 
depreciation of the nominal exchange rate of the lempira, 
using an auction system to regulate the allocation of 
foreign exchange.  The lempira fell from a rate of 16.88 to 
the dollar at the end of 2002, to 17.95 at the end of 2003, 
a 6.4 percent devaluation, practically unchanged from the 
6.5 percent devaluation of the previous year.  The minimum 
wage increased by an average of 9.7 percent, more than 
compensating for the rate of inflation. 
EXCHANGE RATE (LEMPIRAS/USD) 
---------------------------- 
               End of    Devaluation 
               Period    in Percent 
 
1998           13.95         5.7 
1999           14.62         4.8 
2000           15.02         2.8 
2001           15.85         5.6 
2002           16.88         6.5 
2003           17.95         6.4 
 
6.  Domestic liquidity, as measured by M1, rose from 13.1 
billion lempiras at the end of 2002 to 15.8 billion lempiras 
at the end of 2003, a 16.5 percent increase in nominal terms 
(and 9.7 percent in real terms) over the previous year.  The 
money supply shrank in real terms over the first half of the 
year and grew in the second half of the year, though the 
rise in the second half failed to spark an increase in bank 
lending, apparently due to caution exercised by bankers. 
 
MONETARY INDICATORS 
------------------- 
(December of each year, in millions of Lempiras) 
                                               % var  % var 
                  2001       2002       2003   01/02  02/03 
 
Money (M1)      11,514.8   13,191.6   15,806.8  14.6   19.8 
 In circulation  5,118.7    5,487.8    6,415.5   7.2   16.9 
 In deposits     6,396.2    7,703.8    9,391.3  20.4   21.9 
 
Broad Money     36,314.1   40,444.9   46,422.7  11.4   14.2 
Supply (M2) 
 
Deposits in Foreign 
 Currency       13,801.2   16,288.1   18,654.4  18.0   14.5 
 
Money Supply    50,115.3  56,733.0    65,077.1  13.2   14.7 
(M3) 
 
------------------------- 
INTEREST RATES AND CREDIT 
------------------------- 
 
7. Nominal interest rates on lempira-denominated loans 
averaged 20.24 percent in 2003, compared with 22.06 percent 
in 2002.  In early 2004, interest rates fell below 20 
percent for the first time in over a decade.  (Note:  These 
are the average nominal rates charged by banks to their best 
customers; small and medium enterprises, on the other hand, 
complain of a dearth of credit, very short loan periods, and 
substantially higher average rates.  End note.) 
 
ANNUAL INTEREST RATES 
--------------------- 
            In Lempiras             In Dollars 
Year     Lending    Deposit     Lending    Deposit 
 
1999      29.46      15.04       12.86       5.59 
2000      24.57      12.23       13.13       5.10 
2001      23.18      11.76       12.08       3.58 
2002      22.06       9.57       10.93       2.25 
2003      20.30       8.14        9.20       1.62 
 
8.  Total banking credit to the private sector stood at 
49,370 million lempiras at the end of December 2003, 
following an increase of 12.4 percent in nominal terms. 
Banks and financial companies are still exercising caution 
in their lending practices, particularly in the agricultural 
sector, which saw a net decrease in new loans of 7.5 percent 
in nominal terms.  This caution is the result of a flood of 
non-performing loans following 1998\'s Hurricane Mitch, 
coupled with historically low prices for such key 
commodities as coffee. 
 
9.  New industrial loans rose by 32.5 percent, reflecting 
the recovery registered by the manufacturing sector, and 
headed by the maquila sector.  Services and real estate 
loans grew moderately in nominal terms but registered small 
declines in real terms, despite the growth in both the 
tourism and construction sectors, which partially benefit 
from external financial sources.  Trade and consumer credits 
reflected substantial falls in both real and nominal terms. 
Total credit stock in 2003 grew, while total new loans 
declined by 6.6 percent in nominal terms. 
 
NET INTERNAL CREDIT (MILLIONS OF LEMPIRAS) 
----------------------------------------- 
                                           Change   Change 
                  2001     2002     2003    01/02    02/03 
 
Public Sector   -11,395  -12,499   -8,712    9.7%   -30.3% 
Private Sector   40,807   43,922   49,370    7.6%    12.4% 
Net Internal 
  Credit         29,412   31,422   40,658    6.8%    29.4% 
 
---------------------- 
PUBLIC SECTOR FINANCES 
---------------------- 
 
10.  The central government\'s budget deficit widened to 5.9 
percent of GDP in 2003.  Government revenue rose by 9.9 
percent, to just over 23 billion lempiras (USD 1.3 billion). 
Much of the increase in revenues is due to increased tax 
compliance, stemming from a crackdown on tax evaders that 
led to the temporary closure of more than 1,600 businesses 
during 2003.  Revenue collected from taxes grew by 7 percent 
in 2002, and by 14 percent in 2003. 
 
11.  However, government expenditure increased by 13.1 
percent, owing to the ballooning public wage bill (not 
brought under control until December 2003) and to government 
financing of several agricultural relief schemes, estimated 
at a cost of around 1.2 percent of GDP.  The financing of 
the resulting deficit came mostly from internal credit, 
particularly a 1.2 billion lempira loan from the Central 
Bank, guaranteed by transfers from Hondutel (the State-owned 
telephone company).  Despite the GOH\'s poor fiscal 
performance in 2003, statistics available so far for 2004 
show that the government is on track to meet its target of 
reducing this year\'s budget deficit to 3.5 percent of GDP, 
as agreed with the IMF. 
 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL ACCOUNT 
------------------------------------ 
(millions of Lempiras)   2001          2002          2003 
 
Gov\'t Income           19,726.5      20,977.1      23,055.3 
   From Taxes          16,083.1      17,229.0      19,632.4 
   Other Sources        3,643.4       3,748.4       3,422.9 
Gov\'t Expenditure      24,966.4      26,644.6      30,135.6 
Budget Deficit          5,239.9       5,667.2       7,080.3 
As % of GDP                5.3%          5.2%          5.9% 
 
12. Honduras\'s foreign debt, which is held by the official 
sector, Central Bank, and private sector (financial and non- 
financial), was USD 5,115.6 billion in the year 2003, up 3.1 
percent from 2002.  The increase was mainly due to the U.S. 
dollar\'s depreciation with respect to other currencies that 
make up the \"baskets\" of the international lending 
institutions.  In 2003, loans from multilateral and 
bilateral institutions totaled USD 489.5 million, USD 287.7 
million to the private sector and USD 201.8 million to the 
public sector.  Foreign debt service in 2003 was USD 503.3 
million, USD 413.5 million of capital and USD 89.8 million 
in interest.  The GOH continues its policy of taking on only 
foreign concessional loans for projects of high priority, 
and expects to reach its HIPC completion point in the first 
quarter of 2005. 
 
HONDURAN FOREIGN DEBT (IN USD MILLIONS) 
---------------------------------------- 
Type of Creditor    2001       2002       2003       %age 
 
Multilateral       3,118.3    3,162.2    3,324.2     65.0 
Bilateral          1,414.6    1,487.5    1,538.7     30.5 
Commercial           275.1      314.0      252.7      4.5 
TOTAL              4,808.0    4,963.7    5,115.6    100.0 
 
Palmer 
"
"22468","11/4/2004 13:23","04TEGUCIGALPA2478","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002478 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (OHILTON), IIP/G/WHA, WHA/CEN 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, SMIG, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON TPS, NOVEMBER 3, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 11/3, entitled \"TPS.\"  \"The extension of 
Temporary Protected Status has given to more than 90,000 
Hondurans living in the U.S. the possibility of working 
until July 5, 2006, without the risk of being arrested and 
deported.  Although the government has tried to get 
permanent status for them, this fifth extension gives us a 
chance to continue lobbying and negotiating to achieve that 
objective.\" 
 
\"The extremely dramatic conditions, that is, the destruction 
and emergency in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch that 
originated this migratory benefit, have disappeared, but the 
problems of unemployment and poverty have aggravated the 
situation of most Hondurans.\" 
 
\"The physical effects of that natural phenomenon can\'t be 
seen anymore, but its human and social consequences are 
still evident in most households and in the country in 
general, and that\'s why we need all the aid we can get from 
those who have left the country.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"22473","11/4/2004 14:32","04TEGUCIGALPA2491","Embassy Tegucigalpa","SECRET","04TEGUCIGALPA2370|04TEGUCIGALPA2409","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 002491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (CHANGED INVERTED TELEPHONE AREA CODES) 
 
PLEASE PASS TO ROBERT MURRAY AND MIKE POSILLICO DS/ICI/PII, 
MIKE BAYER DS/CR/CIL, MIKE FLYNN DS/IP/WHA, K. HALL 
DS/IP/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/02/2014 
TAGS: ASEC 
SUBJECT: PHONE NUMBER LINKS BETWEEN JORDANIAN AND TERROR 
GROUPS 
 
REF: A. REF: 1 TEGUCIGALPA 2409 
     B. 2. TEGUCIGALPA2370 
 
1. (S/NF) Summary-  RSO Tegucigalpa, working with Embassy 
collection elements, has found a possible link between 
telephone number called by Abdel Rahman Nassar and two 
Jordanian subjects with known alien smuggling groups  within 
Central America and Hizbollah terror group in the middle 
east.   End Summary 
 
 2. (S/NF)  During the initial RSO investigation it was 
determined that the three subjects stayed in the Monteverde 
hotel in the northern Honduran city of San Pedro Sula. The 
subjects made six phone calls to a Honduran registered 
cellphone, number 504-387-1709 and a call to a Chicago area 
mobile phone, number 708-307-6933. 
 
 
 3. (S/NF)  On October, 12, 2004 RSO passed the Honduran 
cellular telephone number, to include the main number of the 
hotel, to other U.S. agencies, in order to conduct number 
checks. Preliminary information indicates that a possible 
link exists between the Honduran phone numbers to alien 
smuggling groups and terror groups. 
 
 4. (S/NF)  Information collected indicates that the Honduran 
cell phone, that the subjects called, then made numerous 
calls to a number in Great Britain, and a number in the 
Southern Honduran city of Choluteca, phone number 
504-880-3884. Preliminary checks revealed a link between 
phone line in the Honduran city of Choluteca, and various 
numbers in the middle east with possible ties to Hizbollah 
and HAMAS.  Initial checks of the number in Great Britain, 
phone number 44-208-792-6263, revealed calls placed to Cuba, 
North Korea, Egypt, and Asencion Island, Georgetown. 
 
 5. (S/NF)  The initial checks conducted on the main number 
to the Monteverde Hotel, phone number 504-556-6239,  revealed 
that numerous calls were made from this number to central 
American alien smugglers. 
 
 6. (S/NF)   The preliminary information collected indicates 
that there is a possibility that Rahman Nassar is a 
facilitator in an alien smuggling ring that is operating 
through out Central America. These calls could indicate that 
he was being assisted by others in this region who are 
involved in smuggling of Special Interest Aliens (SIA\'s). 
 
 7. (S/NF)  All RSO\'s please share with representatives of all 
U.S. agencies abroad. 
 
 8. (S/NF)  POC for this case is ARSO Bill Stowell. 
 
Palmer 
"
"22489","11/4/2004 19:37","04TEGUCIGALPA2496","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA1690|04TEGUCIGALPA2123|04TEGUCIGALPA2356|04TEGUCIGALPA2434|04TEGUCIGALPA400|04TEGUCIGALPA729","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC, AND DS 
STATE FOR INL, INL/LP, INR/C, INR/AN/IAA, 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG/ROL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/02/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, KCOR, KJUS, KCRM, ECON, PHUM, PINR, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN AG NAVARRO SEEKS SOLUTION TO PARALYSIS AT 
THE PUBLIC MINISTRY OVER CORRUPTION CASES CRISIS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2434 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2356 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 2123 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 1690 
     E. TEGUCIGALPA 729 
     F. TEGUCIGALPA 400 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Negotiations continue at the Public 
Ministry (PM) between Attorney General Ovidio Navarro and 
federal prosecutors (fiscales) after many fiscales walked off 
the job October 19 following Navarro\'s termination of ten and 
transfer of six others for their public criticism over the 
PM\'s decision to drop all pending corruption charges against 
ex-president (and National Party leader) Raphael Leonardo 
Callejas and a number of Callejas associates (ref B).  The PM 
has remained paralyzed since then as both sides continue to 
exchange charges of political cronyism and incompetence. 
Representatives of both sides are seeking a workable 
compromise as the unrest moves into its third week.  Since 
its inception ten years ago, the PM has demonstrated little 
ability to tackle high-profile criminal cases in Honduras. 
END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Navarro Butts Heads With Career Prosecutors 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) Negotiations continue at the Public Ministry (PM) 
between Attorney General Ovidio Navarro and prosecutors 
(fiscales) after many fiscales walked off the job October 19 
due to Navarro\'s decision to terminate ten and transfer six 
others for their public criticism over the PM\'s decision to 
drop all pending corruption charges against ex-president (and 
National Party leader) Raphael Leonardo Callejas and a number 
of Callejas associates (ref B).  Navarro justified the 
decision based on his view that the terminated fiscales were 
politically motivated and/or incompetent.  The PM has 
remained partially paralyzed since then as both sides 
continue to exchange charges of political cronyism and 
incompetence.  Fiscales originally called for Navarro, also a 
National Party member, to resign, something he has stated 
both publicly and privately he will not do.  Navarro claimed 
he would not reverse his earlier decision to follow-through 
on removing insubordinate fiscales although both sides appear 
to be moving toward a compromise, especially after an October 
27 ruling by the Constitutional Chamber of the Honduran 
Supreme Court that the PM did not have the authority to drop 
the cases against Callejas and his associates. 
 
3. (C) Eight of the ten fiscales who were fired agreed to 
receive severance packages rather than return to the PM and 
Navarro agreed to halt the transfer of the six others.  The 
final sticking points revolve around fiscales\' demands that 
Navarro sack Jaime Banegas, Director of Fiscales and 
reinstate the two other fiscales who were dismissed. 
Fiscales claim that, since assuming the position of Director 
in February, Banegas has acted inappropriately by putting 
pressure on fiscales to drop corruption cases against 
politically-connected individuals and obstructing business at 
the PM by transferring fiscales to other positions due to 
their desire to push corruption cases forward.  According to 
news reports, Banegas officially made the decision to drop 
all corruption cases against Callejas since Navarro had 
recused himself due to his past legal representation of 
Callejas.  Post believes, however, that Navarro ordered the 
cases be dropped. 
 
4. (SBU) Navarro agreed to form a commission, which includes 
representatives of both the PM and the fiscales, to 
investigate charges that Banegas has acted inappropriately. 
Navarro subsequently disbanded the Commission when he 
received word that a few members intended to publicize the 
charges against Banegas in the name of transparency.  Navarro 
saw the Commission\'s role as gathering facts and providing a 
recommendation to him.  He reserved the right to make the 
final decision on keeping or dismissing Banegas.  Navarro has 
said that he will discuss the Banegas matter directly with 
the Association of Fiscales.  For their part, the fiscales 
have said that they will maintain pressure on Navarro through 
a variety of measures. (COMMENT:  Prior to the crisis, Post 
had fielded complaints from fiscales concerning Banegas\' 
heavy-handed approach and questionable behavior.  END 
COMMENT.) 
 
---------------------- 
Navarro Meets With DCM 
---------------------- 
 
5. (C) On October 29, DCM met with Navarro regarding the 
situation at the PM.  Navarro insisted that his decision to 
discipline certain fiscales was based on his view that they 
were not competent and had acted in an insubordinate manner. 
He particularly mentioned Soraya Morales, head of the PM\'s 
anti-corruption office, as an individual who was not doing a 
good job and had a political agenda.  (COMMENT  Morales was 
not among the fiscales affected by the PM\'s recent decision, 
as she was in Japan at the time of the firings, although a 
few who worked for her were dismissed.  Morales called 
publicly in August for the PM to close its anti-corruption 
office due to the PM\'s inability to prosecute meaningful 
corruption cases.  She also frequently confided to Post her 
frustration in not being able to move cases forward; 
something she blames on the PM\'s leadership.  In point of 
fact, many of these dismissed cases had not moved forward 
during the leadership of the two prior Liberal Party Attorney 
Generals.  END COMMENT)  Navarro also noted the partisan 
manner in which the anti-corruption office conducted its 
business, noting that they were preparing cases only against 
Nationalists, including presidential pre-candidates Pepe Lobo 
(President of the Congress) and Miguel Pastor (Mayor of 
Tegucigalpa). Charges were also being developed against Oscar 
Kilgore (Mayor of San Pedro Sula, the commercial center of 
Honduras). 
 
6. (C) Navarro assured DCM that he wants to make progress in 
fighting corruption and that over the next few months he 
expected several high-level cases would be brought forward. 
Navarro continued to insist, however, that the Congress must 
act on pending legislation outlining implementing procedures 
for how individuals who previously enjoyed immunity would be 
prosecuted.  The current draft legislation before Congress 
outlining procedures for how to prosecute some 400 high-level 
government officials previously immune from prosecution calls 
for these cases to be brought before a magistrate of the 
Supreme Court for a preliminary determination of the merits 
of the case.  If, and only if, a Supreme Court justice 
determines a case should be brought forward can an individual 
be prosecuted.  If this process is implemented in a 
transparent and impartial manner, this could be a positive 
development.  However, if past history prevails, this 
legislation offers corrupt individuals with contacts in the 
Supreme Court (another politicized institution not known for 
its zeal in fighting corruption) an opportunity to quash 
prosecutions altogether. 
 
------------------- 
PM In The Spotlight 
------------------- 
 
7. (C) On October 27, Ambassador and DCM raised U.S. concerns 
with President Maduro about perceptions that Honduras is 
backsliding on anti-corruption efforts and the recent 
decision by the PM to dismiss corruption cases against 
leading political figures (ref A).  Also, representatives of 
the G-17 donor countries and cooperating institutions 
(including the Ambassador) met with a Honduran Congressional 
delegation headed by President of the Congress Porfirio 
\"Pepe\" Lobo.  In this meeting, G-17 representatives expressed 
their concern over the situation at the PM and their desire 
to see Honduras make meaningful progress in the fight against 
corruption. 
 
8. (U) A number of civil society organizations and the 
Popular Block (a configuration of leftist groups) staged 
peaceful protests outside the PM demanding action against 
corruption in Honduras.  These groups have also been joined 
by sympathetic fiscales.  To make a point that speaking out 
against corruption was taboo at the PM, striking and 
dismissed fiscales lined up outside the PM\'s headquarters on 
November 2 dressed in black with tape across their mouths. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
PM Needs to Make Impact on Fighting White-Collar Crime 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
9. (SBU)  COMMENT:  In its ten-year history, the PM has never 
been effective at prosecuting high-profile white-collar crime 
in Honduras.  Whether through lack of resources, political 
will, incompetence of poorly-trained front-line prosecutors, 
or negligence, the institution seems unable to make concrete 
progress on this front.  This inaction has led many in 
Honduras to view the institution with justified skepticism 
regarding the PM\'s ability to make a dent in the fight 
against corruption.  If the PM were to move a few high-level 
cases successfully through the system, it would go a long way 
toward assuring the people of Honduras and the international 
community that the government is able to fight corruption. 
END COMMENT. 
Palmer 
"
"22560","11/5/2004 20:26","04TEGUCIGALPA2509","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, NOVEMBER 5, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 11/5, entitled \"CAFTA to Congress.\"  \"The Executive has 
sent the text of CAFTA to Congress for its approval, which 
may be subject to a wide process of consultation with 
different sectors of Honduran society.\" 
 
\"With the reelection of President Bush, the odds of its 
approval in the U.S. Congress have evidently improved, 
especially after the Republicans consolidated their control 
over the House of Representatives and the Senate.\" 
 
\"Meanwhile, it\'s important for Hondurans and for all Central 
Americans to adopt a positive and realistic attitude towards 
CAFTA, creating a suitable environment to take advantage of 
this new trade scheme.\" 
 
\"For Honduras, it will be crucial to establish new economic 
and financial policies, which is a very difficult task at 
this moment.  With a depreciating currency, a weak financial 
system, a collapsing agricultural sector, the disappearance 
of medium and small enterprise, constant labor disputes, and 
a lack of national leadership, there\'s no way we can 
increase the dynamism and competitiveness of the Honduran 
private sector and our national economy.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"22561","11/5/2004 20:26","04TEGUCIGALPA2510","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, KDEM, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON THE U.S ELECTIONS, NOVEMBER 5, 
2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 11/5, entitled \"Democratic Defeat.\"  \"Not even 
the active support of several Hollywood stars, the most 
influential media outlets, academics, organizations of all 
kinds, including relatives of 9/11 victims and soldiers who 
died or are still fighting in Iraq, or the failures and 
mistakes of President Bush were enough for the Democrats to 
regain the White House.  To make matters worse, they got 
even weaker in the House of Representatives and the Senate.\" 
 
\"Their bet on the vote of young people and a massive turnout 
that the experts on Kerry\'s side saw as their key to 
success, didn\'t yield the results expected.  Although young 
people voted mostly for Kerry and this election had the 
largest turnout in history, the Republicans exploited to a 
great extent the fear of terrorism, and they relied on 
Christian conservatism, mainly in the rural areas and the 
mid-size cities in the Midwest and South.\" 
 
\"Besides, the Democrats stressed too much the defects of 
Bush rather than the virtues of their candidate.  They were 
also unable to grasp the idea that their opponents were 
firmly rooted in the ideological dogmatism, and against it, 
not even the truth is an effective tool.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"22621","11/8/2004 18:47","04TEGUCIGALPA2524","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPA2382","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002524 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNP, IO/SHA, S/WCI, L/UNA, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, KJUS, KAWC, AORC, HO, UNGA 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS WANTS TO TRADE VOTES FOR ICTY CANDIDACIES 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2382 
 
     B. STATE 218465 
     C. OLSEN/PATEL E-MAIL 10/20/04 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 2288 
     E. OLSEN/IO/SHA FAX 10/08/04 
     F. GENEVA 2780 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see para. 4. 
 
2. (SBU) Post received a diplomatic note from the Honduran 
Foreign Ministry in response to Post\'s diplomatic note 
regarding the candidacy of Theodor Meron for re-election to 
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia 
(ICTY) at elections to be held in New York during the 59th 
General Assembly in November 2004 (refs A-C).  The dip note 
suggested an exchange of votes, with the GOH voting for Meron 
and the USG voting for Honduran candidate Dr. Rigoberto 
Espinal Irias (refs D-F). 
 
3. (SBU) PolOff told MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario 
Fortin November 8 that the USG does not generally announce 
its vote for prior to an election, but that Post would 
forward the request to the Department for consideration. 
 
4. (SBU) Action request for IO: Please provide guidance on 
how Post should respond to the GOH\'s suggestion of an 
exchange of votes for ICTY candidacies. 
Pierce 
"
"22678","11/9/2004 13:00","04TEGUCIGALPA2529","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA, IIP/G/WHA, AND IIP/T/ES 
FOR PM, NEA/NGA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, MOPS, IZ, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, NOVEMBER 8, 2004 
 
 
1.  Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 11/8, entitled \"Another Challenge in Iraq.\" 
\"While President George W. Bush and his followers are 
enjoying his indisputable win, the occupation forces in Iraq 
have a difficult task at hand: conquering the rebel Sunni 
city of Fallujah through blood and fire after having failed 
for the past seven months.\" 
 
\"The problem is that, as usually happens to occupation 
forces, time is becoming their worst enemy, both because of 
their inability to ensure safety - which is shameful for the 
greatest power in history - and the fact that it would be a 
terrible failure for the U.S. if the elections scheduled for 
January can\'t be carried out.  The elections in Iraq are a 
good thing for the Americans, even though they\'re merely a 
farce, just as in Afghanistan.\" 
 
\"We hope that, in the end, after so much death, pain, and 
destruction this senseless occupation has caused, the Iraqis 
themselves come out triumphant to reclaim their right to 
live in peace and under the government they choose in 
legitimately free elections.\" 
 
Pierce 
"
"22695","11/9/2004 16:21","04TEGUCIGALPA2531","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE225570","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002531 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR JRIVERA-MONTES AND DERB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, ECON, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS HOMES HOUSING PROJECT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 225570 
 
1. Reftel requests embassy comments and recommendations 
regarding the possibility of OPIC providing a $9.8 million 
direct loan to Honduras Homes, to construct 1,450 low-cost 
houses.   ZIP Buffalo is a maquila (light-assembly) operation 
active in Honduras.  Incohnsa Group and the Arguello family 
are well and favorably known to the USAID mission in 
Honduras, and it is therefore Post,s opinion that they are 
creditworthy and reliable business partners. 
 
2. The rapid growth of the light assembly and textiles 
industries in Honduras, and particularly in the Sula Valley 
between San Pedro Sula and Puerto Cortes, has led to 
localized labor shortages and consequently higher average 
wages and educational levels for workers.  This growth 
continues to draw immigrants from other parts of Honduras to 
the Sula Valley, putting increasing pressure on social 
services and basic infrastructure, including low-cost 
housing.  Addressing this issue is thus both a social and a 
business imperative, and would benefit both workers and 
employers.  The GOH has a fully-elaborated strategy for 
poverty reduction, including support for low-cost housing 
purchases.  Under the recent GOH agreement with the IMF, 
fiscal austerity is the rule, and resources are dear. 
However, in Post,s view, given low cost housing,s 
associated impact on poverty reduction and its direct support 
for continued growth in an economically vibrant sector, GOH 
support for low cost housing is likely to continue. 
 
PIERCE 
Pierce 
"
"22768","11/10/2004 21:27","04TEGUCIGALPA2551","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE232102","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002551 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
OSD FOR DIRECTOR OF NONPROLIFERATION POLICY (DCOOPER) 
STATE FOR NP/RA (JKROFT) AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, PARM, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: TEGUCIGALPA RESPONSE TO INVITATION TO ATTEND PSI 
EXERCISE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 232102 
 
1. (SBU) On October 29, Post delivered reftel non-paper to 
both MFA DG for Foreign Policy AMB Mario Fortin and MOD 
Federico Breve regarding the upcoming November 16-18 
multilateral maritime exercise in the Caribbean designed to 
test U.S. and PSI partners\' ability to detect, track and 
intercept the shipment of WMD, their delivery systems, and 
related materials.  On November 4, Post was contacted by 
Commander of the Honduran Navy Jose Eduardo Espinal, who 
expressed interest in having the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) 
represented at the exercise.  Post provided Commander Espinal 
with the contact information listed in reftel. 
 
2. (SBU)  While the HOAF has an interest in attending the 
exercise, GOH funding for the necessary travel may not be 
available.  Post has no available funds to assist and MILGP 
was unsuccessful in exploring other funding options.  The GOH 
has yet to formally respond to the invitation.  Given the 
problematic funding issue, Post is not optimistic that the 
GOH will be able to attend the exercise. 
Palmer 
"
"22880","11/16/2004 13:10","04TEGUCIGALPA2580","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PDA (OHILTON), WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, KPAO, PGOV, KDEM, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON THE U.S ELECTIONS, NOVEMBER 10, 
2004 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Vicente Machado (Honduran Ambassador in 
Colombia) in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El Heraldo\" 
on 11/10, entitled \"Wink to Kerry, Smile to Bush.\"  \"Senator 
John Kerry received a wink in the ballots, but victory 
smiled on President George Bush after the U.S. elections. 
It was what almost everyone expected, although some skeptics 
believed otherwise.\" 
 
\"I was one of those who believed Bush was going to win for a 
simple reason: if the decision was to be taken by all those 
from abroad, the politician of Massachusetts would have won 
easily, but since the decision depended on the Americans, an 
outcome in favor of the Texan was predictable.\" 
 
\"Right or wrong, the American electorate set an example that 
should be followed: vote for the candidate you think is best 
for your country.  Hondurans, who will elect our officials 
in 2005, should bear in mind that, at voting time or at any 
time, Honduras should come first, second and always.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"23206","11/23/2004 16:44","04TEGUCIGALPA2635","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04TEGUCIGALPA1541","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, WHA/USOAS, AND DRL/PHD 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND DCHA/DG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, HO 
SUBJECT:  2005 HONDURAN PRIMARY ELECTIONS - RULES OF THE GAME 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 1541 
 
1. Summary.  Honduran primary elections are scheduled for 
February 20, 2005, with general elections set for November 
27, 2005.  Under a new Electoral law reform passed early in 
2004, Honduran voters will be able to select candidates for 
the National Congress in the 2005 elections based not only on 
their names but also on their photographs, a process without 
precedent in Honduras (reftel).  This new method for the 
direct election of congressional members contrasts with the 
old system whereby candidates were elected on party rank- 
ordered congressional lists.  USAID and other international 
donors will support the elections with about USD four 
million.  A Supreme Electoral Tribunal, managed by political 
party appointees, has national authority to run the 
elections.  End Summary. 
 
2. Septel will provide more information on the political 
movements battling in the primaries and Post\'s assessment of 
the likely winners of the presidential nominations. 
 
February Primaries - Three Parties Participating 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
3. Honduran primary elections are scheduled for February 20, 
2005, with general elections set for November 27, 2005.  The 
primaries will be open primaries, meaning that voters can 
choose which primary they want to vote in, as opposed to a 
closed primary that is restricted to party members only. 
Voters will be voting for candidates for president/vice 
president, congress, mayor, and city council, all of whom 
under running under a specific movement within a party. 
Three out of the five parties, the National Party (PN), the 
Liberal Party (PL), and the Democratic Unification Party 
(UD), will participate in the primaries.  (Note:  The second 
UD slate may not be registered by the TSE, in which case the 
UD will not participate in the primary elections.  End Note.) 
The Christian Democrat Party (DC) and the Innovation and 
Unity Party (PINU) will not have primary elections, but 
instead will present candidate lists to the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal (TSE) for the general election.  Independent 
candidates who meet the registration requirements may run in 
the general elections only if they did not run and lose in a 
party primary election. 
 
TSE - Key Institution for Elections 
 
SIPDIS 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. The TSE has national authority to run the elections, with 
298 municipal commissions reporting to 18 departmental 
commissions which in turn report to the TSE.  The TSE budget 
is USD 18 million for primary and general elections, which 
the TSE is seeking from Congress.  The TSE has 135 employees 
- 60 administrative, 30 technical staff, and 45 support 
staff.  The National Registry of Persons (RNP), which 
provides identity documents to Honduran citizens and then 
forwards lists of eligible voters to the TSE, will loan the 
TSE another 10 people.  The TSE must train all poll workers; 
 
SIPDIS 
there will be 96,000 - 168,000 poll workers.  Police and the 
military will be responsible for the transport and security 
of ballots. 
 
5. The TSE consists of President Jacobo Hernandez Cruz (PN), 
Magistrate Aristides Mejia (PL), Magistrate Saul Escobar 
(DC), and Backup Magistrate Yolanda de Vargas (PINU). 
 
New this Election - Photos and Other Reforms 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
6. Under a new Electoral law passed in January that came into 
effect in April, voters will be able to select candidates for 
the National Congress in the 2005 elections based not only on 
their names but also on their photographs, a process without 
precedent in Honduras (reftel).  This new method for the 
direct election of congressional members contrasts with the 
old system whereby candidates were elected on party rank- 
ordered congressional lists.  It is thus the first primary 
for congressional and city council candidates.  The ballot 
will be a paper ballot printed in color, with a box under the 
name/photo of each candidate.  Voters must check a box below 
each candidate they choose for a ballot to be valid.  Voter 
can \"cross\" their votes and select individual candidates from 
different movements within the same party. 
 
7. The new law limits campaigns to 50 days for primary 
elections and 90 days for general elections. A political 
candidate can run for one political position only.  The 
office of Vice President was created, and the current system 
of three presidential designates was eliminated in the new 
law.  The law also mandated limited campaign finance 
reporting requirements. 
3.4-3.8 Million Eligible Voters 
------------------------------- 
 
8. There are 3.46 million people on the draft list of 
eligible voters for primary elections; experts expect the 
final list set to be published January 5, 2005, to contain 
approximately 3.8 million people (Honduras has a population 
of approximately 7 million.)  Honduran voters abroad will be 
able to vote for President and Vice President in the general 
election at Honduran embassies or consulates.  Suffrage is 
universal and mandatory for those 18 and older; however, the 
clergy and members of the military or civilian security 
forces are not permitted to vote.  Convicted felons cannot 
vote. 
Technical Assistance 
-------------------- 
 
9. USAID is using USD 65,000 of the Bureau of Democracy, 
Conflict, and Humanitarian Assistance (DCHA) core funds under 
DCHA\'s contract with the International Foundation for 
Election Systems (IFES) to obtain almost three person-months 
of the services of a high-level elections expert, Rafael 
Lopez-Pintor, for Honduras beginning in late October.  Mr. 
Lopez-Pintor\'s overall assignment is to help the TSE to 
develop its strategic approaches to implementing the new law. 
Mr. Lopez just completed (a) an assessment of the 
organizational and administrative capacity of the TSE to 
carry out the primary and general elections next year, and 
(b) assessed TSE\'s preparations to date for the elections. 
 
10. USAID is also programming about USD 216,000, converted 
from local currency trust fund resources, to a Cooperative 
Agreement with the Inter-American Institute of Human Rights. 
Its Center for Electoral Assessment and Promotion (CAPEL) 
will use those resources to provide advisory assistance to 
(a) the GOH and NGOs in the development of a national voter 
education program and (b) the GOH in implementing the 
elections in accordance with the new law. 
 
11. USAID\'s Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) 
has provided USD 130,000 to be used for elections, which have 
been obligated in the amendment signed August 30, 2004, for 
the new Ruling Justly Strategic Objective.   The funds have 
been added through an amendment to an existing Cooperative 
Agreement with the Federation of Development Associations of 
Honduras (FOPRIDEH), an NGO umbrella organization, to support 
its election assistance program.  FOPRIDEH has been working, 
with USAID assistance, on electoral reform for several years, 
and was instrumental in building public and Congressional 
support for electoral law change.  FOPRIDEH has signed an 
agreement with the TSE to formalize cooperation between them 
in implementing the elections, with FOPRIDEH centering its 
program on a civic education campaign (media and leaflets) to 
familiarize voters with the new systems required by the new 
law and to promote dialogues on the role of civil society and 
the importance of political parties for democracy in 
Honduras. 
 
12. On November 3, USAID, through the Strengthened Rule of 
Law Program (SROL), agreed to a GOH request to use USD one 
million of local currency funds to support the TSE during the 
2005 elections.  A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was 
signed with the Organization of American States (OAS) in 
order to join forces in support of the electoral process, and 
with the Ministry of Finance (MOF).  Specifically, $500,000 
will be used to buy computer equipment for the elections 
through an OAS procurement process, and the remaining 
$500,000 will be programmed based on USAID\'s recommendations 
derived from Mr. Lopez-Pintor\'s assessment.  (See septel for 
problems involving this MOU.) 
 
13. The Organization of American States (OAS) will provide 
technical assistance for computers and vote counting.  Two 
OAS consultants are working under Swedish funding with the 
GOH on the development of the long run capacity of the TSE 
and the RNP to implement the new electoral law.  Swedish 
funds are divided roughly equally between the two 
institutions, total about USD 2-2.5 million, and are designed 
to finance assistance for a two-year period. 
 
Palmer 
"
"23216","11/23/2004 22:34","04TEGUCIGALPA2636","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE209663|04SECSTATE242242|04TEGUCIGALPA2418","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP AND L/LEI 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, EAIR, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: CNIES INFORMATION SHARING AGREEMENT UPDATE: 
HONDURAS TRYING TO MEET DECEMBER 1 DEADLINE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 242242 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2418 
     C. SECSTATE 209663 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Post remains optimistic that the Government of 
Honduras (GOH) will respond positively by the December 1 
deadline for completing a CNIES information sharing agreement 
via an exchange of diplomatic notes with the U.S. (ref B). 
Post\'s optimism is based on informal feedback from Minister 
of Defense Federico Breve and Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Leonidas Rosa Bautista; however, during a November 12 
follow-up meeting between PolCouns and MFA Director General 
for Foreign Affairs Ambassador Mario Fortin, Fortin informed 
PolCouns that since the proposed agreement deals with 
counternarcotics efforts, it must first be approved by 
Honduras\' National Counternarcotics Council (\"Consejo 
Nacional Contra Narcotrafico\" or CNCN). 
 
2. (C) The CNCN, Honduras\' counternarcotics oversight body, 
is headed by Vice President Armida de Lopez Contreras, wife 
of former FM Carlos Lopez Contreras.  Recently she delayed 
for more that six months the signing of our FY 2004 
counternarcotics LOA when she insisted on substantive changes 
to INL\'s standard provisions, such as eliminating the human 
rights and narcotics vetting language.  This CNCN clearance 
could delay the process. 
 
3. (SBU) DG Fortin indicated to PolOff that getting CNCN 
approval would not be a significant obstacle to final GOH 
approval.  Post still believes the GOH will respond in a 
positive manner and will continue to pressure senior MOD and 
MFA officials to move quickly.  In fact, on November 22, DG 
Fortin contacted PolOff requesting a floppy disk with the 
CNIES required language so that the MFA could expedite the 
clearance process for a GOH diplomatic note.  Post believes 
the GOH will meet the December 1 deadline.  However, we 
believe it prudent to extend that deadline to December 15 to 
allow the MFA bureaucracy time to produce the required 
exchange of diplomatic notes. 
Palmer 
"
"23282","11/24/2004 20:26","04TEGUCIGALPA2644","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04State238056","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002644 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/MST, IO/T, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, HO, WTO, UNESCO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS SHARES CONCERNS OVER VAGUE UNESCO DRAFT 
 
REF: State 238056 
 
1.  Post delivered reftel talking points to Ambassador Mario 
Fortin, Director of Foreign Policy at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, and to Norman Garcia, Minister of Trade and 
Industry, on November 8.  EconOff then raised the points in 
a meeting with Minister Garcia and other Trade Ministry 
officials on November 9, and confirmed, as suggested in 
reftel, that Trade Ministry officials were indeed entirely 
unaware of the UNESCO negotiation or its potential 
implications for a country\'s international trade 
obligations. 
 
2.  In response, Honduran Trade Ministry officials contacted 
their counterparts at the Ministry of Culture, Art and 
Sports responsible for the UNESCO negotiations.  Together, 
they drafted a report outlining the potential trade-related 
ramifications of the UNESCO draft and presented this report 
to Director of Trade Policy Melvin Redondo on November 19. 
Speaking with EconOff on November 23, Redondo stated that 
while he does not see precisely how the agreement would 
impact a signatory\'s international trade obligations, the 
very fact that the language in the current draft is so vague 
and open-ended raises the concern that it might.  Redondo 
stated that Honduras does not favor approval of such a 
vaguely worded document, and assured EconOff that the Trade 
Ministry will stay engaged as negotiations proceed so that 
their concerns will be addressed. 
 
Palmer 
"
"23283","11/24/2004 20:31","04TEGUCIGALPA2645","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa2483","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002645 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB AND DRL/IL 
STATE PASS USTR FOR AMALITO 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
DOL FOR ILAB 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT SHUETE 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, PGOV, EAGR, ELAB, HO 
SUBJECT: GOH Trade Officials Worried about DR Exclusion from 
CAFTA 
 
REF: Tegucigalpa 2483 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  GOH trade officials are increasingly 
concerned that the exclusion of the Dominican Republic from 
CAFTA would require Honduras to re-sign CAFTA and re-start 
its process of Congressional approval and ratification. 
They believe that there is no legal mechanism under Honduran 
law by which Honduras could approve and ratify the current 
(August 5) version of CAFTA if the Dominican Republic is 
excluded.  Instead, the GOH would have to sign a new 
agreement and present the new agreement to Congress for 
approval, which would delay ratification until early 2005 at 
best.  End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) In the past two weeks, Minister of Trade and 
Industry Norman Garcia and Director of Trade Policy (and 
Lead Negotiator for CAFTA) Melvin Redondo have expressed 
growing concern that the exclusion of the Dominican Republic 
from CAFTA will make it impossible for Honduras to approve 
and ratify CAFTA by the end of this year as planned.  Since 
an approval decree for the August 5 version of CAFTA (which 
the includes the Dominican Republic) has already been 
presented to Congress (reftel), exclusion of the Dominican 
Republic at this stage would require, according to Redondo, 
signing a new agreement and re-starting the process of 
Congressional approval using this new agreement.  Minister 
Garcia, though admitting that he has not analyzed the legal 
issues himself, says that his legal advisors are convinced 
that Congress could not approve the August 5 version of 
CAFTA if the Dominican Republic is not included. 
 
3. (SBU) According to Redondo, the question of the Dominican 
Republic\'s exclusion \"has actually become more difficult 
than CAFTA itself,\" and he has also expressed concern that 
opponents of the agreement could use the exclusion of the 
Dominican Republic \"as propaganda against CAFTA\".  However, 
even under the worst-case scenario of a lost opportunity for 
Congressional approval in 2004 and a re-start in 2005, 
Redondo and Garcia seem confident that CAFTA will still have 
enough Congressional support to pass. 
 
------------------------------- 
Comment: Process, not Substance 
------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Comment: It is worth noting that Garcia and Redondo 
seem troubled only by the logistical headaches that removal 
of the Dominican Republic would cause; they are not 
bemoaning the trade benefits foregone or the negative impact 
on regional integration.  In addition, neither Garcia nor 
Redondo has at any point blamed the U.S. for coming down too 
hard on the Dominican Republic; they seem to understand the 
political necessity of the U.S. position.  Still, with the 
process of ratification well under way and proceeding 
according to plan, it is understandable that they would 
bitterly regret having to completely lose current momentum 
and start again fresh next year.  End comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"23303","11/26/2004 12:17","04TEGUCIGALPA2646","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPA2635","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR EB, INL, INR/AN/IAA, AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, ECON, SNAR, KJUS, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PRIMARY ELECTIONS IN FEBRUARY: PASTOR AND 
LOBO IN NATIONALIST FIGHT; ZELAYA LEADS THE LIBERALS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2635 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 1541 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  With the February 20, 2005, primary 
elections three months away, the race is tightening on the 
Nationalists side with President of Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" 
Lobo closing the gap on Tegucigalpa Mayor Miguel Pastor.  On 
the Liberal side, politician Mel Zelaya is pulling away from 
the rest of the pack and looks likely to win the nomination. 
Turnout could be the key in these open primaries, the first 
ever for congressional and city council candidates.  End 
Summary. 
 
2. (U) With the February 20, 2005, primary elections only 
three months away, here is a snapshot of the leading 
movements and their candidates for president and vice 
president.  (Each movement also has a slate of congressional, 
mayoral, and city council candidates.) 
 
National Party (center/right) 
----------------------------- 
 
\"New Time\" 
---------- 
 
3. (SBU) Miguel Pastor is the Mayor of Tegucigalpa, young and 
media savvy, and has been campaigning as an electable fresh 
face based on his success as mayor.  He represents a 
generational change in the current political leadership and 
he has been distancing himself from Ricardo Maduro\'s 
Administration.  VP Carlos Lopez Contreras is a former 
Foreign Minister and current Honduran representative for 
Hague border issues.  He is a VP candidate with gravitas. 
Pastor, with family connections in major media outlets, had a 
commanding lead in the polls, but Lobo has the support of 
many party insiders and has been gaining strength in recent 
polls.  The Pastor movement\'s San Pedro Sula Mayoral 
candidate is incumbent Mayor Oscar Kilgore, which gives him a 
strong base on the north coast. 
 
\"Work and Security\" 
------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo is President of Congress with 
considerable experience in politics and as an 
agrobusinessman.  VP Mario Canahuati is the current Honduran 
Ambassador to the U.S., and a maquila businessman who helps 
bring support in the San Pedro Sula area.  Lobo is running as 
a law and order candidate with proven effectiveness as 
President of Congress.  He has charisma problems but is very 
well connected and favored by many party insiders.  Lobo has 
many links to the \"dark side\" of the National Party.  Lobo\'s 
Tegucigalpa mayoral candidate is President Maduro\'s private 
secretary Ricardo Alvarez, who holds a commanding lead in the 
 
SIPDIS 
mayoral race. 
 
\"For a Better Alternative\" 
-------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) Gilberto \"Picho\" Goldstein is a congressman and 
businessman.  VP Irma Acosta de Fortin is a university rector 
and was Raphael Callejas\' VP candidate the first time 
Callejas ran (and lost).  Goldstein has no chance of getting 
the Nationalist Party nomination, but has some old guard 
support in the party.  Interestingly, he has become a vocal 
supporter of the recent electoral reforms (reftels). 
 
6. (U) Also running, but garnering even less support, is 
presidential candidate Jesus Flores and VP Oscar Zuniga. 
 
Pastor Lead Slips as Lobo Gains 
------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) Pastor, who once had a commanding lead over Lobo in 
the polls, now only has a 10 percent lead.  An unpublished 
October 30 poll that EmbOffs have seen from an independent 
and credible polling firm reads as follows: 
- Pastor   52 percent 
- Lobo     42 percent 
- Goldstein 5 percent 
 
8. (SBU) The same poll in early September had Pastor leading 
Lobo by almost 30 percent.  Pastor has lost ground among 
Nationalists, Liberals, and independents.  Many independents 
who previously said they would vote for Pastor are now in the 
undecided column.  Pastor has retained strong support in the 
18-40 years old age group, but Lobo leads among those over 40 
years old, who are more likely to vote.  Pastor has been 
urging the GOH to do a better job of registering young adults 
so they can be eligible to vote in the primary. 
 
9. (SBU) Theories abound as to why Pastor has lost ground and 
Lobo has gained.  The October 20 submission of the candidate 
lists for each movement may have led some weak Pastor 
supporters, who were left off the Pastor lists, to defect to 
Lobo.  Lobo\'s choice of Canahuati as VP appears to have 
helped Lobo more than Pastor\'s choice of Lopez Contreras has 
helped Pastor.  Pastor also recently lost a key grass-roots 
organizer and very popular local leader in the Tegucigalpa 
area, Renan Inestroza, who switched to the Lobo campaign 
after a falling-out with Pastor.  Inestroza reportedly 
thought he was promised a top slot on the congressional 
candidate list by Pastor and switched to Lobo when he didn\'t 
make the list.  Ironically, Inestroza is not on Lobo\'s 
congressional candidate list either. 
 
10. (SBU) While the campaign is not officially on, Lobo as 
President of Congress has been running a series of basic but 
effective messages articulating his position on a number of 
hot issues - crime, death penalty, gangs, jobs, gay marriage, 
etc.  Lobo has also been running a negative campaign against 
Pastor.  At the same time, Pastor has been running slick, but 
vacuous, ads, promoting himself as the electable candidate 
with leadership and a fresh approach, but not saying anything 
substantive.  Ironically, the leading Liberal candidate, Mel 
Zelaya, is running a campaign that is somewhat similar to 
Pastor\'s campaign, but with a lower profile.  Perhaps 
realizing Lobo\'s issues-based campaign appears to be working, 
Pastor\'s latest ad is much more substantive.  Pastor is also 
likely to criticize Lobo for breaking his promise not to run 
for president when he was chosen as President of Congress. 
 
Liberal Party (center/left) 
--------------------------- 
 
\"Liberal Hope\" 
-------------- 
 
11. (SBU) Manuel Zelaya Rosales, previously a congressman, is 
a politician, a farmer, and does not have a university 
degree.  VP Elvin Santos is a young businessman and the son 
of politician (his father has a questionable reputation). 
The leading Liberal Party candidate by default it seems; at 
this time Zelaya clearly has a commanding lead in the race 
for his party\'s nomination. 
 
\"Jaime\'s Liberal Movement\" 
-------------------------- 
 
12. (SBU) Jaime Rosenthal Oliva is a businessman, 
congressman, and all-around wheeler-dealer with a shady 
reputation.  VP Ramon Villeda Bermudez is a congressman, 
veterinarian, and a past presidential contender who never 
gained the nomination.  Villeda is the son of former 
President Ramon Villeda Morales, who restored democracy to 
Honduras in the 1950s.  A Liberal Party dinosaur, Rosenthal 
is the quintessential party insider who is unable to move up 
in the polls, despite heavy self-advertising (he runs one of 
the four major newspapers and a television channel).  He 
shows no signs of being able to topple Zelaya, and 
indications are that he plans to go negative on Zelaya to try 
to change the dynamic of the race. 
 
\"New Majority\" 
-------------- 
 
13. (SBU) Gabriela Nunez de Reyes is an advisor for Atlantic 
Bank, a former Minister of Finance in the Carlos Flores 
Administration, and previously worked for the IMF.  She is 
the most viable of the female presidential candidates.  VP 
Guillermo Alvarado Downing is a former Minister of 
Agriculture under the Flores Administration and an 
agrobusinessman.  Nunez is someone to watch in the future, 
but she has little chance to beat Zelaya. 
 
\"Pineda\'s Liberal Movement\" 
--------------------------- 
 
14. (SBU) Rafael Pineda Ponce is a congressman, an elder 
statesman, and is currently suffering from cancer.  VP Yansi 
Juarez is a woman and an unknown figure.  Pineda, a former 
President of Congress, has some campesino and union support. 
He is respected but has a low chance of winning the 
nomination; his days as party leader are behind him. 
 
15. (SBU) Also running, but with even less support, is 
presidential candidate Hugo Noe Pino, a former Ambassador to 
the U.S. and Minister of Finance, and VP Elsa Palou, 
Congressman Jorge Arturo Reina and VP Virginia Figueroa, Vera 
Rubi and VP Edgardo Caceres Castellanos, and Mayor of Puerto 
Cortes Marlon Lara and VP Daniel Davila Nolasco. 
 
Zelaya With Commanding Lead 
--------------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) The same unpublished October 30 poll cited 
previously reads as follows for the Liberals: 
- Zelaya      52 percent 
- Rosenthal   22 percent 
- Nunez        9 percent 
- Pineda Ponce 8 percent 
 
17. (SBU) Zelaya\'s lead over his Liberal rivals has 
increased, as Pineda Ponce has slipped to fourth place. 
Rosenthal, despite more advertising than Zelaya, has not 
gained any ground.  As previously noted, Zelaya\'s campaign is 
somewhat similar to Pastor\'s as it has portrayed him as the 
electable candidate, without saying anything substantive. 
However, Rosenthal has been unable thus far to force Zelaya 
into a battle, as Lobo has done with Pastor.  Barring an 
unexpected development, final results are likely to be along 
the lines shown above in the current poll.  Nunez and Lara 
are the generational transition candidates in the Liberal 
Party and are positioning themselves for the 2009 elections. 
 
Minor Parties 
------------- 
 
18. (SBU) The Democratic Unification Party (UD) candidates 
are \"United People Movement\" presidential candidate Juan 
Almendarez (former communist, heads small human rights NGO), 
VP Martha Isabel Sandoval, and \"popular Convergence\" movement 
presidential candidate Jose Maria Turcios (former communist, 
alleged to be involved in kidnapping of a bank president in 
1981), VP candidate unclear.  The UD is far to the left and 
is often an anti-U.S. party.  They have support from the 
leftist protest organization Popular Block and a few public 
sector unions.  The second UD movement may not be registered, 
in which case the UD would not participate in the primaries. 
 
19. (SBU) The Christian Democratic Party (PCD) candidate is 
Juan Ramon Martinez (op/ed writer), VP candidate Adela de 
Chavarria.  The Innovation and Unity Party (PINU) candidate 
is Carlos Sosa Coello (congressman), VP candidate Olga 
Morales de Galindolean.  The PINU and DC tickets are running 
unopposed for their parties\' nominations, and neither has a 
chance to win the presidency.  The PCD leans to the right and 
PINU leans toward the left. 
 
Key Issues on Voter\'s Minds 
--------------------------- 
 
20. (SBU) In the October poll, Maduro\'s performance was rated 
as bad/very bad by 53 percent of respondents, with 40 percent 
rating it as good/very good.  This does not bode well for the 
Nationalists.  Also, corruption scandals in November have 
hurt the Nationalists as voters increasingly doubt their 
ability to tackle endemic corruption in Honduras.  The 
Nationalists and Liberals were tied at 42 percent in voter\'s 
party preference; Pastor (26 percent) held a slight lead over 
Zelaya (22 percent) and Lobo (20 percent) for president. 
When asked what was the most pressing problem facing 
Honduras, here is how voters answered: 
 
September 2002               August 2004 
crime          44 percent    unemployment   30 percent 
unemployment   19 percent    crime          22 percent 
cost of living 17 percent    cost of living 21 percent 
 
21. (SBU) On the surface, the switch from crime and 
unemployment as a top voter concern during the last two years 
should help the Liberals.  The Nationalists, thanks to 
Maduro, Lobo, and others, are now seen as the law and 
order/tough on crime candidates.  The Liberals have 
criticized the Maduro Administration\'s failure to boost 
economic growth.  However, to a certain extent, this change 
in voter attitudes may be due to voters giving the Maduro 
Administration credit in the one area they have clearly 
fought to make a difference - crime.  This credit could 
potentially help the Nationalists, particularly Pepe Lobo. 
 
22. (SBU) However, one mitigating factor in favor of the 
Liberals is that the two Nationalist candidates have been 
advertising their respective accomplishments for more than 
two years without any Liberal Party opposition advertising, 
aside from Rosenthal\'s self-promotion.  Once the Liberals 
roll out their campaigns and begin to frame their message on 
economic issues, the Nationalists could be vulnerable on 
these issues. 
 
23. (SBU) Turnout could be the key to who wins in these open 
primaries.  In the same October poll, only 37 percent said 
they planned to vote in the primaries, with 42 percent saying 
no, and 21 percent saying they were unsure. 
 
Pastor or Lobo vs. Zelaya 
------------------------- 
 
24. (SBU) Comment:  At this point, it appears that the 
presidential race will be Pastor or Lobo vs. Zelaya, with 
three months of hard campaigning ahead.  Will Pastor be able 
to halt Lobo\'s surge and rebuild some of his shrinking lead? 
Will Lobo\'s broken pledge not to run for President come back 
to haunt him?  Will Rosenthal be able to shake up the race 
and put Zelaya\'s win in jeopardy?  Who will turn out to vote 
and which primary will they vote in?  The answers to these 
questions will determine the outcome of the presidential 
primaries.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"23658","12/6/2004 14:42","04TEGUCIGALPA2719","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE248337","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2014 
TAGS: ETTC, PREL, CU, HO 
SUBJECT: TEGUCIGALPA RESPONSE TO NSC-DIRECTED REVIEW 
REGARDING WAIVER OF TITLE III OF THE LIBERTAD ACT 
 
REF: STATE 248337 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger Pierce; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) The Government of Honduras (GOH) has actively worked 
to advance democracy, human rights, and fundamental freedoms 
in Cuba.  On April 15, the UN Commission on Human Rights 
(UNCHR) passed a Honduran-sponsored resolution calling for 
greater respect for human rights in Cuba.  The Government of 
Cuba responded to the GOH\'s action by suspending pending 
maritime boundary negotiations with Honduras, an item which 
was a foreign policy priority of President Ricardo Maduro\'s 
administration.  Also, while the GOH does have formal 
diplomatic relations with Cuba, Honduras has not named an 
Ambassador to Cuba, partly out of deference to U.S. wishes. 
The GOH consistently and publicly states that concern over 
Cuba\'s human rights policies is a fundamental tenet of its 
policy toward the Castro regime.  PolCouns met with the new 
Honduran Charge d\'Affaires in Havana, Humberto Lopez 
Villamil, prior to his recent departure to Havana to 
emphasize the importance of human rights in Cuba.  Villamil 
welcomed the meeting and indicated he would seek out the U.S. 
Interests Section in Havana. 
 
2. (C) In addition, the GOH has agreed to accept 18 Cubans 
from Guantanamo.  The GOH is doing this despite a possible 
negative reaction from the GOC. 
 
3. (SBU)  Post has no information available on investments 
made in Cuba by Honduran individuals or companies.  The 
Ministry of Industry and Trade and the Central Bank collect 
information on foreign investments made in Honduras, grouped 
by country of origin, but have never collected information on 
Honduran investments abroad.  This year, for the first time, 
the Central Bank has added a question on Honduran investment 
abroad to its annual questionnaire of Honduran companies. 
They hope to compare the data received from this question 
with information that other governments provide on Honduran 
foreign investment in their countries.  In the future, 
therefore, this information should become available. 
 
4. (C) If the Title III waiver were not renewed for Honduras, 
it could undermine clear GOH support for pressuring Cuba to 
improve its human rights record, undermine general GOH 
support for U.S. Cuba policy, and unnecessarily punish a 
supportive regional ally. 
Palmer 
"
"23671","12/6/2004 17:13","04TEGUCIGALPA2724","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04State239929","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002724 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/MDM:JFRANCO AND DDOUGLASS 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OMA:LGALLAGHER 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/MST, IO/T, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, EAID, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: TRANSPARENCY OF BUDGETS/MILITARY SPENDING 
 
REF: State 239929 
 
1.  The following answers are keyed to the questions in 
reftel: 
 
A. General Overview of Auditing Procedures: 
 
1,2,3,4:  Responsibility for auditing Honduran military 
expenditures lies with a civilian Auditor who is named by 
the President and works for the Ministry of Defense (MOD). 
Underneath him works the Paymaster, who is also a civilian. 
 
Each branch of the military service (Army, Navy, and Air 
Force) has its own Paymaster section, and within each there 
is an Audit Department responsible for continuously auditing 
all its expenditures.  The MOD\'s Paymaster then audits the 
services\' reports and reports to the MOD\'s Auditor who has 
overall responsibility.  Once all internal auditing is 
complete, the MOD is responsible for reporting findings to 
the President.  Usually this is done at the end of the 
calendar year. 
 
Additionally, the Supreme Court of Accounts (Tribunal 
Superior de Cuentas or TSC, a national hybrid general 
accounting and public ethics office established in 2002), is 
nominally responsible for conducting audits of all 
government ministries, including the MOD. 
 
5.  Yes; auditing is done continuously.  All subordinate 
elements must present an expenditure report (with purchase 
receipts) on a monthly basis.  If not provided, funds for 
the following month will not be allocated.  Each service has 
an account with the Central Bank; no cash is handled at the 
service level.  If a purchase is required, an order is 
generated to request a check from the Central Bank; these 
purchases are matched against existing budget lines, and 
appropriate deductions are made.  Once receipts are 
provided, the Central Bank provides the checks.  Generally 
the services\' paymaster\'s offices have established relations 
with several civilian providers who provide required items 
on a credit basis. 
 
6.  As described above, Post believes that Honduras does 
indeed have a \"functioning system for reporting audits of 
military expenditures to civilian authorities,\" which is 
established by law.  The only problem identified with the 
procedures is the turnaround time that the services must 
wait to receive checks from the Central Bank in order to pay 
their creditors.  This delay exists as a result of the way 
the system is currently organized and does not represent a 
lack of transparency or indicate any intentional 
unwillingness to be transparent on military expenditures. 
 
B.  The Military Budget and On-budget and Off-budget 
Revenues and Expenses 
 
1.  The country\'s defense budget includes only the military. 
The budget for the National Police is the responsibility of 
the Ministry of Public Security. 
 
2.  If a contingency arises which would require off-budget 
military spending (participation in Iraq or Haiti, response 
to a natural disaster, etc.), the MOD can request additional 
funding from Congress.  If approved by Congress, these 
additional expenditures would be audited in the manner 
described above. 
 
C. The Military Component of the National Budget 
 
1.  Yes.  In 2003 the MOD\'s budget comprised 2.7 percent of 
the national budget, and 0.8 percent of GDP.  By contrast, 
the Ministries of Education and Health received a combined 
42 percent of the national budget, or 12 percent of GDP. 
 
2.  Yes.  Preparation of the military\'s budget begins with 
each service chief, who is responsible for formulating his 
service\'s respective budget.  The MOD then approves the 
proposed budgets, consolidates them, and submits them to 
Congress for final approval.  Once Congress approves all 
ministries\' budgets, it formulates the National Budget. 
Congress is expected to approve the 2005 National Budget on 
or about December 13. 
 
Palmer 
"
"23730","12/7/2004 21:42","04TEGUCIGALPA2738","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE209663|04SECSTATE242242|04TEGUCIGALPA2418|04TEGUCIGALPA2636","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002738 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP AND L/LEI 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, MOPS, EAIR, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS APPROVES CNIES INFORMATION SHARING 
AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. CUMMINS-AGUILERA EMAIL 11/30/04 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2636 
     C. SECSTATE 242242 
     D. TEGUCIGALPA 2418 
     E. SECSTATE 209663 
 
1. On December 7, Post finally received the hard-copy of 
Diplomatic Note 173-DT (dated November 30, 2004) from the 
Honduran Foreign Ministry in response to Post\'s diplomatic 
note number 316 of October 19.  The Honduran note contains 
formal GOH acceptance of the proposed CNIES information 
sharing agreement per reftel E without changes to our 
suggested response.  Per ref E, Post will send a copy of both 
diplomatic notes, accompanied by an English translation of 
the GOH response (not including the direct quotation of the 
U.S. dip note), via pouch to L/LEI.  Post is also faxing a 
copy of the diplomatic notes to L/LEI, INL/LP, and WHA/CEN. 
 
2. Informal translation of GOH dip note follows: 
 
Note No. 173-DT 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs extends its greetings to the 
Honorable Embassy of the United States of America and has the 
pleasure to acknowledge receipt of Diplomatic Note No. 316 
dated October 19, 2004, which literally says: 
 
(Complete text of the Embassy\'s diplomatic note follows) 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Honduras hereby confirms 
that the above communication is acceptable to Honduras and 
that the Embassy of the United States of America\'s note as 
well as this response, shall comprise agreement among our two 
governments as of this date.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
wishes to extend the Embassy of the United States of America 
the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C., November 30, 2004 
 
(initials of Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista and GOH 
seal) 
 
3. This exchange of diplomatic notes brings into effect a 
formal understanding between the U.S. and the GOH on the use 
of data provided by the CNIES program. 
 
Pierce 
"
"23855","12/9/2004 19:13","04TEGUCIGALPA2753","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE261907|04VISTAN0321621","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091913Z Dec 04
","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS (Melara Berlioz Yuri Fernando) 
SUBJECT: N0321621, Notice of Revocation 
 
Ref: (A) VISTA  N0321621 (B) STATE 261907 
 
1. Per Ref A instructions, Consul General notified Yuri 
Melara on December 9 that any U.S. visas he might hold had 
been revoked by the Department.  CG notified Melara by 
telephone since Melara said he was ill and could not come to 
the Embassy.  CG told Melara he should not try to travel 
with any visa he might hold, notwithstanding it might appear 
on its face to be valid.  CG also asked Melara to present 
his passport to the Embassy as soon as possible so the visa 
might be physically cancelled. 
 
2. Post has notified Honduran Immigration and airlines 
serving routes between Honduras and the United States of 
this revocation. 
 
3. Post has not yet received any media inquiries about this 
matter, but will use Department-provided guidance when it is 
needed. 
 
PIERCE 
"
"23895","12/10/2004 12:10","04TEGUCIGALPA2757","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04Tegucigalpa2483","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/TPP, INR/B AND DRL/IL 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
DOL FOR ILAB 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT SHUETE 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
ROME for Embassy The Vatican 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, PGOV, EAID, KIPR, EAGR, ELAB, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: CAFTA Debate Heats Up Ahead of Possible December 15 
Vote; Ratification Remains Likely But Vote Could Be Delayed 
 
REF: A) Tegucigalpa 2483 
 
     B) Tegucigalpa 2315 
 
1.  Summary:  As the Honduran Congress considers CAFTA and 
moves closer to a vote, both supporters and opponents of the 
agreement have been making their views known in public fora 
and through the press.  In recent weeks CAFTA has been 
publicly denounced by Roman Catholic Cardinal Oscar 
Rodriguez (considered to be one of the leading Latin 
American candidates to be the next Pope), campesino leaders, 
and a ruling party congressmen, who is a presidential 
candidate.  In response, administration officials have 
stepped up their efforts at outreach and promotion, ahead of 
a ratification vote which they hope will take place on 
December 15.  Though the opposition has turned up the volume 
on their objections, administration officials are still 
expressing confidence that CAFTA will be approved.  Post 
also expects that the National Congress will approve CAFTA 
when it votes on this issue.  The vote could be delayed 
until late January/early February.  End summary. 
 
2.  In the weeks since October 28, when legislation for the 
approval of U.S.-Central America Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA) was submitted to Congress (ref A), groups and 
individuals opposed to CAFTA have increasingly been making 
very vocal public statements to express their opposition to 
the agreement. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Cardinal Rodriguez: CAFTA \"Anything but free\" 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  On November 26, in comments widely covered by the 
Honduran press, Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez declared that the 
so-called Free Trade Agreement is \"anything but free\". 
While attending the annual assembly for Central American 
bishops in Costa Rica, Rodriguez stated that CAFTA \"is only 
free for the party which has power, and Central Americans do 
not.  How can we talk about free trade when protectionism 
persists in the United States?\" 
 
4.  Rodriguez acknowledged that the agreement will provide 
benefits for certain sectors of the Central American 
economies, but not, he claimed, to the agricultural sector, 
where poor Central American farmers will be forced to 
compete against subsidized products from the United States. 
\"It will be impossible for our farmers to compete under 
these conditions.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Campesino Organization: \"An Economic Conquest\" 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5.  The General Secretary of the Coordinating Council for 
Honduran Campesino Organizations (COCOCH), Felix Vasquez, 
has announced that a march on Congress will be held December 
14, the day before administration officials say that 
Congress will vote on CAFTA.  Speaking to the press on 
December 1, Vasquez denounced CAFTA as an \"economic 
conquest\" of Honduras, saying that \"small and medium-sized 
businesses will disappear, since no protection of our 
products or our markets was negotiated\" in the agreement. 
Vasquez claims to have collected ten thousand signatures on 
a petition against CAFTA, which he hopes to present to 
President of the Congress (and National Party presidential 
candidate) Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo at the culmination of the 
march on December 14. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Gilberto Goldstein: \"CAFTA is premature\" 
---------------------------------------- 
 
6.  The only presidential candidate to have spoken publicly 
about CAFTA is National Party Congressman Gilberto Goldstein 
(considered to have very little chance of winning his 
party\'s nomination).  Goldstein came out against CAFTA in 
comments published in the press on November 29, arguing that 
the details of the agreement have not been sufficiently 
explained to all sectors of the Honduran economy, and that 
poor Honduran farmers have not been adequately trained and 
prepared for the transition that CAFTA will bring.  He 
further suggested that Central America is politically 
unready for such an agreement, saying that, \"Before signing 
any commercial treaty that involves all Central Americans, 
we should first solidify and unify ourselves, we who form 
the great Republic of Central America, in which we have 
invested 50 years without achieving our desired goal.\" 
 
7.  Comment: While Post understands that President of the 
Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo is working closely to promote 
congressional approval of CAFTA, neither he nor any of the 
other leading presidential candidates, such as National 
Party candidate Miguel Pastor or leading Liberal Party 
candidate Mel Zelaya, have spoken publicly about the 
agreement.  See septel for reporting on their comments 
during private meetings with EmbOffs.  End Comment. 
 
------------------------------------ 
GOH Continues to Get Its Message Out 
------------------------------------ 
 
8.  At the same time, administration officials have 
intensified their efforts to promote CAFTA and explain its 
contents to a skeptical public.  (Note:  A September CID- 
Gallup poll put public support for CAFTA in Honduras at 49 
percent, the lowest level of support in Central America. End 
Note.)  Minister of Trade and Industry Norman Garcia and 
Minister of Agriculture Mariano Jimenez have now held closed- 
door outreach meetings with every party in Congress (ref B), 
though some Congressmen still complain to the press that 
they lack a sufficient understanding of the agreement. 
Other GOH officials, including the Minister-Advisor for 
Promotion of Foreign Investment Camilo Atala and the usually 
reticent Chief CAFTA Negotiator Melvin Redondo, have been 
appearing on radio and television news programs explaining 
the benefits of CAFTA.  In the last week of November the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry published a special six-page 
section in all four national newspapers, entitled \"Myths and 
Realities About the Free Trade Agreement.\" 
 
------------------------------ 
Pushing for a December 15 Vote 
------------------------------ 
 
9.  Minister Garcia told EconOffs that Congress will vote on 
CAFTA on December 15, and other Trade Ministry officials say 
that President Ricardo Maduro has scheduled a meeting with 
congressional leaders to discuss the agreement on December 
14.  Melvin Redondo has even announced the December 15 date 
publicly, a clear sign that administration officials are 
pushing Congress to act before the year-end recess. 
However, National Party Congressman Juan Orlando Hernandez, 
the \"Whip\" of the Congress, has said that a vote on CAFTA is 
unlikely during the week of December 13-17, as there is 
still some vocal opposition to the agreement, including 
within the National Party delegation.  According to 
Hernandez, while the executive branch is pushing for a quick 
vote on the agreement, congressmen, who have to face voters 
soon on the issue (primary elections are in February 2005), 
are much more reluctant. 
 
Pierce 
"
"23931","12/10/2004 21:31","04TEGUCIGALPA2765","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03Tegucigalpa2062","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
STATE PASS USTR 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
COMMERCE FOR MSELIGMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, HO, IMF 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ECONOMIC REFORM: DEPOSIT INSURANCE AGENCY 
STRENGTHENED 
 
REF: A) 03 Tegucigalpa 2062 
 
     B) 04 Tegucigalpa 232 
     C) 04 Tegucigalpa 1984 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: In September 2004, at IMF insistence, the 
GOH passed four banking reform laws aimed at strengthening 
the nation\'s financial system.  While the GOH missed the 
IMF\'s target date by nearly three months, the laws passed in 
late September do meet the terms of the IMF agreement and, 
more importantly, should go a long way to strengthening the 
country\'s fragile financial system.  This cable focuses on 
the deposit insurance agency reform law and is the first in 
a series of four cables that will analyze each of the recent 
laws, assess their impacts on the Honduran financial system, 
and outline challenges of implementation or additional 
needed reforms that remain. 
 
2. (U) On September 22, the Honduran Congress passed a law 
that reforms the Honduran deposit insurance agency, FOSEDE 
(Fondo de Seguro de Depositos) in three major ways.  First, 
it simplifies FOSEDE\'s function, removing the responsibility 
for resolving and recapitalizing stressed banks, so that 
FOSEDE becomes strictly a deposit insurance fund.  Second, 
it leaves FOSEDE as the only deposit insurance agency 
operating in the country, removing additional guarantees on 
deposits that the GOH had provided since 1999.  Third, the 
law changes the way that FOSEDE is capitalized, adding some 
sources of funding while removing others.  These changes 
should strengthen the financial system by giving FOSEDE a 
clear mandate - to insure bank deposits - and by providing 
it with sufficient capital to do that job, while greatly 
reducing the financial costs and moral hazard implicit in 
the earlier system.  However, concerns remain that FOSEDE is 
not sufficiently capitalized to handle a failure of one of 
the country\'s major banks.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
BACKGROUND: THE NEED FOR REFORM 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) In May 2003, the IMF released its \"Financial System 
Stability Assessment\" for Honduras, based on the work of a 
joint IMF/World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program 
(FSAP).  The report concluded that the Honduran banking 
system is \"highly fragile at a systemic level, impairing 
sustainable economic growth,\" and outlined several reforms 
needed to strengthen the system.  (Ref A provides a summary 
of this report and its recommendations.)  The FOSEDE reform 
law directly addresses two specific recommendations from 
that report: \"improve the framework for crisis management 
and bank resolution\" and \"create the appropriate conditions 
for a smooth transition towards a partial deposit 
insurance.\"  These recommendations were incorporated as 
Structural Performance Criteria in the Letter of Intent 
signed by the GOH and the IMF in February 2004 (ref B).  The 
Letter of Intent set a target date of June 30 for passage of 
the four reform bills: the Deposit Insurance Law; the 
Central Bank of Honduras Law; the Banking Commission Law; 
and a new Financial Institutions Law.  While the GOH missed 
this deadline by nearly three months (ref C), the laws were 
passed just in time for the IMF Board\'s six-month review of 
Honduras\' performance under the Poverty Reduction and Growth 
Facility (PRGF) arrangement. 
 
4. (U) The new FOSEDE law marks the third time in barely 
five years that the GOH has overhauled its deposit insurance 
scheme.  However, this is the first time that the reforms 
have been made pro-actively, as a result of deliberate 
planning and technical analysis, rather than reactively, as 
a sudden response to the political pressure generated by a 
collapsing bank.  The first deposit guarantee scheme in 
Honduras was established 1999 when a major bank, Bancorp, 
collapsed due to fraud and mismanagement.  Regulators in the 
National Commission for Banks and Insurance (Comision 
Nacional de Bancos y Seguros, or CNBS) closed the bank, and 
Congress created a temporary deposit insurance fund to 
provide 100 percent compensation to depositors and preserve 
the financial system\'s stability.  The second overhaul came 
in 2001, when the GOH created the current deposit insurance 
agency, FOSEDE, to pay Banhcreser depositors following the 
collapse of that bank (though depositors in uninsured 
institutions associated with Banhcreser still lost their 
savings). 
 
5. (U) Even after FOSEDE was created, however, it still did 
not bear sole responsibility for deposit insurance. 
Instead, FOSEDE provided insurance for the first $9,633 per 
depositor, per institution, and Congress continued to cover 
the remaining amount, up to 100 percent of deposits.  The 
100 percent coverage was envisioned to be a temporary 
arrangement, to give time for a sustainable restructuring of 
the system.  However, only limited restructuring and 
consolidation took place.  The first reduction in GOH 
coverage, from 100 percent to 50 percent, was scheduled for 
September 2002, but one week before the reduction was due to 
take place, it was postponed for a year by Congressional 
decree.  GOH coverage was finally reduced to 50 percent in 
September 2003 and on September 30, 2004, was removed 
entirely, leaving in place only the guarantees provided by 
FOSEDE. 
 
6. (U) The financial and economic costs of 100 percent 
coverage of deposits were substantial.  Covering all 
deposits is expensive and exposes the government to 
insupportable financial liabilities.  Nor could public 
welfare be invoked to justify this added expense, since 98 
percent of deposits in the Honduran banking system were 
below $10,000 and hence were already covered by FOSEDE.  In 
other words, full coverage was a safety net that benefited 
only the two percent of depositors who had bank deposits 
over $10,000.  (Comment:  These politically influential 
individuals were likely responsible for the government\'s 
delay in removing 100 percent coverage.  End comment.)  Of 
greatest concern, a 100 percent guarantee of deposits 
creates moral hazard (that is, it establishes incentives for 
increasingly irresponsible behavior) throughout the banking 
system, as it undermines both bankers\' and depositors\' 
incentives to manage the risks in their portfolios.  The 100 
percent guarantee provides depositors with an incentive to 
place their savings in whatever bank pays the highest 
interest rate, regardless of that bank\'s stability.  To 
attract these deposits, banks invest in increasingly risky 
ventures to enable them to offer higher rates of return. 
 
7. (U) FOSEDE also suffered from an overly-broad mandate 
that did not allow it to focus on its core mission of 
deposit insurance.  Under its 2001 charter, FOSEDE was also 
responsible for assisting stressed banks through 
intervention and recapitalization.  While there is no 
inherent conflict in having these two functions reside in 
the same institution, in practical terms the large costs 
involved in taking over and recapitalizing stressed banks 
detracted from FOSEDE\'s ability to act as a credible insurer 
of deposits for the rest of the financial system. 
 
------------------------- 
CHANGES UNDER THE NEW LAW 
------------------------- 
 
8. (U) On October 29, EconOff met with President of FOSEDE 
Rosa Lidia Montes de Oca to discuss the new law and the 
changes that it would require.  Unlike the President of the 
Central Bank or the Banking Commission, who each serves four- 
year terms, Montes was appointed in 2001 for a five-year 
term, specifically designed not to correspond precisely with 
the four-year electoral cycle, in the hope that the position 
would be seen as more of a technical and less of a political 
appointment. 
 
9. (U) According to Montes, the September reform law 
addresses all of the problems with FOSEDE described above. 
By stripping FOSEDE of its function as a rescuer of ill 
banks, the reform allows it to focus exclusively on its role 
as a deposit insurance agency.  The National Banking and 
Insurance Commission, CNBS, now has responsibility for 
resolving and recapitalizing stressed banks (septel). 
 
10. (U) The new law also removes (as of September 30, 2004) 
the additional deposit insurance that the GOH had provided 
since 1999 and leaves FOSEDE as the only deposit insurance 
agency operating in the country.  Coverage for deposits in 
insured institutions is therefore now capped at $9,633 per 
depositor, per institution.  This odd limit is an artifact 
of the movement of the exchange rate between the drafting 
and ratification of the original 2001 FOSEDE law.  Depositor 
protection was denominated in Lempira equivalent and is now 
adjusted annually such that the dollar value does not vary. 
 
11. (U) The reform law seeks to re-establish FOSEDE\'s 
stability and reliability by modifying the way it is 
capitalized.  (Comment: This change is crucial.  FOSEDE was 
born with a negative net worth -- inherited from the 
previous deposit scheme -- and went even further into debt 
when it had to borrow from the Central Bank to rescue two 
small banks in 2002.  End Comment.)  The new law provides 
FOSEDE with a one-time grant of $25 million, of which $10 
million is provided by the CNBS, and $15 million is made 
available from the InterAmerican Development Bank\'s 
Financial Sector Program (IDB loan number 1533/SF-HO).  In 
addition, all financial institutions covered by FOSEDE will 
continue to make assessed contributions - presently 0.25 of 
deposits annually -- but subject to future revision if 
necessary.  However, the law also states that once the 
payment of $25 million is made, the Central Bank\'s 
guaranteed line of credit to FOSEDE shall be removed, 
meaning that FOSEDE will no longer be able to borrow from 
the Central Bank as it has done in the past when it needed 
funds. 
 
---------- 
NEXT STEPS 
---------- 
 
12. (U) FOSEDE is currently preparing the regulations for 
the new law, with assistance from consultants paid for by 
the World Bank and the IDB.  Montes does not foresee this 
implementation effort posing a major burden on FOSEDE, since 
its function is being reduced, not expanded.  However, she 
said, it will take years to fully finance FOSEDE, even with 
the $25 million infusion of cash that the new law provides 
and a possible increase in assessments on member 
institutions. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
COMMENT: FEARED JITTERS HAVE NOT MATERIALIZED... 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
13. (U) Comment:  The reform of FOSEDE, though technical and 
circumscribed in scope, is an important example of a 
Honduran economic policy success - one whose implementation 
has gone better than some experts had expected.  The 
difficulty in achieving a smooth transition to a limited 
deposit insurance system was one of the major concerns 
raised by the 2003 IMF/World Bank FSAP report, which warned 
that \"the elimination of the blanket guarantee... by 
September 2004 may produce market instability, given current 
systemic weaknesses.\"  In the event, there are no immediate 
signs that this has been the case.  CNBS officials have 
expressed confidence that the successful passage of all four 
financial reform laws before the September 30 elimination of 
additional deposit insurance contributed to the stability of 
the transition and boosted confidence across the financial 
sector. 
 
------------------------------- 
...BUT THE REAL TEST LIES AHEAD 
------------------------------- 
 
14. (SBU) Comment (cont\'d): However, two concerns remain. 
The first, as mentioned above, is the fact that FOSEDE is 
still not fully capitalized.  FOSEDE President Montes made 
it very clear that, now and for at least the next few years, 
FOSEDE can only handle the failure of a small or medium- 
sized bank.  There remain, in other words, banks in the 
system that are \"too big to fail.\"  Second, in the event of 
another bank failure, would the Honduran Congress really 
stand by and allow the wealthiest 2 percent of Honduran 
account holders (including, of course, most members of 
Congress) to lose their uninsured deposits?  Post considers 
it more likely that political pressures to intervene would 
prove too strong to resist, as they did during the 2003 
bailout of the agricultural sector that eventually cost the 
GOH an estimated 1.7 percent of GDP.  Despite these 
concerns, however, Post believes that these financial 
reforms, and the FOSEDE reform law in particular, constitute 
a significant step forward toward stability of the Honduran 
financial system. 
 
Pierce 
"
"23933","12/10/2004 21:46","04TEGUCIGALPA2766","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPA2646","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR EB, INL, INR/AN/IAA, AND INR/B 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, ECON, ETRD, SNAR, KJUS, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES: NATIONALS - 
PASTOR AND LOBO IMPRESSIVE; LIBERALS - ZELAYA CHARISMATIC, 
NUNEZ TECHNOCRATIC, AND ROSENTHAL PROBLEMATIC 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2646 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2635 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1541 
 
1. (SBU) Introduction: During recent meetings with Washington 
visitor, National Party leading presidential candidates 
Miguel Pastor (first in polls) and Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo 
(second in polls) were impressive, Liberal Party leading 
presidential candidate Mel Zelaya was charismatic, while 
third place Liberal Party candidate Gabriela Nunez came off 
as more of a technocrat than a leading politician.  In a 
previous meeting with PolOffs, second place Liberal Party 
candidate Jaime Rosenthal played the part of the intelligent 
but questionably-connected businessman/politician.  End 
Introduction. 
 
2. (U) Director of the Office of Central American Affairs 
(WHA/CEN) David Lindwall and Honduras Desk Officer Marcos 
Mandojana visited Honduras November 30-December 3 and held 
meetings in Tegucigalpa with most of the top contenders for 
the National and Liberal Parties presidential nominations. 
PolOffs also held a previous meeting with second place 
Liberal Party candidate Jaime Rosenthal.  Primary elections 
are scheduled for February 20, 2005; the general election 
will take place November 27, 2005. 
 
Miguel Pastor 
------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, DCM, PolCouns, and PolOff had 
breakfast December 3 with Mayor of Tegucigalpa Miguel Pastor, 
who is the leading National Party candidate.  Joining Pastor 
was his twin brother and campaign manager, Sebastian Pastor, 
and senior campaign official Nahun Valladares y Valladares. 
Pastor, who has been knocked for staying away from issues of 
substance, was impressive in the meeting.  He showed a strong 
grasp of key issues and had a confident and sophisticated 
presence, despite his youthful appearance.  He laid out a 
nuanced position on crime that included prevention as well as 
law enforcement, and stressed the importance of combating 
corruption.  He highlighted the importance of job creation 
and said he supported the U.S.-Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA).  Pastor underlined the need for Millennium 
Challenge Account (MCA) assistance.  Pastor\'s team also 
stressed the need for election observers during the primary 
elections.  Lindwall noted that financial constraints argued 
against Organization of American States (OAS) observation of 
the party primaries in Honduras, and suggested the 
possibility of local NGOs and/or students working with the 
media, as had been done in Ecuador.  Sebastian closed the 
meeting with an audacious request: he asked Lindwall and 
Mandojana to consider the possibility of a state visit to the 
U.S. for Pastor after he becomes the next president, an 
outcome they fully expect to achieve. 
 
Pepe Lobo 
--------- 
 
4. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, and PolOff met December 1 with 
President of Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo, who is running a 
close second in the National Party race.  Joining Lobo was 
the \"whip\" of the congress, Lobo\'s ally Juan Orlando 
Hernandez.  VP candidate and Ambassador to the U.S. Mario 
Canahuati was in San Pedro Sula and unable to attend the 
meeting.  Lobo summarized his campaign focus as jobs and 
security (his campaign slogan).  Corruption and the rule of 
law, including counternarcotics, were focal points of the 
meeting.  Lobo highlighted recent advances, including an 
independent Supreme Court, but acknowledged the Public 
Ministry needed to be overhauled.  Hernandez noted that high 
levels of crime undermined faith in democracy.  Lobo candidly 
said that there was a values problem in Honduran society 
reflected in a lack of respect for the law that was key to 
the crime problem.  Lobo also noted that poverty weakened 
faith in democracy.  Lobo and Lindwall discussed the 
importance of congressional approval of CAFTA.  Lobo noted 
that Catholic Church Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez and third place 
National Party candidate Gilbert Goldstein had both recently 
come out against CAFTA.  He avoided any promise of when 
congressional action on CAFTA would take place.  Lobo also 
highlighted tourism, the maquila sector, natural resources, 
and agriculture as key to economic growth.  Hernandez 
emphasized the importance of MCA funds to improve 
infrastructure that in turn would boost productivity and the 
ability of Honduran producers to compete.  Lobo mentioned 
that he had met WHA A/S Noriega at a recent meeting of Latin 
American congressional leaders.  Lobo, as usual, was in 
command of a wide range of issues.  He appeared confident 
about his electoral prospects, most likely boosted by his 
recent closing of the gap for the number one spot in polls 
for the National Party nomination. 
 
Mel Zelaya 
---------- 
 
5. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, DCM, PolCouns, and PolOff had 
lunch, hosted by the DCM, December 3 with leading Liberal 
Party candidate Mel Zelaya, VP candidate Elvin Santos, and 
senior campaign official Patricia Rodas.  Zelaya, a 
charismatic politician sometimes rapped for a lack of 
intellect and limited world view, was engaging and relaxed, 
joking that Honduras as David would beat the U.S. as Goliath 
in agricultural competition.  Zelaya said he supported CAFTA, 
stressed the importance of economic development, spoke in 
favor of the GOH receiving MCA funds, and denounced 
corruption.  Zelaya was more focused on substance than in 
past meetings with EmbOffs, but several times deferred to his 
colleagues to respond to questions, most notably declining to 
outline his goals for U.S.-Honduran bilateral relations. 
Rodas, who is reported to have a leftist past and is Zelaya\'s 
pick for leader of the party organization, launched a series 
of provocative questions, including asking about U.S. views 
on greater Central American contacts with China.  Santos, was 
candid and, as a newcomer to Zelaya\'s political team, seemed 
to not have discussed many political issues with Zelaya. 
There was tension between Santos and Rodas, which could 
presage difficulties for Zelaya\'s possible government and its 
relations with the private sector, for which Santos was 
chosen as VP to lead Zelaya\'s outreach efforts.  Zelaya was 
very confident that his place atop the polls is unshakable. 
He also demonstrated a managerial style that would delegate 
significant operational authority to subordinates while he 
focused on larger strategic communication issues. 
 
Gabriela Nunez 
-------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, and PolOff had breakfast 
December 2 with Gabriela Nunez, who is in third place in the 
Liberal Party race.  She was accompanied by her VP candidate, 
Guillermo Alvarado, and her campaign manager, Max Gil Santos. 
 Nunez and her team emphasized that they were focused on 
economic development, not politics, and said they supported 
CAFTA, despite the fact that they believed GOH negotiators 
had overly focused on the maquila industry.  Nunez stressed 
the importance of election observers for the primary 
elections.  Nunez repeatedly deferred to her colleagues, 
something she has done in past meetings with EmbOffs. 
Unfortunately, that led to a tangential soliloquy by 
Alvarado, a former Minister of Agriculture who until recently 
worked for the Guatemalan agribusiness Gutierrez company, on 
sanitary/phytosanitary issues involved in the export of 
Central American chicken to the U.S.  Nunez\'s technical 
abilities may be strong, but she was the least engaging of 
all the top candidates and at her own peril ignores the need 
for successful politics to precede policy implementation. 
This campaign is clearly a dress rehearsal for a more serious 
run for the presidency in 2009. 
 
Jaime Rosenthal 
--------------- 
 
7. (SBU) PolCouns and PolOff had lunch November 24 with 
Liberal Party candidate Jaime Rosenthal and Manuel Gamero, 
director of the Rosenthal-owned El Tiempo newspaper.  Gamero 
has been Rosenthal\'s recent go-between with the Embassy, due 
to Rosenthal\'s controversial status.  Rosenthal said he 
believes he can win despite Zelaya\'s overwhelming advantage 
in the polls, and indicated he would go negative on Zelaya as 
soon as the official campaign period began.  Rosenthal was 
dismissive of Zelaya\'s intellectual abilities, mused that 
neither Pastor nor Lobo would be that bad as president, and 
spoke without irony about the importance of combating 
corruption.  The bitterness of the upcoming primaries will 
determine which party is more united for the general 
election.  Rosenthal, as the only presidential candidate from 
San Pedro Sula, will play a key role in the general 
elections, regardless of his showing in the primaries. 
 
Pastor and Lobo Battling, Zelaya Out in Front 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Comment:  Post\'s assessment of the candidates\' 
chances remains unchanged since our last analysis (ref A). 
There is clearly a much closer battle in the National Party 
than the Liberal Party.  Pastor\'s increased focus on issues 
should stand him well against Lobo, but this race will likely 
come down to the wire.  Pastor is running as a the leader of 
a new generation and is in command of the media aspects of 
politicking, while Lobo is for all intents and purposes the 
current administration\'s candidate, although they have not 
said so publicly or in private, and has the support of the 
traditional National Party machine.  With formal campaigning 
barred until January, it remains to be seen if candidates 
that project well in TV spots or small meetings can rouse 
support from the electorate at campaign events.  The 
unanimity of candidates\' support for CAFTA was notable, as 
was the concern for corruption.  All the candidates also 
stressed the importance of the bilateral relationship, and 
made clear the U.S. is the key partner for Honduras.  End 
Comment. 
 
9. (U) This cable was cleared by Lindwall and Mandojana. 
Pierce 
"
"23971","12/13/2004 12:05","04TEGUCIGALPA2768","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04TEGUCIGALPA2646","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002768 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR EB, INL, INR/AN/IAA, AND INR/B 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, ECON, ETRD, SNAR, KJUS, PINR, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES: NATIONALS - 
PASTOR AND LOBO IMPRESSIVE; LIBERALS - ZELAYA CHARISMATIC, 
NUNEZ TECHNOCRATIC, AND ROSENTHAL PROBLEMATIC 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2646 
 
     B. TEGUCIGALPA 2635 
     C. TEGUCIGALPA 1541 
 
1. (SBU) Introduction: During recent meetings with Washington 
visitor, National Party leading presidential candidates 
Miguel Pastor (first in polls) and Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo 
(second in polls) were impressive, Liberal Party leading 
presidential candidate Mel Zelaya was charismatic, while 
third place Liberal Party candidate Gabriela Nunez came off 
as more of a technocrat than a leading politician.  In a 
previous meeting with PolOffs, second place Liberal Party 
candidate Jaime Rosenthal played the part of the intelligent 
but questionably-connected businessman/politician.  End 
Introduction. 
 
2. (U) Director of the Office of Central American Affairs 
(WHA/CEN) David Lindwall and Honduras Desk Officer Marcos 
Mandojana visited Honduras November 30-December 3 and held 
meetings in Tegucigalpa with most of the top contenders for 
the National and Liberal Parties presidential nominations. 
PolOffs also held a previous meeting with second place 
Liberal Party candidate Jaime Rosenthal.  Primary elections 
are scheduled for February 20, 2005; the general election 
will take place November 27, 2005. 
 
Miguel Pastor 
------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, DCM, PolCouns, and PolOff had 
breakfast December 3 with Mayor of Tegucigalpa Miguel Pastor, 
who is the leading National Party candidate.  Joining Pastor 
was his twin brother and campaign manager, Sebastian Pastor, 
and senior campaign official Nahun Valladares y Valladares. 
Pastor, who has been knocked for staying away from issues of 
substance, was impressive in the meeting.  He showed a strong 
grasp of key issues and had a confident and sophisticated 
presence, despite his youthful appearance.  He laid out a 
nuanced position on crime that included prevention as well as 
law enforcement, and stressed the importance of combating 
corruption.  He highlighted the importance of job creation 
and said he supported the U.S.-Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA).  Pastor underlined the need for Millennium 
Challenge Account (MCA) assistance.  Pastor\'s team also 
stressed the need for election observers during the primary 
elections.  Lindwall noted that financial constraints argued 
against Organization of American States (OAS) observation of 
the party primaries in Honduras, and suggested the 
possibility of local NGOs and/or students working with the 
media, as had been done in Ecuador.  Sebastian closed the 
meeting with an audacious request: he asked Lindwall and 
Mandojana to consider the possibility of a state visit to the 
U.S. for Pastor after he becomes the next president, an 
outcome they fully expect to achieve. 
 
Pepe Lobo 
--------- 
 
4. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, and PolOff met December 1 with 
President of Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo, who is running a 
close second in the National Party race.  Joining Lobo was 
the \"whip\" of the congress, Lobo\'s ally Juan Orlando 
Hernandez.  VP candidate and Ambassador to the U.S. Mario 
Canahuati was in San Pedro Sula and unable to attend the 
meeting.  Lobo summarized his campaign focus as jobs and 
security (his campaign slogan).  Corruption and the rule of 
law, including counternarcotics, were focal points of the 
meeting.  Lobo highlighted recent advances, including an 
independent Supreme Court, but acknowledged the Public 
Ministry needed to be overhauled.  Hernandez noted that high 
levels of crime undermined faith in democracy.  Lobo candidly 
said that there was a values problem in Honduran society 
reflected in a lack of respect for the law that was key to 
the crime problem.  Lobo also noted that poverty weakened 
faith in democracy.  Lobo and Lindwall discussed the 
importance of congressional approval of CAFTA.  Lobo noted 
that Catholic Church Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez and third place 
National Party candidate Gilbert Goldstein had both recently 
come out against CAFTA.  He avoided any promise of when 
congressional action on CAFTA would take place.  Lobo also 
highlighted tourism, the maquila sector, natural resources, 
and agriculture as key to economic growth.  Hernandez 
emphasized the importance of MCA funds to improve 
infrastructure that in turn would boost productivity and the 
ability of Honduran producers to compete.  Lobo mentioned 
that he had met WHA A/S Noriega at a recent meeting of Latin 
American congressional leaders.  Lobo, as usual, was in 
command of a wide range of issues.  He appeared confident 
about his electoral prospects, most likely boosted by his 
recent closing of the gap for the number one spot in polls 
for the National Party nomination. 
 
Mel Zelaya 
---------- 
 
5. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, DCM, PolCouns, and PolOff had 
lunch, hosted by the DCM, December 3 with leading Liberal 
Party candidate Mel Zelaya, VP candidate Elvin Santos, and 
senior campaign official Patricia Rodas.  Zelaya, a 
charismatic politician sometimes rapped for a lack of 
intellect and limited world view, was engaging and relaxed, 
joking that Honduras as David would beat the U.S. as Goliath 
in agricultural competition.  Zelaya said he supported CAFTA, 
stressed the importance of economic development, spoke in 
favor of the GOH receiving MCA funds, and denounced 
corruption.  Zelaya was more focused on substance than in 
past meetings with EmbOffs, but several times deferred to his 
colleagues to respond to questions, most notably declining to 
outline his goals for U.S.-Honduran bilateral relations. 
Rodas, who is reported to have a leftist past and is Zelaya\'s 
pick for leader of the party organization, launched a series 
of provocative questions, including asking about U.S. views 
on greater Central American contacts with China.  Santos, was 
candid and, as a newcomer to Zelaya\'s political team, seemed 
to not have discussed many political issues with Zelaya. 
There was tension between Santos and Rodas, which could 
presage difficulties for Zelaya\'s possible government and its 
relations with the private sector, for which Santos was 
chosen as VP to lead Zelaya\'s outreach efforts.  Zelaya was 
very confident that his place atop the polls is unshakable. 
He also demonstrated a managerial style that would delegate 
significant operational authority to subordinates while he 
focused on larger strategic communication issues. 
 
Gabriela Nunez 
-------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Lindwall, Mandojana, and PolOff had breakfast 
December 2 with Gabriela Nunez, who is in third place in the 
Liberal Party race.  She was accompanied by her VP candidate, 
Guillermo Alvarado, and her campaign manager, Max Gil Santos. 
 Nunez and her team emphasized that they were focused on 
economic development, not politics, and said they supported 
CAFTA, despite the fact that they believed GOH negotiators 
had overly focused on the maquila industry.  Nunez stressed 
the importance of election observers for the primary 
elections.  Nunez repeatedly deferred to her colleagues, 
something she has done in past meetings with EmbOffs. 
Unfortunately, that led to a tangential soliloquy by 
Alvarado, a former Minister of Agriculture who until recently 
worked for the Guatemalan agribusiness Gutierrez company, on 
sanitary/phytosanitary issues involved in the export of 
Central American chicken to the U.S.  Nunez\'s technical 
abilities may be strong, but she was the least engaging of 
all the top candidates and at her own peril ignores the need 
for successful politics to precede policy implementation. 
This campaign is clearly a dress rehearsal for a more serious 
run for the presidency in 2009. 
 
Jaime Rosenthal 
--------------- 
 
7. (SBU) PolCouns and PolOff had lunch November 24 with 
Liberal Party candidate Jaime Rosenthal and Manuel Gamero, 
director of the Rosenthal-owned El Tiempo newspaper.  Gamero 
has been Rosenthal\'s recent go-between with the Embassy, due 
to Rosenthal\'s controversial status.  Rosenthal said he 
believes he can win despite Zelaya\'s overwhelming advantage 
in the polls, and indicated he would go negative on Zelaya as 
soon as the official campaign period began.  Rosenthal was 
dismissive of Zelaya\'s intellectual abilities, mused that 
neither Pastor nor Lobo would be that bad as president, and 
spoke without irony about the importance of combating 
corruption.  The bitterness of the upcoming primaries will 
determine which party is more united for the general 
election.  Rosenthal, as the only presidential candidate from 
San Pedro Sula, will play a key role in the general 
elections, regardless of his showing in the primaries. 
 
Pastor and Lobo Battling, Zelaya Out in Front 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Comment:  Post\'s assessment of the candidates\' 
chances remains unchanged since our last analysis (ref A). 
There is clearly a much closer battle in the National Party 
than the Liberal Party.  Pastor\'s increased focus on issues 
should stand him well against Lobo, but this race will likely 
come down to the wire.  Pastor is running as a the leader of 
a new generation and is in command of the media aspects of 
politicking, while Lobo is for all intents and purposes the 
current administration\'s candidate, although they have not 
said so publicly or in private, and has the support of the 
traditional National Party machine.  With formal campaigning 
barred until January, it remains to be seen if candidates 
that project well in TV spots or small meetings can rouse 
support from the electorate at campaign events.  The 
unanimity of candidates\' support for CAFTA was notable, as 
was the concern for corruption.  All the candidates also 
stressed the importance of the bilateral relationship, and 
made clear the U.S. is the key partner for Honduras.  End 
Comment. 
 
9. (U) This cable was cleared by Lindwall and Mandojana. 
Pierce 
"
"24000","12/13/2004 20:04","04TEGUCIGALPA2777","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002777 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DS/ER/CC, DS/IP/WHA-MFLYNN, DS/ITA-KHALL, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, KSAC, HO, PGOV 
SUBJECT: STUDENT DEMONSTRATIONS 
 
1. Summary. Over the last several days student demonstrations 
have been taking place outside the public university in 
Tegucigalpa.  The Government of Honduras (GOH) has threatened 
to close down the university for a year because of corruption 
in the awarding of degrees and student demonstrations.  These 
demonstrations have not turned violent but tires have been 
burned in the street and traffic has been interrupted outside 
the main entrance to the university, which is located on the 
east side of town.  End Summary. 
 
2. Over the last few days students have been demonstrating 
over the GOH threats to close down the National University of 
Honduras (UNAH).  On Friday, December 10, the road outside 
UNAH, a main highway, was stopped to vehicle traffic for over 
two hours with burning tires and angry students.  The 
students planned to march to the National Congress but that 
did not materialize.  RSO sources reported that these 
demonstrations, along with marches to the National Congress, 
would continue for the week of December 13-17. 
 
3. December 13, at approximately 1100 hours, students staging 
a rally outside the National Congress were tear-gassed by 
anti-riot police.  It appeared that the crowd, estimated at 
3,000 participants, were pushing up against the anti-riot 
unit stationed outside the building.  When the tear gas was 
disbursed the crowd departed the area and it appeared the 
demonstration was over for the day.  As of 1410 hours, RSO 
source informed the security office that students, whose 
numbers are estimated at 700 plus, were returning to the 
National Congress area armed with sticks and rocks.  It has 
been reported that additional police elements are preparing 
to reinforce the anti-riot police. 
 
4. At this time, no violence or injuries have been reported. 
RSO has been advising embassy employees of the changing 
situation and assisting motor pool to avoid the effected 
area.  The demonstrations have in no way been targeted at the 
USG. 
Pierce 
"
"24058","12/14/2004 18:37","04TEGUCIGALPA2787","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE240980","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 002787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/MTA/MST AND WHA/CEN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR GBLUE 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT MLARSEN AND AGATT SHUETE 
SAN SALVADOR FOR DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EFIN, HO 
SUBJECT:  HONDURAS NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE REPORT 2005 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 240980 
 
1.  The text of the 2005 National Trade Estimate report for 
Honduras follows. 
 
TRADE SUMMARY 
 
(Note that the following paragraph is to be updated by Washington 
with USDOC statistics.)  In 2003, the U.S. trade deficit with 
Honduras was $486.4 million, a decrease of $203.8 million from 
deficit of $690.2 million in 2002.  U.S. goods exports to 
Honduras were $2.826 billion, an increase of $255 million from 
$2.571 billion in 2002.  Corresponding U.S. imports from Honduras 
were $3.261 billion in 2003, up $135 million from 2002.  Honduras 
is currently the United States\' 32nd largest export market. 
 
(This paragraph will also be updated with USDOC statistics.)  The 
stock of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in Honduras in 2002 
amounted to $184 million, down 24 percent from 2001.  U.S. FDI is 
concentrated largely in the manufacturing sector. 
 
IMPORT POLICIES 
 
Free Trade Agreements 
 
The United States and five Central American countries (Costa 
Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua) signed the 
U.S.-Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) in May 2004. 
The CAFTA will not only liberalize bilateral trade between the 
United States and the region, but will also further integration 
efforts among the countries of Central America, removing barriers 
to trade and investment in the region by U.S. companies.  The 
CAFTA will also require the countries of Central America to 
undertake needed reforms to alleviate many of the systemic 
problems noted below in areas including customs administration; 
protection of intellectual property rights; services, investment, 
and financial services market access and protection; government 
procurements; sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) barriers; other 
non-tariff barriers; and other areas. 
 
Tariffs 
 
In 1995, Honduras and other members of the Central American 
Common Market (CACM) agreed to reduce and harmonize the common 
external tariff (CET) at zero to 15 percent, but allowed each 
member to determine the timing of the reductions.  In 2002, 
Honduras lifted tariffs on capital goods and raw materials 
(including those used for manufacture of pharmaceutical products 
and agricultural inputs) for those imports produced outside of 
the CACM.  Additionally, tariffs on most non-CACM intermediate 
goods were reduced to 10 percent, and tariffs on final goods were 
reduced to 15 percent.  Per the tax reform law of 2002, import 
tariffs on cars were reduced from 40 percent to 15 percent ad 
valorem, and a tariff based on engine size was eliminated.  Once 
the CAFTA goes into effect, about 80 percent of U.S. industrial 
and commercial goods will be immediately eligible to enter 
Honduras duty free, with the remaining tariffs on such goods 
being eliminated within ten years.  Textiles and apparel will be 
duty-free and quota-free immediately if they meet the agreement\'s 
rule of origin, promoting new opportunities for U.S. and Central 
American fiber, yarn, fabric and apparel manufacturing. 
 
Honduras implements a combination price band and absorption 
agreement for corn, grain sorghum, and corn meal.  Under the 
price band mechanism, duties can vary from 5 to 45 percent, 
depending on the import price.  The duty for these products drops 
to 1 percent if the end users agree to first purchase a 
predetermined amount of corn and sorghum from domestic farmers - 
otherwise, the higher tariffs of the price band mechanism remain 
in effect.  The tariff reduction only takes place during non- 
harvest season (March through August) and only end-users who have 
previously signed the absorption agreement may apply for this 
preferential treatment.  A similar absorption agreement exists 
for rough rice, where duties are 1 percent for signers of the 
agreement and 45 percent for everyone else.  The United States 
has strongly opposed the Honduran policies on these grains as 
limiting access for U.S. agricultural products. 
 
When implemented, the CAFTA will lead to the elimination of this 
system for all products but white corn.  Tariffs on all other 
agricultural products will be eliminated within 15 years after 
the agreement takes effect, except for tariffs on rice, which 
will be phased out over 18 years, and tariffs on some dairy 
products, which will be phased out over 20 years. 
 
The Agreement also requires transparency and efficiency in 
administering customs procedures, including the CAFTA rules of 
origin.  Honduras committed to ensure procedural certainty and 
fairness and all parties agree to share information to combat 
illegal transshipment of goods. 
Honduras implemented the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement in 
February 2000. 
 
STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING, AND CERTIFICATION 
 
Application of sanitary and phytosanitary requirements is 
sometimes lacking in transparency, resulting in uncertainty among 
U.S. suppliers and Honduran importers.  Honduras committed during 
the CAFTA negotiations to resolve these issues (see below). 
 
In both 2002 and 2003, Honduran importers had initial difficulty 
in receiving permission to import turkey into Honduras, though in 
each year permission was eventually granted.  The Honduran 
government has also cited SPS concerns in periodically denying 
applications for the importation of pork and dairy products. 
 
Since 2002, Honduras has imposed a ban on poultry products from a 
number of states in the U.S., due to concerns over low-pathogenic 
avian influenza (LPAI).  The ban was revised and renewed in March 
2004 in spite of World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) 
guidelines that the presence of LPAI does not justify trade 
restrictions, and despite information provided to GOH officials 
by USDA indicating the dates on which depopulation and 
surveillance testing were completed in the affected states.  The 
U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates that if Honduran 
restrictions on U.S. raw poultry and poultry parts were lifted, 
U.S. producers could export an additional $10 million of poultry 
products to Honduras annually. 
 
In December 2003, Honduras imposed a ban on the import of U.S. 
beef and its derivatives, in response to the detection by USDA of 
a case of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE, commonly known 
as \"mad cow\" disease) in Washington state.  The ban was applied 
in accordance with guidelines issued by the OIE (World 
Organization for Animal Health), and did not include dairy 
products or other products considered to carry no risk of BSE. 
On June 2, 2004, the Honduran government lifted the ban in 
response to increased safety measures taken by the U.S. 
authorities. 
 
In January 2004, U.S. rice exporters complained that they were 
being to forced to fumigate with methyl bromide shipments of U.S. 
rice that had false smut present before the shipment would be 
allowed into Honduras.  This restriction added costs and delays 
to the shipping, and is not justifiable on food safety grounds. 
(The presence of false smut is a quality issue, but the GOH 
imposed restrictions as if it were a health issue.)  In September 
2004, the GOH authorities stopped requiring fumigation in 
response to information provided by APHIS on the practice. 
 
The Honduran government requires that sanitary permits be 
obtained from the Ministry of Health for all imported foodstuffs, 
and that all processed food products be labeled in Spanish and 
registered with the Division of Food Control (DFC) of the 
Ministry of Health.  During 2003, a U.S. supermarket chain 
complained that delays in the process of granting these permits 
were hampering the company\'s ability to import its products into 
Honduras.  The Ministry of Health agreed to accelerate the 
process by focusing most closely on products considered to be at 
high risk for sanitary concerns (such as raw meat) and 
simplifying the procedures for low-risk products.  However, 
during 2004, the company complained that these regulations were 
not being strictly enforced for many of its Honduran competitors, 
a complaint that post finds credible.  This lack of enforcement 
on the part of the Honduran government places any U.S. company 
which does comply with the regulations at a disadvantage. 
 
The embassy has also received complaints from a regional 
supermarket chain which, in 2003, imported more than $40 million 
worth of U.S. goods into the region, and believes the amount of 
its imports into Honduras could grow significantly, given a more 
transparent and efficient process of granting sanitary permits. 
Specifically, the company has complained that the length of time 
required for a sanitary permit to be granted (usually 2 to 3 
months) is too long, that the cost of a permit ($500 - $600) is 
excessive, and that the application requires information that is 
difficult to obtain and has little to do with the safety of the 
product in question. 
 
Under the CAFTA, Honduras agreed to apply the science-based 
disciplines of the WTO Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
Measures, and will move toward recognizing export eligibility for 
all plants inspected under the U.S. food safety and inspection 
system.  Presently, Honduras may import meat products only from 
individual U.S. plants that have been pre-certified by Honduran 
food safety authorities. 
 
When the United States and Central America launched the CAFTA 
negotiations, they initiated an active working group dialogue on 
SPS barriers to agricultural trade that met alongside the 
negotiations to facilitate market access.  The objective was to 
leverage the impetus of active trade negotiations to seek 
difficult changes to the countries\' SPS regimes. The SPS Working 
Group remains committed to continue working on the resolution of 
outstanding issues even after the negotiations concluded. 
Through the work of this group, additional commitments to resolve 
specific unjustified measures restricting trade between Honduras 
and the United States have also been agreed. 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
 
Honduras is not a party to the WTO Government Procurement 
Agreement.  Under the Government Contracting Law, which entered 
into force in October 2001, all public works contracts over one 
million lempiras (approximately $53,850 as of December 2004) must 
be offered through public competitive bidding.  Public contracts 
between 500,000 and one million lempiras ($26,925 and $53,850) 
can be offered through a private bid, and contracts less than 
500,000 lempiras ($26,925) are exempt from the bidding process. 
Currently, to participate in public tenders, foreign firms are 
required to act through a local agent (at least 51 percent 
Honduran-owned).  The CAFTA eliminates this requirement. 
 
While foreign firms are granted national treatment for public 
bids, some still complain of mismanagement and lack of 
transparency in the bid processes.  In 2004, a U.S. insurance 
company participated in a bid to provide insurance to the state- 
run electricity company, ENEE.  The U.S. company was eliminated 
from consideration on grounds that it considers to be 
unreasonable.  Every other company that participated except one 
was also eliminated for various technical reasons, leaving only 
one company to \"compete\" on price.  All of the eliminated 
companies, including the U.S. company and several Honduran 
companies, have together denounced the management of the bidding 
process as having been contrary to the Government Contracting 
Law, and they have submitted a complaint to the Supreme Court of 
Accounts (Tribunal Superior de Cuentas), the GOH\'s general 
accounting and public ethics office.  That case remains pending. 
 
One way that the GOH has tried to improve transparency and 
fairness in government procurement is by hiring the United 
Nations Development Program (UNDP) to manage procurement for an 
increasing number of ministries and state-owned entities. 
However, U.S. companies have still expressed concerns about the 
way that UNDP has managed major procurements for the government. 
Specifically, during 2004, two U.S. companies, participating in 
two separate bid processes, complained that the bid requirements 
were written so narrowly that they favored a particular company 
from the outset.  One of these companies also complained that, 
while a process for the participating companies to provide 
feedback did exist, their concerns about the unreasonable terms 
of reference did not seem to be taken into account.  A third U.S. 
company complained about UNDP management of an invitation-only, 
limited-bid process, saying that the criteria for being invited 
to bid were not transparent. 
 
Under the CAFTA, U.S. suppliers will be granted non- 
discriminatory rights to bid on contracts from most Central 
American government entities, including key ministries and state- 
owned enterprises.  The CAFTA requires fair and transparent 
procurement procedures, such as advance notice of purchases and 
timely and effective bid review procedures.  The CAFTA\'s anti- 
corruption provisions ensure that bribery in trade-related 
matters, including in government procurement, is specified as a 
criminal offense under Central American and U.S. laws. 
 
EXPORT SUBSIDIES 
 
Honduras does not have export subsidies or export-promotion 
schemes other than the tax exemptions given to firms in free 
trade zones.  The CAFTA will require the elimination of WTO- 
illegal export subsidies. 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR) PROTECTION 
 
Honduras largely complied with the Trade Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) Agreement by the January 1, 
2000, deadline.  In December 1999, the Honduran Congress passed 
two laws to reform previous legislation concerning copyrights, 
patents, and trademarks.  However, the Honduran Congress must 
still pass laws governing the design of integrated circuits and 
plant variety protection to be in complete TRIPs compliance.  In 
the CAFTA, Honduras agrees to ratify or accede to the 
International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of 
Plants by January 1, 2006, or provide effective patent protection 
for plants by the date of entry into force of the agreement. 
 
Honduras has been a member of the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) since 1983.  Honduras and the U.S. initialed 
a Bilateral Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Agreement in March 
1999, but both parties decided to fold the provisions into the 
CAFTA, which, once implemented, will strengthen intellectual 
property rights protection in all areas.  Honduras became party 
to the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Performances and 
Phonogram Treaty (WPPT) in May 2002. 
 
CAFTA provisions will strengthen Honduras\' IPR protection regimes 
to conform with, and in many areas exceed, WTO norms and will 
criminalize end-user piracy, providing a strong deterrence 
against piracy and counterfeiting.  The CAFTA will require all 
member countries to authorize the seizure, forfeiture, and 
destruction of counterfeit and pirated goods and the equipment 
used to produce them.  It will also mandate both statutory and 
actual damages for copyright infringement and trademark piracy. 
This serves as a deterrent against piracy, and ensures that 
monetary damages can be awarded, even when it is difficult to 
assign a monetary value to the violation. 
 
Copyrights 
 
Honduras\' copyright law, updated in 1999, added more than twenty 
different criminal offenses related to copyright infringement and 
established fines and suspension of services that can be levied 
against offenders.  However, the piracy of books, sound and video 
recordings, compact discs, and computer software is still 
widespread in Honduras, due to limited enforcement capacity.  A 
spot survey by an industry-sponsored IPR advocacy group found 
that nearly 75 percent of all compact discs for sale in Honduras\' 
markets were pirated.  The Public Ministry, which is responsible 
for prosecuting crimes, assigns just one prosecutor half-time to 
intellectual property crimes.  As a result, U.S. companies which 
have tried to pursue software infringement cases have received 
little co-operation from the Honduran authorities.  U.S. software 
companies are also pushing for ministries and state-owned 
entities to legalize the pirated software that many currently 
use.  A major U.S. software company has estimated that it loses 
$5 million annually due to software piracy in Honduras.  The 
CAFTA enforcement provisions are designed to help reduce 
copyright piracy. 
 
The piracy of cable television signals is also a problem in 
Honduras.  During 2004, two different U.S. companies claimed that 
their competitors were broadcasting pirated cable television 
signals from the United States, and complained that the Honduran 
authorities do not vigorously investigate and prosecute these 
activities. 
 
Patents and Trademarks 
 
Honduras ratified the Paris Convention for the Protection of 
Industrial Property in 1994.  The Honduran Congress enacted a 
1999 Law of Industrial Property to provide improved protection 
for both trademarks and patents.  To be protected under Honduran 
law, patents and trademarks currently must be registered with the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade.  The CAFTA will eliminate 
cumbersome registration requirements. 
 
Modifications to the Patent Law of 1993 included patent 
protection for pharmaceuticals, and extension of the term of 
protection for a patent from seventeen to twenty years from the 
date of filing, to meet WTO standards.  The term for cancellation 
of a trademark for lack of use was extended from one year to 
three years.  Trademarks are valid for up to ten years from the 
registration date.  The illegitimate registration of well-known 
trademarks has, however, been a persistent problem in Honduras. 
The CAFTA enforcement provisions are designed to help reduce 
trademark piracy. 
 
U.S. pharmaceutical companies have complained that the Ministry 
of Health, in approving competing companies\' pharmaceutical 
products, has often failed to respect data exclusivity rights as 
guaranteed under article 39 of the WTO TRIPs agreement and 
article 77 of Honduras\' Industrial Property Law.  (Honduran law 
provides five-year exclusive use of data provided in support of 
registering pharmaceutical products.)  The CAFTA obligations 
clarify that test data and trade secrets submitted to a 
government for the purpose of product approval will be protected 
against unfair commercial use for a period of 5 years for 
pharmaceuticals and 10 years for agricultural chemicals. 
SERVICES BARRIERS 
 
Currently, special government authorization must be obtained to 
invest in the tourism, hotel, and banking services sectors. 
Foreigners may neither hold a seat on nor provide direct 
brokerage services in Honduras\' stock exchange.  Honduran 
professional bodies heavily regulate the licensing of foreigners 
to practice law, medicine, engineering, accounting, and other 
professions. 
 
Under the CAFTA, Honduras will accord substantial market access 
in services across their entire services regime, subject to very 
few exceptions.  In addition, U.S. financial service suppliers 
would have full rights to establish subsidiaries, joint ventures 
or branches for banks and insurance companies.  Honduras will 
allow U.S.-based firms to offer cross-border services in areas 
such as financial information and data processing, and financial 
advisory services. In addition, Central American mutual funds 
will be able to use foreign-based portfolio managers.  The 
commitments in services cover both cross-border supply of 
services as well as the right to invest and establish a local 
services presence (such as in tourism or securities).  Market 
access to services is supplemented by requirements for regulatory 
transparency.  Regulatory authorities must use open and 
transparent administrative procedures, consult with interested 
parties before issuing regulations, provide advance notice and 
comment periods for proposed rules, and publish all regulations. 
The right to provide professional services will be granted on a 
reciprocal basis depending on the requirements in individual U.S. 
states. 
 
INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
 
The Constitution of Honduras requires that all foreign investment 
complement, but not substitute for, national investment. 
Currently, the Government of Honduras must approve any foreign 
investment in sectors including telecommunications, basic health, 
air transport, insurance and financial services, private 
education, and most sectors related to natural resources and 
farming.  Foreigners are barred from small-scale commercial and 
industrial activities with an investment less than 150,000 
lempiras (about $8,078).  Foreign ownership of land within 40 km 
of the coastlines and national boundaries is constitutionally 
prohibited, though tourism investment laws allow for certain 
exceptions.  Inadequate land title procedures, including 
overlapping claims and a weak judiciary, have led to numerous 
investment disputes involving U.S.-citizen landowners.  Under the 
CAFTA, U.S. investors will enjoy in almost all circumstances the 
right to establish, acquire and operate investments in Honduras 
on an equal footing with local investors. 
 
In 2001, a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between the U.S. and 
Honduras entered into force.  The treaty provides for equal 
protection under the law for U.S. investors in Honduras and 
permits expropriation only in accordance with international legal 
standards and accompanied by adequate compensation.  U.S. 
investors in Honduras also have the right to submit an investment 
dispute to binding international arbitration. 
 
Honduras has taken the following limited exceptions to its BIT 
national treatment obligation: properties on cays, reefs, rocks, 
shoals or sandbanks or on islands or on any property located 
within 40 km of the coastline or land borders of Honduras, small 
scale industry and commerce with total invested capital of no 
more than $40,000 or its equivalent in national currency, 
ownership, operation and editorial control of broadcast radio and 
television, ownership, operation and editorial control of general 
interest periodicals and newspapers published in Honduras. 
 
Under current Honduran law, the government-owned telephone 
company Hondutel maintains monopoly rights over all fixed-line 
telephony services.  However, in 2003 the government began to 
allow foreign investors to participate in fixed-line telephony 
services as \"sub-operators\" in partnership with Hondutel.  At 
present, approximately 40 firms have entered into \"sub-operator\" 
contracts with Hondutel, of which five firms are already 
providing services to the public.  By law, Hondutel\'s monopoly 
expires in December 2005, and the government of Honduras has 
announced plans for full privatization of Hondutel thereafter. 
Both foreign and domestic firms already enjoy full rights to 
invest in cellular telephony services. 
 
In July 2004, the Minister of Natural Resources and the 
Environment issued a decree calling for a new national policy on 
mining, and ordering the government agency responsible for 
granting mining permits and concessions, DEFOMIN, to stop 
granting any new mining concessions.  This decision affected a 
U.S. company that already operates in Honduras and was planning 
to expand its operations, which had applied for additional 
concessions in late 2003.  The same company has also been waiting 
for over a year for the environmental permit to operate a 
separate mine, and as of December 2004 has received neither 
permission, nor denial, nor an explanation of the status of the 
application.  Other U.S. companies also complained during 2004 
that the GOH seems to no longer welcome foreign investment in the 
mining sector. 
 
In the investment chapter of the CAFTA, Honduras will commit to 
provide a higher level of protection for U.S. investors than 
under the existing BIT.  The CAFTA requires that all forms of 
investment be protected, including enterprises, debt, 
concessions, contracts and intellectual property.  Among the 
rights afforded to U.S. investors are due process protections and 
the right to receive a fair market value for property in the 
event of an expropriation.  Investor rights will be backed by an 
effective, impartial procedure for dispute settlement that is 
fully transparent.  Submissions to dispute panels and panel 
hearings will be open to the public, and interested parties will 
have the opportunity to submit their views. 
 
TRADE RESTRICTIONS AFFECTING ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 
 
Honduras currently has no domestic legislation concerning 
electronic commerce, as the sector is still not developed in the 
Honduran market.  The Electronic Commerce System Directorate 
(DISELCO), a joint project of the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Tegucigalpa (CCIT), the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Cortes (CCIC), and the National Industry Association 
(ANDI), is the institution in charge of establishing the policies 
and norms pertaining to electronic commerce in Honduras. 
 
Although improving, the country still lacks adequate basic 
telecom infrastructure and Internet bandwidth capacity to 
effectively support significant electronic commerce.  Except for 
web page promotional material, companies are not utilizing 
computer-based sales as a substantial distribution channel in 
Honduras. 
 
Under the CAFTA, Central America and the United States agreed to 
provisions on e-commerce that reflect the issue\'s importance in 
global trade and the importance of supplying services by 
electronic means as a key part of a vibrant e-commerce 
environment.  As it develops its electronic commerce sector, 
Honduras joined other parties in committing to non-discriminatory 
treatment of digital products and agreeing not to impose customs 
duties on such products and to cooperate in numerous policy areas 
related to e-commerce. 
 
OTHER BARRIERS 
 
Anti-Competitive Practices 
 
U.S. investors who set up businesses in Honduras at times find 
themselves subject to forms of competition that, in the U.S., 
would be considered unfair business practices.  In 2003, a U.S.- 
Japanese joint venture established a cement company in Honduras, 
challenging the duopoly enjoyed by the two Honduran companies in 
the market.  The two established companies engaged in a campaign 
of predatory pricing that brought cement prices below the cost of 
production.  After the U.S.-Japanese venture dropped out of the 
market, prices returned to their earlier level.  While such 
actions might be illegal in the U.S., there is currently no law 
against predatory pricing in Honduras, although a draft 
competition law, which would address certain types of anti- 
competitive behavior, is currently before a congressional 
committee. 
 
Corruption 
 
Historically, U.S. firms and private citizens have found 
corruption to be a problem which seriously complicates doing 
business in Honduras, thus creating a constraint on foreign 
direct investment.  Corruption appears to be most pervasive in 
the areas of government procurement, performance requirements, 
the regulatory system, and the buying and selling of real estate, 
particularly land title transfers.  Honduras\' judicial system is 
easily influenced; investment and business disputes involving 
foreigners have rarely been resolved in a transparent manner. 
The administration of justice is a key challenge to domestic and 
foreign companies.  With considerable U.S. help, the government 
is reforming Honduras\' judicial system and fighting corruption, 
though progress has been extremely slow and serious problems 
remain in these areas.  Anti-corruption provisions in the CAFTA 
aim to help alleviate these problems, particularly by 
criminalizing the bribery of a public official in any area 
related to trade and investment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"24096","12/15/2004 12:04","04TEGUCIGALPA2795","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE249035","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

151204Z Dec 04
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 002795 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL AND INL/LP 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OILS AND OFFICE OF DIVERSION CONTROL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, HO 
SUBJECT:  HONDURAS 2005 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL 
STRATEGY REPORT PART I 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 249035 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
1. The transshipment of cocaine through Honduras by air, 
land, and maritime routes continued in 2004.  While seizures 
were slightly down in 2004 compared to last year\'s record 
levels, Honduran authorities did successfully disrupt one of 
the most active trafficking organizations in the country, 
dealing a significant setback to organized crime in the 
region.  Corruption within the police, Public Ministry (PM), 
and the judiciary, however, continues to hamper law 
enforcement efforts. 
2. Limited resources remain the largest obstacle to 
Honduras\' ability to implement its national counternarcotics 
policy, yet the Government of Honduras (GOH) remains 
committed to stemming the flow of illegal narcotics 
transiting its territory.  Both the police and military take 
an active part in Honduras\' counternarcotics strategy, with 
the Honduran Navy responding particularly well given its 
limited resources.  While many arrests are made, the PM has 
had little success in prosecuting these individuals.  Drug 
abuse in Honduras appears to be on the rise, with 
availability and usage up in 2004.  Honduras is a party to 
the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
----------------- 
STATUS OF COUNTRY 
----------------- 
3. Due to Honduras\' geographic location and the GOH\'s 
limited interdiction resources, the transshipment of drugs, 
primarily cocaine, through Honduras continues at a 
persistent rate.  Transshipment is facilitated by direct air 
and maritime links to U.S. cities and the Pan-American 
Highway, which crosses southern Honduras.  While the police 
and military lack sufficient assets to comprehensively 
attack drug trafficking in Honduras, there were nonetheless 
significant drug seizures this year.  Honduras is not a 
significant producer of drugs or precursor chemicals. 
 
------------------------------------- 
COUNTRY ACTIONS AGAINST DRUGS IN 2004 
------------------------------------- 
 
4. Policy Initiatives: The GOH continued a joint police and 
military counternarcotics initiative launched in April 2003 
to discourage traffickers from using Honduras as a transit 
point.  This initiative includes the use of the Honduran Air 
Force to interdict illicit flights entering Honduran 
airspace.   A Honduran Frontier Police presence at Honduras\' 
Pan-American Highway checkpoint also provides a deterrent to 
the flow of narcotics into Honduras from its southern border 
with Nicaragua. 
5. A new draft counternarcotics law under review in the 
National Congress would significantly expand the authority 
of law enforcement agencies to initiate undercover 
operations.  Current law prohibits law enforcement agencies 
from using these types of operations to conduct 
investigations, mandating in fact, that anyone participating 
in the purchase and/or sale of narcotics, including police 
participating in sting operations, be arrested. 
6. Honduras is also in the process of considering revisions 
to its Criminal Procedures Code that took effect on February 
20, 2002.  Proposed revisions include increased penalties 
for crimes related to drug trafficking and/or possession. 
7. Accomplishments: As of December 1, 2004, Honduran 
authorities have seized 3,866 kilograms of cocaine, 1,611 
pounds of marijuana, one kilogram of heroin, and destroyed 
approximately 71,152 marijuana plants during the year.  The 
GOH seized USD 2,058,803 in cash (setting a new national 
record) plus numerous other assets, including property, 
aircraft, go-fast boats, and vehicles worth well over USD 
2,000,000.  Honduran authorities also made 751 narcotics- 
related arrests. 
8. The Honduran Frontier Police have been largely 
responsible for these successes, drawing on intensive 
counternarcotics training, and U.S. technical assistance and 
equipment.  In 2004, cooperation among all elements of the 
police, military, and other special investigative units 
increased.  The Honduran Navy participated in a number of 
regional counternarcotics efforts that led to large seizures 
in international waters. 
9. On July 14, Pedro Garcia Montes was killed in Cartagena, 
Colombia.  Montes, a Honduran citizen, was considered to be 
the head of a major trafficking organization in Honduras. 
Upon Montes\' death, police raided numerous properties 
belonging to him, resulting in seizures of weapons, cash, 
and other contraband.  They also arrested Ethalson Mejia 
Hoy, a key Montes associate.  Montes\' death effectively 
decapitated his organization and was a significant blow to 
organized crime in the region. 
10. Law Enforcement Efforts: Counternarcotics law 
enforcement is a priority for the Maduro Government, 
although limited resources, corruption, and inexperienced 
personnel hinder GOH efforts to stop traffickers using 
Honduras as a transit country.  Police, constrained by lack 
of adequate transportation, rarely patrol some areas of the 
country, particularly in the isolated northeast.  Despite 
these constraints, Honduran law enforcement agencies made 
many drug-related arrests.  The Honduran judicial system, 
however, has a poor track record of turning these arrests 
into convictions. 
11. Corruption: Endemic corruption continues to impede 
effective counternarcotics law enforcement in Honduras. 
Corruption within the judicial system particularly has been 
problematic (a judge released Mejia on bail after police had 
arrested him on a valid INTERPOL notice).  In 2004, Honduras 
amended its constitution to strip immunity from prosecution 
from high-level government officials.  To date, the National 
Congress has not passed implementing legislation that many 
GOH officials believe is necessary, and there have been no 
prosecutions of formerly immune individuals.  Honduras is a 
signatory to the Inter-American Convention Against 
Corruption, but has fallen short of fully implementing the 
Convention\'s recommendations. 
12. Agreements and Treaties: Honduras has counternarcotics 
agreements with the United States, Belize, Colombia, 
Jamaica, Mexico, Venezuela, and Spain and is a party to the 
1988 UN Drug Convention.  Honduras recently certified its 
major public maritime ports in compliance with International 
Ship and Port Facility Security codes and is an active 
member of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission 
(CICAD).  In 2004, Honduras signed the UN Convention Against 
Corruption, but it has yet to be approved by the National 
Congress.  A U.S.-Honduras maritime counternarcotics 
agreement entered into force in 2001 and a bilateral 
extradition exists between the U.S. and Honduras.  Honduras 
is one of ten nations to sign the Caribbean Maritime 
Counterdrug Agreement, but has not yet ratified it. 
13. Cultivation/Production: Cannabis is the only illegal 
drug known to be cultivated in Honduras.  The GOH does not 
permit the use of aerial eradication; however upon 
detection, marijuana plants are cut down and destroyed. 
14. Drug Flow/Transit:  In 2004, there was a noticeable 
increase in the number of detected suspect maritime vessels 
transiting through Honduran territorial waters en route to 
southern Mexico and the United States.  Suspect air-tracks, 
however, decreased.  Cocaine and heroin are smuggled 
overland by commercial and private vehicles.  Approximately 
90 percent of all drugs transiting Honduras are destined for 
the United States.  There is evidence of the existence of an 
illicit trade in \"arms for drugs,\" with arms from these 
deals presumably destined for use by terrorist groups in 
Colombia. 
15. Domestic Programs/Demand Reduction: Drug abuse in 
Honduras appears to be on the rise and illegal drugs are 
becoming increasingly available, particularly along the 
Caribbean coast.  The Maduro Administration launched a pilot 
program directed at Honduran youth to fight drug abuse and 
the National Anti-Narcotics Council is making demand 
reduction a major part of Honduran counternarcotics efforts. 
This effort reflects the government\'s appreciation that drug 
trafficking through Honduras is not only a national security 
threat, but a major public policy problem as well. 
------------------------------------ 
U.S. POLICY INITIATIVES AND PROGRAMS 
------------------------------------- 
16. U.S. counternarcotics assistance to Honduras is intended 
to augment GOH efforts to strengthen the rule of law, 
increase police, judicial, and investigative efficiency, 
reduce corruption, and build strong counternarcotics 
institutions.  In 2004, assistance was primarily directed to 
the Frontier Police, Ministry of Public Security, and the 
Public Ministry, although the U.S. also provided limited 
funds to assist Honduras in demand reduction efforts.  The 
GOH has made a firm commitment to combat drug trafficking 
and the U.S. will continue to assist Honduras in its fight 
to reduce narcotics trafficking in the region and associated 
corruption. 
#Palmer 
"
"24410","12/21/2004 12:14","04TEGUCIGALPA2816","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04State254401","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEGUCIGALPA 002816 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE for INL and WHA/CEN 
Justice for OIA and AFMLS 
Treasury for FinCEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KTFN, KJUS, ECON, PGOV, PREL, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS: 2004-2005 INCSR PART II, MONEY LAUNDERING 
AND FINANCIAL CRIMES. 
 
REF: State 254401 
 
1.  Post provides its submission for the 2004-2005 
International Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR) Part 
II, Money Laundering And Financial Crimes. 
 
Introduction and General Questions 
 
Two years after passing a new law against money laundering, 
the government of Honduras has made considerable progress in 
implementing the law, establishing and training the entities 
responsible for the investigation of financial crimes, and 
improving cooperation among these entities.  In 2004, these 
efforts began to pay off, with 16 money laundering-related 
arrests, seizure of over $6 million worth of cash and goods, 
and the first five convictions for money laundering crimes 
in the country\'s history.  Sustained progress will depend 
upon increased commitment from the government of Honduras to 
prosecute financial crimes aggressively. 
 
Honduras is not an important regional or offshore financial 
center and is not considered to have a significant black 
market for smuggled goods (though there have been recent 
high-profile smuggling cases involving gasoline and other 
consumer goods).  Money laundering, however, does take place 
in Honduras, primarily through the banking sector but also 
through currency exchange houses and front companies as 
well.  The vulnerabilities of Honduras to money laundering 
stem primarily from significant trafficking of narcotics, 
especially cocaine, through the region, though smuggling of 
contraband may also generate funds that are laundered 
through the banking system.  Money laundering in Honduras 
derives from both domestic and foreign criminal activity, 
and the proceeds are controlled by local drug trafficking 
organizations and organized crime syndicates.  Honduras is 
not experiencing an increase in financial crimes such as 
bank fraud.  It is not a matter of government policy to 
encourage, facilitate or engage in laundering the proceeds 
from illegal drug transactions, from other serious crimes, 
or from terrorist financing.  However, corruption remains a 
serious problem, particularly within the judiciary and law 
enforcement sectors. 
 
Laws and Regulations to Prevent Money Laundering/Terrorist 
Financing 
 
Money laundering has been a criminal offense in Honduras 
since 1998, when the passage of Law. No. 27-98 criminalized 
the laundering of narcotics-related proceeds and introduced 
various record keeping and reporting requirements for 
financial institutions.  However, weaknesses in the law, 
including a narrow definition of money laundering, made it 
virtually impossible to successfully prosecute the crime. 
 
In 2002, Honduras passed Decree No. 45-2002, which greatly 
strengthened its legal framework and available investigative 
and prosecutorial tools to fight money laundering.  Under 
the new legislation, the definition of money laundering was 
expanded to include the transfer of assets that proceed 
directly or indirectly from trafficking of drugs, arms, 
human organs or people, auto theft, kidnapping, bank and 
other forms of financial fraud, and terrorism, as well as 
any sale or movement of assets that lacks economic 
justification.  The penalty for money laundering is a prison 
sentence of 15-20 years.  The law also requires all persons 
entering or leaving Honduras to declare, and if asked, 
present, money in cash and convertible securities (\"titulos 
valores de convertibilidad inmediata\") that they are 
carrying if the amount exceeds $10,000 or its equivalent. 
 
Decree No. 45-2002 also created a financial information 
unit, the Unidad de Informacion Financiera (UIF), within the 
Honduran National Banking and Insurance Commission. Banks 
and other financial institutions are required to report to 
the UIF any currency transactions over $10,000 in dollar 
denominated accounts or 200,000 lempiras (approximately 
$10,770) in local currency accounts. The law requires the 
UIF and reporting institutions to keep a registry of 
reported transactions for five years.  Banks are required to 
know the identity of all their clients and depositors, 
regardless of the amount of a client\'s deposits, and to keep 
adequate records of the information.  The law also includes 
banker negligence provisions that make individual bankers 
subject to two- to five-year prison terms if, by 
\"carelessness, negligence, inexperience or non-observance of 
the law, they permit money to be laundered through their 
institutions.\"  All of the above requirements apply to all 
financial institutions that are regulated by the National 
Banking and Insurance Commission, which include state and 
private banks, savings and loan associations, bonded 
warehouses, stock markets, currency exchange houses, 
securities dealers, insurance companies, credit associations 
and casinos.  The law does not, however, extend to the 
activities of lawyers or accountants. 
 
Decree No. 45-2002 requires that a public prosecutor be 
assigned to the UIF. In practice, four prosecutors are 
assigned to the UIF, each on a part-time basis, with 
responsibility for specific cases divided among them 
depending on their expertise. The prosecutors, under urgent 
conditions and with special authorization, may subpoena data 
and information directly from financial institutions. Public 
prosecutors and police investigators are permitted to use 
electronic surveillance techniques to investigate money 
laundering. 
 
Under the Criminal Procedure Code, reporting individuals 
such as bank officials are protected by law with respect to 
their cooperation with law enforcement authorities. 
However, some have alleged that their personal security is 
put at risk if the information they report leads to the 
prosecution of money launderers.  Officials of the Public 
Ministry, the National Banking and Insurance Commission and 
the private-sector banking association AHIBA are looking 
into ways that testimony from bank officials could be 
treated differently in order to protect the identity of the 
bank officials. 
 
Until this year, there had been some ambiguity in Honduran 
law concerning the responsibility of banks to report 
information to the regulating authorities and the duty of 
banks to keep customer information confidential.  A new law 
passed in September 2004, the Financial System Law (Decree 
No. 129-2004) clarifies this ambiguity, explicitly stating 
that provision of information demanded by regulatory, 
judicial, or other legal authorities shall not be regarded 
as an improper divulgence of confidential information. 
 
There have been no changes or additions to the Honduran laws 
governing money laundering or terrorist financing during 
2004.  However, four financial sector strengthening laws 
were passed in September, including the Financial System Law 
mentioned above, and reforms of the National Banking and 
Insurance Commission and the Central Bank.  While these laws 
do not touch specifically on money laundering or terrorist 
financing, they improve the legal and operational capacity 
of the Honduran authorities to regulate the banking sector, 
and should therefore strengthen the authorities\' ability to 
detect and counteract money laundering or terrorist 
financing.  While some banks and political figures objected 
to certain parts of these laws, on the whole the laws were 
developed through close consultation with representatives of 
the banking sector, which generally supports the changes for 
their positive impact on greater regulatory clarity and 
effectiveness. 
 
Prosecutions in 2004 
 
Prior to 2004, there had been no successful prosecutions of 
money laundering crimes in Honduras.  To date in 2004, 
however, the authorities have arrested 16 persons for money 
laundering crimes, issued six additional outstanding arrest 
warrants, and secured five convictions. 
 
In April 2004, two Guatemalan citizens were caught crossing 
the border between Guatemala and Honduras carrying $247,000 
in cash, suspected to be connected to narcotics trafficking 
activities.  The two men were brought to trial in June, and 
one was convicted and sentenced to 16 years in prison, while 
the other was found not guilty.  This was the first 
conviction of a money laundering offense since the 2002 law 
had been passed. 
 
In December 2002, the fishing vessel Capitan Ryan was seized 
while departing a Honduran port and found to be carrying 
$467,000 in cash, believed to be connected to drug 
trafficking.  The Hondurans on board the boat were arrested 
and, in June 2004, four of them were convicted of money 
laundering, while three others were found innocent and 
released.  All four who were convicted are currently serving 
terms of 19 years in prison.  The cash and other assets 
(including the boat) seized at the time of the arrest were 
ordered forfeited.  Another person connected to the same 
case was apprehended in Panama by Panamanian authorities; 
his case is still being processed in the Panamanian judicial 
system. 
 
In early 2004, a Honduran named Angela Platero was arrested 
and charged with running an illegal lottery scheme and 
laundering the proceeds.  Honduran authorities seized 
approximately $1.6 million in cash and assets in connection 
with this investigation.  The case was due to go to court in 
October 2004, however defense attorneys filed a motion 
claiming that the seizure was unconstitutional, which has 
been referred to an appellate court.  A denial of the motion 
is expected in early January 2005, in which case the case 
will proceed to trial in February. 
 
Measures to Prevent Terrorist Financing 
 
The government of Honduras has been supportive of 
counterterrorism efforts.  Decree No. 45-2002 states that an 
asset transfer related to terrorism is a crime; however, 
terrorist financing has not been identified as a crime 
itself.  The law does not explicitly grant the government 
the authority to freeze or seize terrorist assets; however, 
on separate authority, the National Banking and Insurance 
Commission has issued freeze orders promptly for the 
organizations and individuals named by the UN 1267 Sanctions 
Committee and those organizations and individuals on the 
list of Specially Designated Global Terrorists designated by 
the United States pursuant to Executive Order 13224 (on 
terrorist financing).  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is 
responsible for instructing the Commission to issue freeze 
orders. The Commission directs Honduran financial 
institutions to search for, hold, and report on terrorist- 
linked accounts and transactions, which, if found, would be 
frozen. The Commission has reported that, to date, no 
accounts linked to the entities or individuals on the lists 
have been found in the Honduran financial system. 
 
While Honduras is a major recipient of flows of remittances 
(estimated at $1.1 billion in 2004), there has been no 
evidence linking these remittances to the financing of 
terrorism.  Remittances primarily flow from Hondurans living 
in the United States to their relatives in Honduras.  Most 
remittances are sent through wire transfer or bank services, 
with some cash probably being transported physically from 
the United States to Honduras.  There is no significant 
indigenous alternative remittance system such as hawala 
operating in Honduras, nor is there any evidence that 
charitable or non-profit entities in Honduras have been used 
as conduits for the financing of terrorism. 
 
Honduras signed the 1999 International Convention for the 
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism on November 11, 
2001, and ratified the convention on March 25, 2003. 
 
Free Trade Zones 
 
Under Honduran legislation, companies may register for \"free 
trade zone\" status, and benefit from the associated tax 
benefits, regardless of their location in the country. 
Companies that wish to receive free trade zone status must 
register with the Office of Productive Sectors in the 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce.  As of December 2004, 
there are 337 companies, both Honduran and foreign, with 
free trade zone status operating in the country, mostly in 
the textile and apparel industry.  There is no indication 
that free trade zones are being used in trade-based money 
laundering schemes or by the financiers of terrorism. 
 
International Cooperation 
 
Honduras cooperates with U.S. investigations and requests 
for information pursuant to the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
Honduras has signed memoranda of understanding to exchange 
information on money laundering investigations with Panama, 
El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, Colombia, and the 
Dominican Republic.  Honduras strives to comply with the 
Basel Committee\'s \"Core Principles for Effective Banking 
Supervision,\" and the new Financial System Law (Decree No. 
129-2004) passed in September 2004 is designed to improve 
compliance with these international standards.  At the 
regional level, Honduras is a member of the Central American 
Council of Bank Superintendents, which meets periodically to 
exchange information. 
 
Honduras is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention, the UN 
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances, the UN International Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime, and the UN 
International Convention for the Suppression of the 
Financing of Terrorism.  Honduras signed the OAS Inter- 
American Convention on Terrorism in June 2002, ratified the 
agreement on September 22, 2004, and became a party to the 
agreement when it deposited its instruments of ratification 
on November 23, 2004.  Honduras signed the UN Convention 
Against Corruption on May 17, 2004.  Honduras is a member of 
the Organization of American States Inter-American Drug 
Abuse Control Commission (OAS/CICAD) Group of Experts to 
Control Money Laundering and the Caribbean Financial Action 
Task Force (CFATF).  Currently Spain and Panama are 
sponsoring the Honduran UIF for membership in the Egmont 
Group of Financial Intelligence Units; that membership is 
expected to be voted upon in 2005. 
 
No specific written agreement exists between the United 
States and Honduras to establish a mechanism for exchanging 
adequate records in connection with investigations and 
proceedings relating to narcotics, terrorism, terrorist 
financing, and other crime investigations.  However, 
Honduras has cooperated, when requested, with appropriate 
law enforcement agencies of the U.S. government and other 
governments investigating financial crimes. 
 
Examples of cooperation between Honduran and U.S. 
authorities include the prosecution of the Capitan Ryan case 
described above, which was aided by support from the 
Department of Treasury\'s anti-money laundering technical 
assistance program, and by cooperation between the INL 
offices at Embassy Panama and Embassy Tegucigalpa: Embassy 
Panama provided funding travel so that Panamanian police and 
prosecutors could share critical evidence with Honduran 
authorities. 
 
Another example of inter-governmental cooperation concerns 
an ongoing investigation into the assets of drug trafficker 
Juan Ramon Matta Ballesteros, currently serving a prison 
term in the United States.  In June 2004, a tip from the 
Spanish authorities alerted the Honduran authorities that 
$550,000 was being transferred to a Honduran bank account in 
the name of Matta Ballesteros\' wife.  The Honduran 
authorities seized this money, but lack direct evidence that 
the money is connected to illegal activities, since a legal 
case was never brought against Matta Ballesteros in 
Honduras.  Officials in the Honduran Public Ministry 
requested information from the U.S. authorities by means of 
an MLAT (Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty) to substantiate 
their claim that the money was derived from illegal 
activities.  The Office of International Affairs in the U.S. 
Attorney\'s Office in Washington agreed to give the Honduran 
authorities access to the historical case files, and two 
Honduran officials from the Public Ministry will travel to 
Washington in January 2005 to examine the files, with INL 
funds supporting the trip. 
 
Asset Forfeiture and Seizure Legislation 
 
Congress first enacted an asset seizure law in 1993 that 
subsequent Honduran Supreme Court rulings substantially 
weakened.  Decree No. 45-2002 strengthened the asset seizure 
provisions of the law, establishing an Office of Seized 
Assets (OABI) under the Public Ministry.  The law authorizes 
the Office of Seized Assets to guard and administer \"all 
goods, products or instruments\" of a crime, and states that 
money seized (or money raised from the auctioning of seized 
goods) should be transferred to the public entities that 
participated in the investigation and prosecution of the 
crime.  Under the Criminal Procedure Code, when goods or 
money are seized in any criminal investigation, a criminal 
charge must be submitted against the suspect within sixty 
days of the seizure.  If one is not submitted, the suspect 
has the right to demand the release of the seized assets. 
 
Decree No. 45-2002 is not entirely clear on the issue of 
whether a legitimate business can be seized if used to 
launder money which derives from criminal activities.  The 
Chief Prosecutor for Organized Crime maintains that the 
authorities do have this power, since once a \"legitimate\" 
business is used to launder criminal assets, it ceases to be 
\"legitimate\" and is subject to seizure proceedings. 
However, this authority is not explicitly granted in the 
law, and there has been no test case to date which would set 
an interpretation.  There are currently no new laws being 
considered regarding seizure or forfeiture of assets of 
criminal activity. 
 
The total value of assets seized in 2004 was $6.1 million, 
of which $4.1 million was in cash and $2.0 million was in 
goods.  This marks a significant increase over 2003 figures 
of $2 million in cash and $584,000 in goods, for a total 
value of seized assets of $2.6 million.  Most of these 
seized assets are alleged to have derived from crimes 
related to drug trafficking; none of the seized assets are 
suspected of being connected to terrorist activity.  The law 
allows for both civil and criminal forfeiture, and there are 
no significant legal loopholes that allow criminals to 
shield their assets. 
However, OABI has not established firm control over the 
asset seizure and forfeiture process.  Implementation of the 
existing law, and the process of equipping OABI to maintain 
control over seized assets and effectively dispose of them, 
has been slow and ineffective.  The implementing regulations 
governing OABI were not finalized and published until more 
than a year after the passage of the law.  Plans to build 
separate offices and a warehouse for this entity are still 
incomplete, resulting in seized assets currently being kept 
in various locations under dispersed authority.  Money 
seized is also kept in various accounts without clear 
records of control, or kept in cash as evidence.  Due to the 
absence of a clear chain of custody over seized cash, the 
Public Ministry on one occasion in 2004 used seized cash to 
pay certain employees\' salaries, without the money\'s first 
having passed through a proper legal process for 
disposition. 
 
Similarly, assets seized, such as vehicles, property, and 
boats, are in many cases left unused, rather than being 
distributed for use by government agencies.  In one case in 
2004, a house seized in connection with a drug-trafficking 
investigation was nominally put under OABI\'s control, but 
was in fact left unguarded, and as a result was looted and 
severely damaged.  Cases such as this one have led some 
police agencies, which do not have the proper assets to 
conduct their operations, to use these assets, again without 
their first having passed through a legal process for their 
disposition. 
 
While these actions are contrary to proper procedures set 
forth in the law, OABI lacks the necessary autonomy or power 
to resist such actions, since OABI is itself under the 
Public Ministry.  Furthermore, there is currently no 
external or independent audit of OABI\'s activities to 
guarantee transparency and proper handling of seized assets. 
 
There is no evidence that traffickers, organized crime 
organizations, or terrorist organizations have taken 
retaliatory actions related to money laundering/terrorist 
financing investigations, government cooperation with the 
USG, or seizure/freezing of assets. 
 
Conclusion 
 
In 2004, the government of Honduras took positive steps to 
implement Decree No. 45-2002 by establishing and equipping 
the various government entities responsible for combating 
money laundering.  However, there are only limited resources 
available for training officials, most of whom lack 
experience in dealing with money laundering issues.  Further 
progress in implementing the new money laundering 
legislation will depend on the training and retention of 
personnel familiar with money laundering and financial 
crimes and improved ability and willingness of the Public 
Ministry to aggressively investigate and prosecute financial 
crimes.  The government of Honduras should continue to 
support the developing government entities responsible for 
combating money laundering and other financial crimes, and 
ensure that resources are available to strengthen its anti- 
money laundering regime.  The government should also 
criminalize terrorist financing, and should ensure full 
implementation and proper oversight of its asset forfeiture 
program. 
 
Palmer 
"
"24446","12/21/2004 20:53","04TEGUCIGALPA2822","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002822 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, DECEMBER 21, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 12/21, titled \"They should hurry.\"  \"CAFTA is now in the 
process of being ratified by the Congresses of each country. 
Just last week and after long discussions, El Salvador was 
the first one to ratify it despite the opposition of leftist 
parties and popular organizations.\" 
 
\"For sure, the same will happen here in Honduras.  The 
Executive Board of Congress has said the treaty will be 
considered for approval right after Christmas and before the 
end of the year, although people in the other countries may 
be better informed on the actual content of the treaty. 
Anyway, it\'s likely that CAFTA will be ratified in the same 
manner Congress does with the annual budget and other 
controversial bills that are approved thoughtlessly, and if 
possible, very late at night to avoid popular 
demonstrations.\" 
 
\"This won\'t be the first thing Congress approves without 
people really knowing what it\'s about.  There are sectors 
which depend on the projected benefits of CAFTA and there 
will be others that will surely be affected, possibly the 
most sensitive ones such as agriculture, which won\'t be able 
to transform themselves to reach a competitive level to 
survive.  We hope CAFTA\'s benefits exceed its limitations.\" 
 
2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" 
on 12/21, entitled \"Sharks and Sardines.\"  \"Congress is now 
ready to discuss and approve CAFTA, in the midst of strong 
opposition throughout Central America.  According to the 
latest developments from Congress, its approval is almost 
certain in view of the commitments acquired after a long and 
demanding negotiation, which evidenced the considerable 
asymmetries between the U.S. and Central America, as well as 
the differences between the regional economies.\" 
 
\"However, despite all the criticism, the general idea is 
that if CAFTA isn\'t ratified by Honduras, the country would 
be greatly isolated from our Central American counterparts 
and especially from the U.S., our main commercial partner.\" 
 
\"CAFTA also brings a great challenge for Honduran 
businessmen, because it will promote an open competition 
where the most apt, hard working and better trained will 
subsist or, to put it in other terms, the bigger fish will 
eat the smaller.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"24481","12/22/2004 12:12","04TEGUCIGALPA2826","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa2765","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEGUCIGALPA 002826 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
STATE PASS USTR 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, HO, IMF 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ECONOMIC REFORM: CENTRAL BANK REFORMED AND 
MODERNIZED BY NEW LAW 
 
REF: A) 04 Tegucigalpa 2765 
 
     B) 03 Tegucigalpa 2062 
     C) 04 Tegucigalpa 232 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: In September 2004, at IMF insistence, the 
GOH passed four banking reform laws aimed at strengthening 
the nation\'s financial system.  This is the second in a 
series of four cables that analyze each of these laws, 
assess their impacts on the Honduran financial system, and 
outline challenges of implementation or additional needed 
reforms that remain.  Ref A analyzed the reform of the 
deposit insurance agency; this cable focuses on the reform 
of the Central Bank. 
 
2. (U) The Central Bank reform law, which took effect on 
September 22, 2004, changes the structure of the Central 
Bank\'s Board of Directors, provides greater flexibility in 
the areas of exchange rate policy, monetary policy, and 
liquidity management, and provides for a stronger 
capitalization of the Central Bank from the central 
government.  In many of these areas, the law creates the 
legal opportunity for reforms which the bank plans to 
implement only gradually.  These changes should strengthen 
the financial system by allowing the Central Bank greater 
political autonomy and more flexibility in its operations. 
However, increased capacity-building and training will be 
necessary if the Central Bank is to implement fully all the 
changes permitted by the new law.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
Background: The Need for Reform 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) As summarized in ref B, a 2003 joint IMF/World Bank 
\"Financial System Stability Assessment\" for Honduras 
concluded that the Honduran banking system is \"highly 
fragile at a systemic level, impairing sustainable economic 
growth,\" and outlined several reforms needed to strengthen 
the system.  These reforms were then incorporated into the 
Letter of Intent signed by the GOH and the IMF in February 
2004, which required the passage of four financial sector 
reform bills: the Deposit Insurance Law; the Central Bank of 
Honduras Law; the Banking Commission Law; and a new 
Financial Institutions Law. 
 
4. (SBU) Specific to the Central Bank, the FSAP identified a 
number of weaknesses, including both credit and operational 
risks in the payments system, tension between monetary 
policy and exchange rate policy, and a lack of political 
autonomy which could leave the Central Bank Board of 
Directors vulnerable to political influences.  However, in 
response to these weaknesses, the report recommended 
incremental improvements to the Central Bank\'s legal 
framework and operations, rather than a major overhaul of 
the bank\'s structure or management. 
 
------------------------- 
Changes Under The New Law 
------------------------- 
 
5. (U) Of the four laws, the Central Bank reform law makes 
the least dramatic short-term changes in the operation of 
the Honduran financial sector.  The law grants no new 
responsibilities to the Central Bank, but revises previous 
legislation to lift legal restrictions against certain kinds 
of Central Bank operations.  The Bank must now choose how 
and when to take advantage of this new flexibility to 
gradually modernize and enhance its services. 
 
6. (U) EconOff met with Vice President of the Central Bank 
Analia Napky on November 24 and received a detailed overview 
of the ways that the new law will give greater flexibility 
to the Bank\'s operations.  Napky highlighted three broad 
areas of reform in the new law: changes to the structure of 
the Central Bank\'s Board of Directors; greater flexibility 
in the areas of exchange rate policy, monetary policy, and 
liquidity management; and a stronger capitalization of the 
Central Bank from the central government. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Make-up of the Board of Directors 
--------------------------------- 
 
7. (U) Presently, the Central Bank is managed by five 
officers: the President, Vice President, and three other 
directors.  All five are appointed by the President and 
serve a four-year term concurrent with the President\'s term. 
This arrangement leads to two potential problems.  First, 
there is a lack of policy continuity and a loss of 
institutional memory as the entire board of directors leaves 
office at the same time as the entire GOH financial team 
every four years.  Second, the Bank\'s political independence 
may be compromised, as the entire board is appointed by a 
newly-elected President and thus tends to be directly 
associated with that President and his administration. 
 
8. (U) Under the new law, the appointments of the three 
lower directors are staggered.  The Central Bank President 
and Vice President will still be appointed by the newly- 
elected President of Honduras and will serve terms 
concurrent with his term.  However, the other three 
directors will serve terms that begin in each of the next 
three years.  As a result, an incoming President can only 
appoint two-fifths of the Central Bank board upon arrival in 
office, and will start off working with a Central Bank board 
three-fifths of which was appointed by his predecessor. 
According to Napky, the biggest gain of this new arrangement 
is that most of the Central Bank\'s Board of Directors will 
remain in place across a Presidential transition, enabling 
the bank to maintain policy continuity and emphasizing the 
Central Bank\'s political independence. 
 
------------------------------- 
Greater Operational Flexibility 
------------------------------- 
 
9. (U) The new law grants the Central Bank greater 
flexibility in its operations in the areas of exchange rate 
policy, monetary policy, and management of the payments 
system, by lifting restrictions that existed under previous 
legislation.  While Napky stressed that the Central Bank 
does not plan to adopt reforms in all of these areas at 
once, she praised the law for providing the necessary legal 
framework for future developments, so that over time the 
bank\'s operations may be modernized. 
 
10. (SBU) The new law gives the Central Bank the flexibility 
to change its exchange rate management, though Napky 
stressed that in the short term they have no intention of 
doing so.  Previously, the Central Bank was required by law 
to purchase all foreign currency from Honduran banks at the 
end of each day, and make it available to banks only through 
means of an auction held once and only once per week.  The 
rate itself is set through means of a managed float, with 
the nominal rate devaluing within a band at roughly six 
percent per year to keep the trade-weighted real exchange 
rate stable.  The new law loosens these requirements 
somewhat, and hence grants the Central Bank the legal 
ability to move to a more flexible exchange rate regime in 
the future.  Napky said that this legal change was made by 
means of a deliberately subtle change in wording, so as not 
to generate either worries or expectations that the Central 
Bank plans to change its exchange rate policy in the near 
future.  The change in wording is so subtle, she joked, that 
\"only a lawyer or a central banker would understand what we 
meant.\"  Napky said that significant changes to the current 
exchange rate regime might only be made \"in 10 or 20 years 
time, if the conditions are right.\" 
 
11. (U) The new law also gives the Central Bank greater 
flexibility in the exercise of monetary policy.  Currently, 
the Central Bank\'s only tool for conducting open market 
transactions is the issuance of Certificates of Monetary 
Absorption (known as CAMs in Spanish).  However, until the 
September reform law, these CAMs were non-negotiable, and 
therefore no secondary market for these instruments 
currently exists.  Also, the CAMs currently exist 
exclusively as actual pieces of paper, and cannot be issued 
or traded electronically.  The new law lifts both of these 
restrictions.  First, under the new system, while the 
auction of these CAMs will remain the Central Bank\'s main 
instrument of monetary policy, the CAMs will become 
negotiable.  Second, the law will permit 
\"dematerialization,\" that is, allowing CAMs to be bought and 
sold electronically, apart from the transfer of any physical 
document.  (Note: The Ministry of Finance is currently 
contemplating a similar reform in the area of government 
bonds, which are currently also non-negotiable and limited 
to their face value.  End note.) 
 
12. (U) The law also allows the Central Bank a more active 
role in its function as the hub of the payments system.  As 
with the issuance of CAMs and bonds described above, until 
the recent reforms, the payment system still required checks 
to be exchanged physically as there was no legal framework 
for the recognition of electronic signatures and documents. 
The new law removes this restriction, and allows the Central 
Bank to grant overnight loans and short-term loans in the 
process of managing the payments system.  The result should 
be an improvement in the efficiency of the payments system, 
reducing the time and costs of routine transactions, as well 
as an eventual reduction in the risk that a failed large 
transaction would trigger a disruption throughout the 
system.  As a result of the new law, Honduras moves closer 
to compliance with the internationally-recognized Committee 
on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) Core Principles for 
systematically important payment systems. 
 
-------------- 
Capitalization 
-------------- 
 
13. (U) Finally, the law establishes a mechanism through 
which the government capitalizes the Central Bank for past 
operating losses, as explicitly required by the February 
Letter of Intent.  The law requires the Ministry of Finance 
to take on the Central Bank\'s accumulated losses from the 
period 1997 to 2004 - approximately 3.2 billion lempiras 
($177 million) at the end of 2003.  The exact cost of this 
operation must be specified within the first two months of 
2005, at which time government bonds will be issued by the 
Ministry of Finance and the cost will be incorporated into 
the central government accounts. 
 
------------------------------- 
The Challenge of Implementation 
------------------------------- 
 
14. (U) The Central Bank is currently preparing the 
regulations for the new law, in conjunction with the 
National Banking and Insurance Commission (CNBS) and with 
the assistance of consultants funded by the IDB and the 
World Bank.  Additional regulations on the management of the 
payment system are also being drafted, though Napky said it 
has not yet been decided if these changes will be brought 
into effect through the regulations of the Central Bank 
reform law or whether they will require a new law to be 
brought to Congress next year. 
 
15. (U) As for implementation, the Central Bank reform law 
imposes no new responsibilities upon the Central Bank. 
However, since it does allow the bank to modify its 
operations, technical assistance and training will be needed 
to enable the bank to take on new activities.  Napky also 
stressed that as the bank modernizes its activities over 
time, there will be a need for new computer hardware and 
software, and training to use them, none of which is 
currently provided for in the Central Bank\'s budget.  Much 
assistance of this sort is already being provided by the 
World Bank (as part of its Financial Sector Strengthening 
Credit) and the IDB.  Napky hopes to raise the possibility 
of additional assistance of this type during the upcoming 
assessment visit of Treasury Department specialists in 
government debt issuance and management, tentatively 
scheduled for January 2005. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Comment: Making Progress in Small Steps 
-------------------------------------- 
 
16. (U) Comment: The Central Bank reform law makes no major 
structural or operational changes, and is arguably the least 
innovative of the four recent financial sector reform laws. 
However, the law does contain several important 
modifications to the legal framework governing the Central 
Bank, which in turn will allow a series of incremental 
improvements in the way the bank conducts its operations. 
While Napky was obviously pleased and excited about the 
prospects of modernizing the Central Bank\'s activities, she, 
like any good central banker, also places a high premium on 
stability and predictability, and is not about to run off 
impulsively on a series of rapid and potentially disruptive 
changes.  End Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"24580","12/23/2004 16:20","04TEGUCIGALPA2831","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002831 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, DECEMBER 22, 2004 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 12/22, entitled \"Let\'s get it over with.\"  \"As we said 
before, El Salvador has already fulfilled their duty by 
ratifying CAFTA.  In Honduras, the pressure has increased to 
follow that example, while the Congress has said that once 
it is back from the Christmas celebrations and before the 
end of the year, the treaty will be discussed and approved.\" 
 
\"President Maduro has also joined the lobbying parade to 
request prompt ratification, and along with some business 
groups, he has warned about the negative consequences of non- 
ratification, such as the closing of the border with El 
Salvador and the eventual departure of the maquila industry 
once the benefits of CBI end.\" 
 
\"As can be seen, the reasons given for approving CAFTA 
aren\'t related to how we\'ll benefit from it, but to how 
badly we\'ll do if we\'re left out, which has proven to be a 
convincing argument.\" 
 
\"After the ratification of CAFTA, the Central American 
presidents will probably go to the U.S. to convince Congress 
to ratify it as well.  So, we need to hurry, and later we 
will find out how CAFTA affects us and whether it damages or 
benefits us.  As we have said, we hope its benefits surpass 
the disadvantages.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 12/22, titled \"Ratification of CAFTA.\"  \"CAFTA 
is more of an opportunity than a threat, and Congress 
shouldn\'t waste any more time before beginning its 
discussion and approving it as soon as possible.\" 
 
\"The opposition to CAFTA, to FTAA, and to the whole 
globalization trend is based on those called globophobics, 
usually made up of a mixture of orthodox Marxists, 
conservatives, and hard-core nationalists.  Obviously, these 
groups are so engaged in their own ideology that it prevents 
them from seeing the advantages of free trade, not only for 
producers of poor countries but also for consumers who will 
have access to more jobs and high-quality products at lower 
prices.\" 
 
\"The Honduran Congress should approve CAFTA before the U.S. 
Congress does, which will probably happen in February, not 
only to contribute to creating a favorable environment in 
Central America, but also to immediately attract the 
attention of international investors.\" 
 
3. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La 
Prensa\" on 12/22, entitled \"CAFTA.\"  \"The ratification of 
CAFTA is the next controversial issue on the agenda of 
Congress.  According to certain sources in Congress, the 
final text will be presented next week for discussion.\" 
 
\"There\'s no doubt that, as in any commercial negotiation, 
the agreement has two sides, two angles, but the right 
course would be to direct the analysis to a search for the 
benefits that will outweigh the damage that some productive 
sectors may suffer.  The worst damage to Honduras would be 
to be left out of a global economy that moves freely through 
national borders.\" 
 
\"The benefits of this agreement go beyond the harm to 
certain sectors, and some of those are protected by the 
treaty.  The challenge is significant.  If we don\'t take it 
on, it would be as if we turned our backs on history to be 
left out of a global economy in detriment to the majority of 
Hondurans who depend on their salaries.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"24591","12/24/2004 14:24","04TEGUCIGALPA2841","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04USDAOTEGUCIGALPA241424ZDEC4","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR INL/LP, S/CT, INR/IAA, AND CA/OCS/ACS/WHA 
STATE FOR DS/ITA (KHALL) AND DS/IP/WHA (MFLYNN) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2014 
TAGS: KCRM, PGOV, SNAR, KJUS, PHUM, ASEC, CASC, KSAC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN GOVERNMENT RESPONDS TO 12/23 BUS MASSACRE 
OF 28 PEOPLE; MARA SALVATRUCHA GANG BELIEVED RESPONSIBLE 
 
REF: USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 241424Z DEC 04 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The Government of Honduras reacted with 
outrage and aggressive law enforcement efforts in the wake of 
the massacre of 28 people in a bus in San Pedro Sula December 
23.  The military is assisting the police by boosting joint 
patrols, and police have arrested several suspects accused of 
being involved in the massacre.  Despite claims by the 
culprits that they were a revolutionary group, police believe 
the Mara Salvatrucha gang to be responsible for the attack. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) The Government of Honduras reacted with outrage and 
aggressive law enforcement efforts in the wake of the 
massacre of 28 people and wounding of an equal number on a 
bus in the northern city of San Pedro Sula the evening of 
December 23.  President Ricardo Maduro has been visiting 
victims and meeting with his ministers directing the GOH\'s 
anti-crime efforts, including the implementation of the 
anti-gang law.  Both he and Minister of Public Security Oscar 
Alvarez have criticized human rights organizations for not 
expressing outrage at the violence and for repeatedly 
questioning the GOH\'s get tough policy on gangs.  Cardinal 
Oscar Rodriguez of the Catholic Church, meanwhile, has urged 
the GOH not to go overboard in its reaction to the massacre. 
There are now approximately 3,000 military members assisting 
the police through joint patrols, including deploying several 
armored vehicles in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.  Joint 
police/military patrols have been expanded and they are 
stepping up searches of public buses.  The President has also 
instructed the Minister of Finance to shift resources to 
boost the police budget. 
 
3. (SBU) The perpetrators claimed to be members of the 
\"Chinchoneros Popular Liberation Front/Movement,\" a 1980s 
communist terrorist organization that conducted armed robbery 
and kidnappings in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula in the 
1980s, including holding 85 hostages before fleeing to Cuba 
in a 1982 incident.  However, the fact that: the culprits 
spelled the name \"Cinchonero\" instead of \"Chinchonero,\" the 
group has been defunct for years, the victims were apparently 
random civilians on a public bus, and the manifesto left by 
the group (which has not been made public) criticized moves 
toward a possible reinstatement of the death penalty, all 
lead observers to believe this supposed group was not 
responsible. 
 
4. (SBU) In fact, police believe the Mara Salvatrucha gang to 
be responsible for the attack and have arrested several 
suspects accused of being involved in the massacre.  (Note: 
There is conflicting information on the exact number of 
suspects arrested.  Estimates range from four to nine.  End 
Note.)  A Mara Salvatrucha gang leader, Darwin Alexis Ramirez 
Hernandez, is under arrest in the San Pedro Sula prison as 
the principal suspect in the attack.  Police believe that the 
attack may have been planned in Comayagua.  EmbOffs are 
seeking more detailed information from police, including the 
text of the manifesto. 
 
5. (U) There were no American citizens killed or injured in 
the attack.  The Peace Corps has taken appropriate measures 
concerning the safety of its volunteers near San Pedro Sula. 
RSO and ECON will be sending a short message to the American 
business community instructing companies how to contact the 
security office with any questions. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  The attack was brutal even by the standards 
of San Pedro Sula, a city with one of the highest murder 
rates in Latin America and a history of grizzly slayings of 
multiple persons at once.  Post\'s initial assessment is that 
the GOH is likely correct in attributing responsibility for 
the attack to gangs, given past senseless violent acts 
committed by gang members to send messages to the GOH. 
Barring evidence to the contrary, Post does not believe this 
was the action of a terrorist organization. 
 
7. (C) Comment continued: The attack plays into the hands of 
the campaign of National Party presidential candidate and 
President of Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo, currently 
trailing Tegucigalpa Mayor Miguel Pastor in the lead-up to 
the February primary election.  In fact, one scurrilous rumor 
even claims Lobo orchestrated the attack to boost his 
campaign.  Lobo, whose campaign is focused on crime, has been 
taking a draconian line against crime, advocating a 
reinstatement of the death penalty, and is closely associated 
with the GOH\'s ongoing \"get tough\" crime policy, including 
the anti-gang law.  Pastor has taken a more nuanced approach 
to attacking crime that includes rehabilitation and can only 
hope not to lose ground.  An unpublished October 30 poll had 
Pastor leading Lobo by only 10 percent among Nationalists. 
The same poll, conducted in late November, has Pastor leading 
Lobo by over 20 percent.  Lobo is likely to close the gap 
again when the next poll is completed in the aftermath of the 
massacre.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"24592","12/24/2004 14:24","04TEGUCIGALPA2844","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002844 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR INL/LP, S/CT, INR/IAA, AND CA/OCS/ACS/WHA 
STATE FOR DS/ITA (KHALL) AND DS/IP/WHA (MFLYNN) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2014 
TAGS: KCRM, PGOV, SNAR, KJUS, PHUM, ASEC, CASC, KSAC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN GOVERNMENT RESPONDS TO 12/23 BUS MASSACRE 
OF 28 PEOPLE; MARA SALVATRUCHA GANG BELIEVED RESPONSIBLE 
 
REF: USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 241424Z DEC 04 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The Government of Honduras reacted with 
outrage and aggressive law enforcement efforts in the wake of 
the massacre of 28 people in a bus in San Pedro Sula December 
23.  The military is assisting the police by boosting joint 
patrols, and police have arrested several suspects accused of 
being involved in the massacre.  Despite claims by the 
culprits that they were a revolutionary group, police believe 
the Mara Salvatrucha gang to be responsible for the attack. 
End Summary. 
 
2. (SBU) The Government of Honduras reacted with outrage and 
aggressive law enforcement efforts in the wake of the 
massacre of 28 people and wounding of an equal number on a 
bus in the northern city of San Pedro Sula the evening of 
December 23.  President Ricardo Maduro has been visiting 
victims and meeting with his ministers directing the GOH\'s 
anti-crime efforts, including the implementation of the 
anti-gang law.  Both he and Minister of Public Security Oscar 
Alvarez have criticized human rights organizations for not 
expressing outrage at the violence and for repeatedly 
questioning the GOH\'s get tough policy on gangs.  Cardinal 
Oscar Rodriguez of the Catholic Church, meanwhile, has urged 
the GOH not to go overboard in its reaction to the massacre. 
There are now approximately 3,000 military members assisting 
the police through joint patrols, including deploying several 
armored vehicles in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.  Joint 
police/military patrols have been expanded and they are 
stepping up searches of public buses.  The President has also 
instructed the Minister of Finance to shift resources to 
boost the police budget. 
 
3. (SBU) The perpetrators claimed to be members of the 
\"Chinchoneros Popular Liberation Front/Movement,\" a 1980s 
communist terrorist organization that conducted armed robbery 
and kidnappings in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula in the 
1980s, including holding 85 hostages before fleeing to Cuba 
in a 1982 incident.  However, the fact that: the culprits 
spelled the name \"Cinchonero\" instead of \"Chinchonero,\" the 
group has been defunct for years, the victims were apparently 
random civilians on a public bus, and the manifesto left by 
the group (which has not been made public) criticized moves 
toward a possible reinstatement of the death penalty, all 
lead observers to believe this supposed group was not 
responsible. 
 
4. (SBU) In fact, police believe the Mara Salvatrucha gang to 
be responsible for the attack and have arrested several 
suspects accused of being involved in the massacre.  (Note: 
There is conflicting information on the exact number of 
suspects arrested.  Estimates range from four to nine.  End 
Note.)  A Mara Salvatrucha gang leader, Darwin Alexis Ramirez 
Hernandez, is under arrest in the San Pedro Sula prison as 
the principal suspect in the attack.  Police believe that the 
attack may have been planned in Comayagua.  EmbOffs are 
seeking more detailed information from police, including the 
text of the manifesto. 
 
5. (U) There were no American citizens killed or injured in 
the attack.  The Peace Corps has taken appropriate measures 
concerning the safety of its volunteers near San Pedro Sula. 
RSO and ECON will be sending a short message to the American 
business community instructing companies how to contact the 
security office with any questions. 
 
6. (C) Comment:  The attack was brutal even by the standards 
of San Pedro Sula, a city with one of the highest murder 
rates in Latin America and a history of grizzly slayings of 
multiple persons at once.  Post\'s initial assessment is that 
the GOH is likely correct in attributing responsibility for 
the attack to gangs, given past senseless violent acts 
committed by gang members to send messages to the GOH. 
Barring evidence to the contrary, Post does not believe this 
was the action of a terrorist organization. 
 
7. (C) Comment continued: The attack plays into the hands of 
the campaign of National Party presidential candidate and 
President of Congress Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo, currently 
trailing Tegucigalpa Mayor Miguel Pastor in the lead-up to 
the February primary election.  In fact, one scurrilous rumor 
even claims Lobo orchestrated the attack to boost his 
campaign.  Lobo, whose campaign is focused on crime, has been 
taking a draconian line against crime, advocating a 
reinstatement of the death penalty, and is closely associated 
with the GOH\'s ongoing \"get tough\" crime policy, including 
the anti-gang law.  Pastor has taken a more nuanced approach 
to attacking crime that includes rehabilitation and can only 
hope not to lose ground.  An unpublished October 30 poll had 
Pastor leading Lobo by only 10 percent among Nationalists. 
The same poll, conducted in late November, has Pastor leading 
Lobo by over 20 percent.  Lobo is likely to close the gap 
again when the next poll is completed in the aftermath of the 
massacre.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"24593","12/24/2004 14:24","04TEGUCIGALPA2874","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04TEGUCIGALPA2841","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR INL/LP, S/CT, INR/IAA, AND CA/OCS/ACS/WHA 
STATE FOR DS/ITA (KHALL) AND DS/IP/WHA (MFLYNN) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/30/2014 
TAGS: KCRM, PGOV, SNAR, KJUS, PHUM, ASEC, CASC, KSAC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAN MILITARY INTELLIGENCE FEELS POLICE 
RUSHING IN PINNING BUS MASSACRE BLAME ON MARA SALVATRUCHA 
GANG 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2841 
     B. USDAO TEGUCIGALPA 241424Z DEC 04 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Honduran military intelligence chief COL Efrain Ochoa 
met at his request December 30 with AMB and DCM to discuss 
his concerns about public statements made by President 
Ricardo Maduro, Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez, 
and top police officials about the massacre of 28 people in a 
bus in San Pedro Sula December 23.  Specifically, COL Ochoa 
said military intelligence believed that statements that the 
Mara Salvatrucha gang was responsible for the attack were 
premature and not yet supported by available evidence.  He 
said it was far from conclusive that the nine suspects 
currently being held, including principal suspect and Mara 
Salvatrucha gang leader, Darwin Alexis Ramirez Hernandez, 
were involved in the attack.  COL Ochoa claimed that one 
survivor of the massacre stated that the attackers in their 
actions, demeanor, and appearance, did not appear to be gang 
members.  COL Ochoa said that they appeared to be people who 
had received military training, and not just criminals.  COL 
Ochoa said military intelligence did not know who was 
responsible for the attack. 
 
2. (C) COL Ochoa said the rush to judgment was convenient, in 
keeping with the GOH\'s anti-gang focus, but may be wrong and 
in any event gave a false sense of security to the populace. 
COL Ochoa reiterated public statements made by Honduran Army 
Commanding General Orlando Velasquez that accusations that a 
military officer had supplied weapons to the attacker were 
wrong.  The name of the alleged culprit (Angel Humberto 
Urquia) was not of a military officer but rather an ex-police 
deputy inspector.  COL Ochoa also said damning statements 
about the alleged involvement of Judge Mirian Barahona may be 
premature.  Such statements stained the image of GOH 
institutions and the country\'s image, he said. 
 
3. (C) COL Ochoa said military intelligence had received 
information about possible future attacks on police and/or 
military targets in San Pedro Sula and Siguatepeque, and on 
the Presidential Palace in Tegucigalpa.  The military has not 
been able to corroborate these alleged planned attacks. 
 
4. (C) Meanwhile, Special Prosecutor for Organized Crime 
Doris Aguilar has informally requested technical assistance 
on this case.  Post may soon receive a formal request for 
assistance from her boss, Attorney General Ovidio Navarro, or 
Minister of Public Security Alvarez. 
 
5. (C) Begin Comment:  Aguilar\'s request suggests that the 
case against the suspects arrested so far may not be as 
strong as GOH officials have stated publicly, a view 
corroborated by COL Ochoa.  Post will monitor closely 
developments in this case.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"24750","12/29/2004 20:46","04TEGUCIGALPA2870","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE259661","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002870 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/ETC:HLee and EB/TPP/ABT:RSingh 
AGRICULTURE FOR USDA/FAS/BIG:JPPassino 
GUATEMALA FOR AGATT SHUETE 
SAN SALVADOR FOR DTHOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, EFIN, HO 
SUBJECT:  Honduras: Biosafety Update 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 259661 
 
1.  Summary: The GOH has introduced no new restrictive laws or 
regulations that pertain to Living Modified Organisms (LMOs) or 
biotechnology since the First Meeting of the Parties to the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety in February 2004.  Honduras 
remains generally open to the import of LMOs and biotech crops. 
However, the application of sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) 
requirements is sometimes lacking in transparency, resulting in 
uncertainty among U.S. suppliers and Honduran importers.  Several 
examples are provided below of instances in which the application 
of SPS regulations has adversely impacted U.S. companies in 2004. 
End summary. 
 
2.  Since 2002, Honduras has imposed a ban on poultry products 
from a number of states in the U.S. because of concerns over low- 
pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI).  The ban was revised and 
renewed in March 2004, in spite of World Organization for Animal 
Health (OIE) guidelines that the presence of LPAI does not 
justify trade restrictions and despite information provided to 
GOH officials by USDA indicating the dates on which depopulation 
and surveillance testing were completed in the affected states. 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates that if Honduran 
restrictions on U.S. raw poultry and poultry parts were lifted, 
U.S. producers could export an additional $10 million of poultry 
products to Honduras annually. 
 
3.  In January 2004, U.S. rice exporters complained that they 
were being forced to fumigate with methyl bromide shipments of 
U.S. rice that had false smut present before the shipment would 
be allowed into Honduras.  This restriction added costs and 
delays to the shipping and is not justifiable on food safety 
grounds.  (The presence of false smut is a quality issue, but the 
GOH imposed restrictions as if it were a health issue.)  In 
September 2004, the GOH authorities stopped requiring fumigation 
in response to information provided by APHIS on the practice. 
 
4.  The Honduran government requires that sanitary permits be 
obtained from the Ministry of Health for all imported foodstuffs 
and that all processed food products be labeled in Spanish and 
registered with the Division of Food Control (DFC) of the 
Ministry of Health.  During 2003, a U.S. supermarket chain 
complained that these regulations were not being strictly 
enforced for many of its Honduran competitors.  This lack of 
enforcement on the part of the Honduran government places any 
U.S. company that does comply with the regulations at a 
disadvantage. 
 
5.  The Embassy has also received complaints from a regional 
supermarket chain that imported more than $40 million worth of 
U.S. goods into the region in 2003 and believes the amount of its 
imports into Honduras could grow significantly if a more 
transparent and efficient process of granting sanitary permits 
existed.  Specifically, the company has complained that the 
length of time required for a sanitary permit to be granted 
(usually 2 to 3 months) is too long, that the cost of a permit 
($500 - $600) is excessive, and that the application requires 
information that is difficult to obtain and has little to do with 
the safety of the product in question. 
 
Palmer 
"
"24804","12/30/2004 17:59","04TEGUCIGALPA2873","Embassy Tegucigalpa","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE269517","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002873 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/30/2014 
TAGS: KCRM, KWMN, PHUM, SMIG, HO 
SUBJECT: CASA ALIANZA HONDURAS IS NOT LINKED TO BRUCE 
HARRIS SCANDAL; EMBASSY RECOMMENDS CONTINUED USG FUNDING 
 
REF: STATE 269517 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 d. 
 
1. (C) PolOff met November 8 with Gustavo Zelaya, Legal 
Assistance Program Coordinator for Casa Alianza.  Zelaya told 
PolOff that Casa Alianza had been fully cooperating with the 
Public Ministry investigation into the alleged crimes of Casa 
Alianza Central American Director Bruce Harris in Honduras. 
Zelaya said that Casa Alianza was also conducting an internal 
investigation, but emphasized that it was Harris and not Casa 
Alianza Honduras that were alleged to have committed wrongful 
acts. 
 
2. (C) PolOff spoke again December 29 with Zelaya, who said 
that it was Casa Alianza\'s understanding that the Public 
Ministry investigation had found no wrongdoing by Casa 
Alianza. 
 
3. (C) Special Prosecutor for Children Nora Urbina, an 
excellent Embassy contact and upcoming IVP grantee, told 
PolOff December 29 that the Public Ministry had completed its 
investigation of Casa Alianza and its various shelters and 
had found no wrongdoing.  She particularly noted that the 
Public Ministry had found no evidence of any cases of sexual 
abuse and/or exploitation.  Urbina said that the 
investigations had found that Harris, and not Casa Alianza, 
was responsible for Harris\' actions and there was no 
wrongdoing by Casa Alianza.  She declined to state what the 
Public Ministry\'s conclusions had been about whether or not 
Harris\' actions constituted crimes, as this has yet to be 
made public.  She said that the Public Ministry was still 
working on an investigation into alleged sexual abuse in the 
Catholic Church and would release the conclusions of the 
three investigations (Harris, Casa Alianza, and the Catholic 
Church) at the same time when all three were ready. 
 
4. (C) PolOff spoke December 30 with Casa Alianza Honduras 
Director Jose Manuel Capellin, who has retained the title of 
Associate Executive Director of Latin American Programs.  He 
told PolOff that, although each Casa Alianza country office 
now reports directly to Covenant House in New York, he is 
doing some regional coordination.  Capellin\'s comments echoed 
Zelaya\'s.  He made it clear that it was Casa Alianza\'s policy 
to immediately report to Honduran authorities any evidence 
that came to light about alleged child abuse or exploitation, 
as they had done in the Harris case.  Capellin reiterated 
that Casa Alianza Honduras was not culpable in any way for 
Harris\' acts. 
 
5. (C) Comment: Casa Alianza has been fully cooperative with 
Ministry of Public Security (police) and Public Ministry 
(prosecutors) in the Harris case and subsequent 
investigations, and received public praise from Minister of 
Public Security Oscar Alvarez, a man not known for showering 
praise on NGOs, for the forthright manner in which it brought 
information to Honduran authorities after Harris\' actions 
came to their attention.  Once the initial publicity over 
Harris\' actions died down, Casa Alianza appears to have been 
able to continue operating as one of the key nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) on children\'s issues in Honduras.  Post 
is in regular contact with Casa Alianza on issues such as 
gangs and rehabilitation, street children, extrajudicial 
killings, trafficking in persons and commercial sexual 
exploitation.  Post is not aware of any information that 
would led EmbOffs to recommend a cutoff of USG assistance. 
Post believes that the USG should continue supporting Casa 
Alianza Honduras.  End Comment. 
Palmer 
"
"24873","1/3/2005 18:16","05TEGUCIGALPA8","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04Tegucigalpa2765","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CAM 
STATE PASS USTR 
TREASURY FOR DDOUGLASS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, HO, IMF 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ECONOMIC REFORM: BANKING COMMISSION REFORM 
LAW IMPROVES BANK CRISIS MANAGEMENT 
 
REF: A) 04 Tegucigalpa 2765 
 
     B) 04 Tegucigalpa 2826 
     C) 03 Tegucigalpa 2062 
     D) 04 Tegucigalpa 232 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: In September 2004, at IMF insistence, the 
GOH passed four banking reform laws aimed at strengthening 
the nation\'s financial system.  This is the third in a 
series of four cables that analyze each of these laws, 
assess their impacts on the Honduran financial system, and 
outline challenges of implementation or additional needed 
reforms that remain.  Refs A and B analyzed the reform of 
the deposit insurance agency and the Central Bank; this 
cable focuses on the reform of the National Banking and 
Insurance Commission. 
 
2. (U) The new Banking Commission law makes one major change 
to Honduras\' structure for financial supervision: it 
transfers responsibility for resolving and recapitalizing 
failed banks from the deposit insurance agency, FOSEDE, to 
the Banking Commission.  While FOSEDE oversaw the closure of 
one bank and the sale of another in 2002, the cost of these 
actions was high, and there is a strong consensus that the 
Banking Commission is the appropriate entity to handle such 
cases in the future.  The new legal framework should, it is 
hoped, allow some needed consolidation of the banking sector 
to take place, while reducing the costs of unnecessary 
interventions, and keeping low the risk that a bank closure 
or liquidation would spread a panic through the system.  The 
law also makes some minor changes to the structure of the 
Commission\'s board.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Background: The Need for Reform 
------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) As summarized in ref C, a 2003 joint IMF/World Bank 
\"Financial System Stability Assessment\" for Honduras 
concluded that the Honduran banking system is \"highly 
fragile at a systemic level, impairing sustainable economic 
growth,\" and outlined several reforms needed to strengthen 
the system.  These reforms were then incorporated into the 
Letter of Intent signed by the GOH and the IMF in February 
2004 (ref D), which required the passage of four financial 
sector reform bills: the Deposit Insurance Law; the Central 
Bank of Honduras Law; the Banking Commission Law; and a new 
Financial Institutions Law. 
 
4. (U) Specific to the Banking Commission, the report found 
that the existing legal and institutional framework for 
managing banking crises was inappropriately designed, too 
costly, and inefficient.  The improvement of this framework 
was one of the four key recommendations of the report. 
Until the recent reforms, resolving and recapitalizing 
distressed banks was the responsibility of the national 
deposit insurance agency, FOSEDE.  During the last bank 
failure in Honduras in May 2002, FOSEDE took over and 
capitalized two small banks, Banco Capital and Banco 
Sogerin, using resources borrowed from the Central Bank. 
The hope was that the injection of capital and some time 
under FOSEDE\'s administration would reverse the banks\' 
deterioration.  While Sogerin was made solvent and 
subsequently sold, Banco Capital was closed and liquidated 
before the end of 2002, casting doubt on the usefulness of 
recapitalizing the bank in the first place. 
 
---------------------- 
Changes in the New Law 
---------------------- 
 
5. (U) The Banking Commission reform law and the FOSEDE 
reform law transfer the responsibility for the restitution 
of troubled banks from FOSEDE to the Banking Commission, as 
recommended by the World Bank/IMF assessment report.  As 
discussed in ref A, this move will both simplify FOSEDE\'s 
mission and remove a major financial burden, as the 
intervention by FOSEDE on behalf of Banco Capital and Banco 
Sogerin in 2002 drove FOSEDE deeply into debt with the 
Central Bank.  Furthermore, the reform is seen as a 
prudential measure:  it is the GOH hope that transferring 
responsibility for the restitution of troubled banks to the 
Banking Commission will counter the temptation to keep a 
weak bank alive with costly injections of capital in cases 
where the best course is to accept the inevitable and move 
directly to the closure and liquidation of a weak bank. 
 
6. (U) The law also makes various changes to the 
organization of the commission - modest but positive steps 
in the establishment of a modern, independent banking 
commission.  Previously, the Banking Commission had been 
made up of three members and two alternates; the new law 
removes the alternates, since, according to a Banking 
Commission official, they were drawing a salary while doing 
nothing.  The new law also tightens the requirements for who 
may serve on the commission, excluding directors or owners 
of banks or other financial institutions, any holders of non- 
performing loans, or anyone who has been sanctioned or found 
guilty of any financial crimes. 
 
------------------------- 
Profile of Honduran Banks 
------------------------- 
 
7. (U) Over the past several years, as public awareness of 
the weaknesses in the banking system has grown, Hondurans 
have increasingly concentrated their deposits in the largest 
banks.  Deposits in the top five banks operating in Honduras 
(Banco Atlantida, BGA, Banco de Occidente, Ficohsa, and 
Bamer) accounted for 55 percent of deposits in 1999, 66 
percent in 2002, and 69 percent as of September 2004 (see 
table below). 
 
                           Total        Total        Total 
Bank                      Assets        Loans      Deposits 
----                      ------        -----      -------- 
Banco Atlantida          15,592.5      9,085.1      9,807.8 
BGA                      15,281.3      7,945.2      8,282.3 
Banco de Occidente       12,547.8      5,762.1      9,403.2 
Ficohsa                  12,182.3      7,110.1      7,583.3 
Banco Mercantil (Bamer)  10,223.9      6,216.0      6,606.8 
Banco del Pais            9,899.9      5,564.6      6,303.2 
BAC Honduras              6,170.5      2,406.3      1,928.3 
Banco Uno                 2,770.3      1,502.6      1,636.6 
Banco Continental         2,458.1      1,260.9      1,210.8 
Banhcafe                  2,367.4        790.4      1,360.8 
Banco Promerica           2,087.0        876.7      1,039.0 
Ficensa                   2,042.4      1,464.5      1,099.8 
Banco de los Trabajadores 2,022.1      1,451.4        978.5 
Banco de Honduras 
 (Citibank)               1,639.5        591.3      1,001.0 
Lloyds (Cuscatlan)        1,576.8        521.3      1,107.1 
Banco Futuro              1,363.4        688.2        679.8 
 
TOTAL                   100,225.2     53,236.7     60,028.3 
 
All figures in millions of Lempiras, data as of September 
2004. (At that time, USD 1 = 18.43 Lempiras) 
 
Source: National Banking and Insurance Commission. 
 
----------------------- 
A More Stable Framework 
----------------------- 
 
8. (SBU) Comment: There is a widespread consensus among both 
private bankers and government officials that the Honduran 
banking sector, with sixteen different national and regional 
banks operating in a country of just seven million people, 
is overcrowded and ripe for further consolidation.  However, 
the elimination of two very minor banks in 2002 was handled 
in a manner that was both inefficient and costly.  Under the 
new legal framework established by the September laws, the 
hope is that some consolidation can be allowed to take 
place, at a lower cost to the government than was the case 
in 2002, and while minimizing the risk that a bank closure 
or liquidation would spread a panic through the system.  End 
Comment. 
 
Palmer 
"
"24924","1/4/2005 18:57","05TEGUCIGALPA23","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04State273018","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEGUCIGALPA 000023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN AND H:JHAGAN 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP, PREL, PGOV, ETRD, ECON, SNAR, EAID, KJUS, HO 
SUBJECT: Scenesetter for CoDel Weller\'s January 16-18 Visit 
to Honduras 
 
REF: A) 04 State 273018 
 
1. (U) Summary: Post welcomes the visit of CoDel Weller to 
Honduras January 16-18.  Honduran President Ricardo Maduro, 
almost three years through his constitutionally-mandated 
single four-year term, faces a difficult task leading one of 
the poorest countries in Latin America.  However, there were 
several positive economic developments in 2004, including 
the signing of an agreement with the IMF in February, the 
negotiation of $147 million of debt forgiveness from Paris 
Club creditors in April, the signing of the U.S.-Central 
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) with the United States 
in May, and Honduras\' selection as one of sixteen countries 
eligible to apply for assistance under the $2.2 billion 
Millennium Challenge Account. 
 
2. (SBU) Bilateral relations between the U.S. and Honduras 
are excellent.  Honduras\' support for the Global War on 
Terrorism is steadfast, and the Government of Honduras (GOH) 
is among the group of nations that sent troops to Iraq in 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, although these troops 
have since returned.  Honduras was the first country in the 
Western Hemisphere to sign and ratify an ICC Article 98 
Agreement with the United States.  Honduras also introduced 
a UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba, 
which passed in April 2004.  End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
Economic Overview 
----------------- 
 
3. (U) Honduras, with a per capita income of $950, is the 
third poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, ahead of 
only Nicaragua and Haiti.  The economy grew by 3.2 percent 
in 2003, and by an estimated 4.0 to 4.5 percent in 2004. 
However, over the past decade, the rate of economic growth 
has been only slightly faster than the rate of population 
growth, which is 2.7 percent per year.  Social indicators 
are gradually improving, but nearly two-thirds of all 
Hondurans still live in poverty, and average education 
levels are very low. 
 
4. (U) Historically, industrial development in Honduras was 
limited, and the economy was long dependent on exports of 
coffee and bananas.  In the past fifteen years, however, the 
economy has diversified, with the development of non- 
traditional exports such as shrimp and melons, an increase 
in tourism, and the establishment of a strong maquila 
industry (primarily textiles and assembly of apparel for re- 
export).  Investment incentives aimed at attracting foreign 
capital in export industries have been introduced.  In 
recent years, the coffee industry has suffered from low 
world prices, and the banana industry was severely damaged 
by Hurricane Mitch in 1998.  Banana production has yet to 
reach pre-Mitch levels, and coffee and bananas now account 
for less than 15 percent of Honduran export earnings. 
 
5. (SBU) Despite the recent economic diversification, there 
continue to be a large subsistence farmer population with 
few economic opportunities (other than illegal immigration 
to the U.S.).  Furthermore, the Honduran government\'s desire 
to attract new types of foreign investment has been hindered 
by a wide range of investment climate and competitiveness 
problems. 
 
6. (U) Family remittances from Hondurans living abroad, 
particularly the U.S., grew by 19 percent to $860 million in 
2003, and, at an estimated 1 billion in 2004, will soon pass 
the maquila sector as the country\'s largest source of 
foreign exchange.  The U.S. is Honduras\' largest trading 
partner.  The roughly 150 U.S. companies that do business in 
Honduras constitute the largest block of foreign direct 
investors. 
 
----------------------- 
The Importance of CAFTA 
----------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) In 2003 and 2004, the U.S.-Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA) was negotiated among the United 
States, Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa 
Rica, and the Dominican Republic.  The agreement was signed 
by trade ministers of the participating countries 
(Ambassador Zoellick of USTR signed for the U.S.) in 
Washington in May 2004.  The agreement now awaits approval 
by the Congresses of the participating countries; only El 
Salvador has ratified the agreement so far, and the 
agreement will not enter into force until it is also 
ratified by the U.S. 
 
8. (SBU) In Honduras, CAFTA is strongly supported by most of 
the private sector, especially the textile and apparel 
industry, and by the Maduro administration, which hopes to 
bring CAFTA to Congress for a vote before the end of the 
legislative year on January 20.  Opposition to CAFTA comes 
from NGOs, labor unions, a small leftist political party, 
and most especially farmers, who are concerned that the 
Honduran agricultural sector will be unable to compete with 
subsidized U.S. agricultural products.  Despite this 
opposition, which has grown more vocal in recent weeks as 
the prospect of a Congressional vote has drawn nearer, 
Honduran ratification is expected to be relatively easy. 
 
9. (SBU) Maduro\'s team hopes that CAFTA, once in effect, 
will lead to faster economic growth and serve as a catalyst 
for regional economic cooperation and integration.  The 
agreement is considered to be absolutely vital to the 
survival of the textile and apparel sector in Honduras now 
that worldwide quotas have been eliminated.  It is estimated 
that in 2004 Honduras received at least $200 million in new 
foreign investment, most of it from the United States, as a 
result of the anticipated benefits of CAFTA.  The 
agreement\'s agricultural chapter will liberalize 
agricultural trade gradually while protecting Honduran 
farmers from sudden disruptions caused by subsidized 
imports.  The agreement also will spur modernization in 
government procurement and services and will help lock in 
the GOH\'s structural reforms in areas such as 
telecommunications. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Millennium Challenge Account Proposal 
------------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) In 2004, Honduras was chosen as one of sixteen 
countries eligible (out of 75 considered) to apply for 
assistance under the $2.2 billion Millennium Challenge 
Account (MCA).  Countries were selected based upon past and 
current policy performance in the areas of governing justly, 
investing in their own people, and promoting economic 
freedom.  In August 2004, after consulting with members of 
civil society and the private sector, the GOH presented to 
the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) a proposal for 
$257.5 million, focusing on highway infrastructure and 
integrated rural development.  President Maduro is fully 
engaged on this issue and has made it clear that negotiation 
of a compact with the MCC is a top priority in the months 
ahead.  MCC representatives have made numerous visits to 
Honduras since June 2004, have been impressed with the 
Honduran efforts so far, and are optimistic that Honduras 
might be one of the first countries to receive MCA 
assistance. 
 
----------------------------- 
IMF Agreement and Debt Relief 
----------------------------- 
 
11. (U) In February 2004, after almost two years of 
negotiations, the Maduro Administration signed a Letter of 
Intent with the International Monetary Fund, which was later 
approved by the IMF\'s Executive Board, for a new three-year 
arrangement for Honduras under the Poverty Reduction and 
Growth Facility (PRGF).  The first review of the program was 
conducted in September 2004, and the IMF found that 
Honduras\' performance was strong.  The IMF expects the GOH 
to reach its Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
completion point by mid-2005 with good PRGF implementation. 
In April 2004, Honduras reached agreement with Paris Club 
creditors on the immediate cancellation of $147 million in 
debt payments and the restructuring of over $200 million 
more.  Honduras has committed to devote resources freed by 
this treatment to priority areas outlined in the country\'s 
poverty reduction strategy. 
 
------------------------- 
Political/Military Issues 
------------------------- 
 
12. (SBU) President Maduro is a solid supporter of the U.S. 
on the Global War on Terrorism.  The GOH has responded 
quickly to all USG requests regarding terrorist threats and 
financing, although to date, no terrorist assets have been 
found in Honduran financial institutions.  Honduras is a 
party to all but two UN and OAS counter-terrorism 
conventions and protocols (the remaining two are awaiting 
publication in the Honduran federal register) and has also 
been aggressive in upgrading port security.  Honduras was 
also the first country in the Western Hemisphere to sign and 
ratify an International Criminal Court (ICC) Article 98 
Agreement with the United States. 
 
13. (U) Honduras has a civilian Minister of Defense and a 
Chief of the Joint Staff who heads the Honduran Armed Forces 
(HOAF).  In January 1999, the constitution was amended to 
abolish the position of military commander-in-chief of HOAF, 
thus codifying civilian authority over the military. 
Civilian control over the HOAF is complete, and 
civil/military relations are good.  This transition has 
resulted in greater transparency and fiscal accountability. 
The HOAF has a new focus on trans-national threats, 
including counter-terrorism, drug trafficking, and combating 
international criminal organizations.  The HOAF is 
interested in establishing an ability to further increase 
its participation in international peacekeeping operations. 
Honduras also stands ready to participate in a regional arms 
\"rationalization\" process but has announced that it will not 
negotiate on a bilateral basis. 
 
------------------------ 
Election Season Underway 
------------------------ 
 
14. (U) Honduras\' open primary election for national and 
local races is scheduled for February 20, with general 
elections set for November 27.  Under a new Electoral law 
reform passed early in 2004, Honduran voters will be able to 
select candidates for the National Congress in the elections 
based not only on their names but also on their photographs, 
a process without precedent in Honduras.  This new method 
for the direct election of congressional (and city council) 
members contrasts with the old system whereby candidates 
were elected on party rank-ordered congressional lists. 
Only the National and Liberal Parties will participate in 
the primary election - the other three small parties will 
just participate in the general election.  USAID and other 
international donors will support the elections with about 
USD four million.  A Supreme Electoral Tribunal, managed by 
political party appointees, has national authority to run 
the elections. 
 
15. (SBU) The race has tightened for presidential nomination 
on the Nationalist\'s side, with President of Congress 
Porfirio \"Pepe\" Lobo pulling closer to the leader, 
Tegucigalpa Mayor Miguel Pastor.  The race will likely come 
down to the wire.  On the Liberal side, politician Mel 
Zelaya is pulling away from the rest of the pack and looks 
likely to win the nomination.  Pastor is running as the 
leader of a new generation and is in command of the media 
aspects of politicking, while Lobo is for all intents and 
purposes the current administration\'s candidate, although 
the GOH has not said so publicly or in private, and has the 
support of the traditional National Party machine.  Formal 
campaigning began in January, and it remains to be seen if 
candidates that project well in TV spots or small meetings 
can rouse support from the electorate at campaign events. 
All major candidates support CAFTA and have made clear that 
the U.S. is the key partner for Honduras. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Iraq, Haiti, and Other Key Foreign Policy Goals 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
16. (SBU) The GOH is very supportive of U.S. foreign policy 
goals, including the reconstruction of Iraq.  In support of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), the GOH deployed some 370 
troops to the vicinity of An Najaf as part of the Spanish 
Brigade operating under the Polish Division.  However, 
following Spain\'s decision to withdraw its troops in April 
2004, Honduras did likewise, although Honduras\' withdrawal 
was not linked to the Spanish decision.  Previously, 
Secretary Powell, CJCS GEN Myers, and Secretary Rumsfeld all 
 
SIPDIS 
visited Honduras in 2003 to thank the GOH for its support of 
OIF.  Their visits were well received and provided important 
political support for Maduro\'s Iraq policy.  As in most of 
the region, the general public overwhelmingly opposed the 
Honduran deployment.  While Honduras has left Iraq, the GOH 
is considering deploying troops to Haiti in support of UN 
peacekeeping operations there.  Honduras is also very 
supportive at the UN, sharing our views on resolutions 
covering such key issues as human rights, human cloning, and 
the Middle East.  Honduras also introduced a UN Commission 
on Human Rights (UNCHR) resolution on Cuba, which passed in 
April 2004. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Soto Cano Air Base - Joint Task Force Bravo 
------------------------------------------- 
 
17. (SBU) About five hundred U.S. service men and women and 
fourteen civilian DOD employees are currently stationed at 
Honduras\' Soto Cano Air Base under the command of the 
Combatant Commander, U.S. Southern Command (SOUTHCOM), as 
Joint Task Force Bravo.  In 1954, the USG and GOH signed a 
Bilateral Military Assistance Agreement that set forth their 
intention to work closely together to foster peace and 
security in the western hemisphere.  The ICC Article 98 
Agreement with Honduras is therefore a particularly 
important accomplishment and enables our military forces to 
continue to work together in such areas as disaster relief, 
joint training exercises, and counternarcotics missions. 
 
---------------- 
Counternarcotics 
---------------- 
 
18. (U) Honduras\' geography places it squarely in the middle 
of a major illegal drug trans-shipment zone, and the trans- 
shipment of cocaine through Honduras by air, land, and 
maritime routes continues.  However, this trade has now 
begun to face significant disruptions.  In 2003, overall 
seizures in Honduras of approximately 6,000 kilos were 
higher than the past five years combined, and in 2004, 
Honduras seized approximately 3,869 kilos of cocaine. 
 
19. (SBU) Corruption within the police, Public Ministry 
(prosecutors), and the judiciary remains a primary 
impediment to successful law enforcement cooperation.  The 
National Council for the Fight Against Drug Trafficking 
(CNCN) has renewed its commitment to lead the country\'s 
counternarcotics efforts.  Available funds to implement a 
government approved master counternarcotics plan, though, 
remain severely limited. 
 
---------------- 
Border Relations 
---------------- 
 
20. (SBU) Honduras has land border disputes with El Salvador 
and Nicaragua and some of its seven maritime neighbors. 
Maduro has been personally engaged with his Presidential 
counterparts to address these issues.  The Gulf of Fonseca 
on the Pacific coast has been a particularly difficult area. 
A 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruling laid out 
a shared area of control in the Gulf of Fonseca and 
established the land border between Honduras and El 
Salvador, although El Salvador has been slow to implement 
the ruling.  In September 2002, El Salvador requested a 
revision of the 1992 ICJ ruling.  In December 2003, the ICJ 
ruled against the Salvadoran appeal, bringing an end to the 
case.  The Organization of American States (as a neutral 
third party) is providing both nations technical assistance 
to help them implement the non-disputed elements of the 
ICJ\'s ruling. 
 
21. (SBU) On the Caribbean coast, Honduras and Nicaragua 
have a long-standing maritime border dispute over the 15th 
parallel.  In the past, the dispute has threatened to derail 
trilateral counternarcotics operations.  In 1999, Honduras 
provoked Nicaraguan retaliation when it signed a maritime 
treaty with Colombia recognizing the 15th parallel as its 
maritime border.  Nicaragua subsequently filed an ICJ case 
over the maritime border and, more importantly, in 1999 
slapped a punitive 35 percent tariff on Honduran goods. 
This tariff remained in place until April 2003 despite a 
Central American Court of Justice ruling that it was 
illegal.  Only after Honduras responded with a retaliatory 
tariff, threatening Nicaraguan exports, did Managua rescind 
the tax.  Cuba suspended negotiations with Honduras over a 
maritime boundary agreement near completion due to the GOH\'s 
introduction of the UNCHR resolution on Cuba in 2004. 
 
------------- 
Port Security 
------------- 
 
22. (U) The GOH has taken a very pro-active stance in 
addressing port security issues, and met the International 
Maritime Organization\'s (IMO) July 1, 2004 deadline to 
certify its ports as meeting the new, more stringent port 
security standards under the International Ship and Port 
Facility Security Code (ISPS) and Maritime Transportation 
Security Act of 2002.  Puerto Cortes is the largest port on 
the Caribbean side of the Central American isthmus and 
currently provides container service to the U.S. market, not 
just for Honduran exports, but also for goods from 
Guatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua.  The National Port 
Authority (ENP) has invested almost $10 million in port 
security enhancements (the bulk of the sum was in severance 
payments to its aged and unqualified union security 
workforce). 
 
23. (U) The GOH hosted a successful visit (the first in the 
Western Hemisphere) of a U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) port 
security program team June 2004.  The team came to assess 
Honduras\' implementation of the ISPS.  It reviewed security 
practices at five national ports, met with the national 
commission on port security, and discussed Honduran port 
security regulations with the newly created (per the ISPS) 
national port security authority.  The USCG team reported 
that it had identified several very innovative and efficient 
security practices that it would carry back to the port 
facilities in the U.S. as \"best security practices\". 
 
-------------------------------- 
Public Security and Human Rights 
-------------------------------- 
 
24. (SBU) Upon taking office in January 2002, President 
Maduro\'s first act was to fulfill his main campaign promise 
-- a zero tolerance campaign against the country\'s 
intolerably high crime situation.  He deployed more than 
5,000 soldiers to the streets to support the police.  The 
public responded enthusiastically.  However, after initial 
success of establishing a visible police presence, violent 
crime, particularly homicides, continued at a high rate.  On 
December 23, 2004, gunmen killed 28 people and wounded an 
equal number on a bus in Chamelecon (near San Pedro Sula in 
northern Honduras).  Police believe that the Mara 
Salvatrucha gang was responsible for the massacre.  The U.S. 
is helping the Maduro government establish an anti- 
kidnapping unit, increase intake/training of police 
recruits, create a model tourist police force, boost its 
counternarcotics efforts, expand the Frontier Police, and 
improve prosecutorial and forensic capacities.  The 
country\'s geographic position makes it an obvious strategic 
transit point for narcotics trafficking, alien smuggling 
operations, trafficking in persons, and other organized 
crime activities. 
 
25. (SBU) Extrajudicial killings, especially of children and 
young adults since 1998, have been a source of serious 
concern, and only recently has the GOH begun to take steps 
to investigate the hundreds of unsolved cases.  Human rights 
groups regularly accuse former security force officials and 
the business community of colluding to organize \"death 
squads\" to commit these summary and arbitrary executions. 
In April 2003, 68 persons, 61 of them gang members, were 
killed in a violent incident at El Porvenir prison near La 
Ceiba.  Reports produced by the Public Ministry, a Special 
Commission of the Honduran National Council for Internal 
Security (CONASIN), and the Human Rights Commissioner put 
the blame for the vast majority of deaths on government 
security forces (police and military under police command) 
and non-gang member inmate trusties.  In May 2004, the 
Public Ministry filed criminal charges against 51 people for 
alleged involvement in the deaths.  The Deputy Warden, who 
was in charge at the time of the incident, was convicted in 
December 2004 of murder and attempted murder and faces a 
minimum sentence of 25 years in prison.  In a separate 
incident in May 2004, a fire at the Granja Penal prison in 
San Pedro Sula claimed the lives of 104 gang members. 
Although it appears GOH authorities were not complicit in 
this event, timely assistance to inmates that could have 
prevented many deaths was withheld due to security concerns. 
 
26. (SBU) While Honduran labor law is deficient in some 
areas with respect to International Labor Organization core 
conventions, the main issue for the protection of labor 
rights, including freedom of association and collective 
bargaining, is the effective enforcement of existing laws. 
There are serious problems with child labor in several 
industries, particularly melon, coffee, and sugar cane (but 
not in the maquila sector), as well as in the informal 
economy, and trafficking in persons of women and children 
for commercial sexual exploitation in the U.S., Central 
America, and Mexico.  USAID and Peace Corps have both been 
involved in HIV/AIDS prevention. 
 
-------------------------- 
Corruption and Rule of Law 
-------------------------- 
 
27. (SBU) Honduras remains one of the most corrupt countries 
in the Western Hemisphere and was recently ranked 114 out of 
146 countries surveyed by Transparency International, an NGO 
that tracks international corruption issues.  Only Bolivia, 
Guatemala, Haiti, and Paraguay scored lower in the Western 
Hemisphere.  U.S. policy to combat endemic corruption has 
struck a nerve in Honduras, especially any mention of our 
visa revocation authorities.  Maduro has stated he is 
willing to address corruption, even if it will cost him 
political support within his party, but real achievements to 
date have been few.  Of particular concern are individual 
judges and prosecutors who solicit and/or remain open to 
offers of bribes.  The Attorney General\'s office has been 
unwilling, or unable, to prosecute high-profile cases, with 
the notable exception of several sitting congressmen 
recently accused of drug trafficking and other offenses. 
Until recently, immunity from prosecution for government 
officials precluded action again senior officials.  Given 
the scope of the problem, any public discussion about the 
country\'s pervasive corruption is a positive development. 
 
-------------- 
USAID Programs 
-------------- 
 
28. (SBU) The USAID Central America and Mexico (CAM) 
Regional Strategy focuses bilateral and regional USAID 
investment on the three performance arenas of Ruling Justly, 
Economic Freedom, and Investing in People and is closely 
aligned with the goals of the Millennium Challenge 
Corporation (MCC).  USAID supports the Ruling Justly 
objective by increasing the responsiveness and 
accountability of public institutions, while also building 
on successful municipal development programs to create 
better models for governance, justice reforms, and 
transparency and participation.  In the arena of Economic 
Freedom, there is a concerted focus on trade policy and 
preparations to ready Honduras\' participation in the CAFTA 
and FTAA.  USAID strives to bridge agricultural production 
in rural areas with relatively higher value processing and 
marketing enterprises in urban centers.  The integrated 
natural resource management program emphasizes sustainable 
land and water-use, biodiversity, and reduced disaster 
vulnerability.  Also, to support the Investing in People 
objective, the health program aims toward improving 
reproductive health, family planning, child survival, 
prevention of HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases, and 
household food security.  Seeking a better-educated Honduran 
work force through expanded access at the pre-school, middle 
school, and upper secondary levels (grades 10-11) is done 
using alternative delivery systems and implementing the 
Centers for Excellence in Teacher Training (CETT) 
Presidential Initiative.  USAID is also assisting GOH 
efforts to develop quality education standards, testing, and 
evaluation. 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
29. (SBU) An estimated 800,000 Hondurans live in the U.S., 
both legally and illegally, a fact that places immigration 
issues high on the bilateral agenda.  (The population of 
Honduras is about 7 million.)  Approximately 82,000 of these 
Hondurans currently enjoy Temporary Protected Status (TPS), 
which was granted to certain Hondurans who were in the 
United States at the time of Hurricane Mitch in 1998.  In 
October 2004, the Department of Homeland Security extended 
TPS for these Hondurans until July 2006, a move that the GOH 
deeply appreciated.  The GOH is also very interested in any 
possible U.S. Congressional action on immigration reform. 
 
30. (SBU) With approximately 11,000 American citizens 
residing in Honduras (this includes American citizens that 
also hold Honduran citizenship) and many thousands visiting 
Honduras annually for tourism and business, American Citizen 
Services are a key part of the Embassy\'s work.  Since 1995, 
40 American citizens have been murdered in Honduras.  There 
was not much progress on most of these cases until 2003, but 
there have now been 26 convictions in thirteen cases.  Some 
progress has been made on extradition cases involving 
American citizens residing in Honduras who are wanted for 
felonies in the United States. 
------------------- 
Embassy Tegucigalpa 
------------------- 
 
31. (SBU) Embassy Tegucigalpa is a medium-sized post, 
employing 119 U.S. citizens and 281 Hondurans among 20 USG 
agencies.  The Peace Corps program, with 220 volunteers, is 
one of the world\'s largest, and the USAID mission has a FY05 
budget of $40.6 million.  The Mission maintains a Consular 
Agent in Honduras\' second city and industrial center, San 
Pedro Sula. 
 
Palmer 
"
"24926","1/4/2005 21:35","05TEGUCIGALPA26","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","05STATE269653","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, L, IO, EB, INL, AND NP 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, PREL, KTIA, PARM, EAIR, EWWT, KCRM, ASEC, HO 
SUBJECT: HONDURAS APPROVED FOUR OUTSTANDING 
COUNTERTERRORISM CONVENTIONS/PROTOCOLS IN 2004; DECREES FOR 
TWO PENDING SIGNATURE AND PUBLICATION IN FEDERAL REGISTER 
 
REF: A. STATE 269653 
 
     B. 03 TEGUCIGALPA 2656 
     C. OLSEN/MAKENS E-MAIL 02/03/03 (NOTAL) 
     D. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 3318 
 
1. Summary: During 2004, the GOH ratified two outstanding OAS 
counterterrorism (CT) conventions and achieved congressional 
approval of the last two outstanding international 
conventions/protocols.  The GOH is now a party to 10 
international and two regional CT conventions and will soon 
be a party to the last two international 
conventions/protocols.  Persistent efforts by EmbOffs and 
visiting USG officials urging GOH officials to sign/ratify 
all outstanding CT conventions have paid off.  End Summary. 
 
2. While a staunch ally in the War on Terrorism, Honduras had 
been slow to sign and ratify outstanding counterterrorism 
(CT) conventions.  In late December 2002, the GOH completed 
all necessary domestic steps to become party to two 
outstanding CT conventions (ref C).  In late October/early 
November 2003, the GOH completed all necessary domestic steps 
to become party to three additional CT conventions (ref B). 
Since then EmbOffs, and visiting USG officials, have 
continuously raised the CT conventions with President Ricardo 
Maduro, multiple senior MFA officials, Minister of the 
Presidency Luis Cosenza, and President of Congress Porfirio 
\"Pepe\" Lobo.  PolOffs have met and spoken repeatedly with 
officials in the MFA\'s Directorate General for Treaties and 
legal advisors to Cosenza. 
 
GOH Ratified Two OAS CT Conventions in 2004 
------------------------------------------- 
 
3. The following two Organization of American States (OAS) CT 
conventions were approved by Congress in December 
2003/January 2004, but it took until February and July 
respectively for the decrees to be finalized, signed by 
President Maduro, and published in La Gaceta (the Honduran 
equivalent of the Federal Register): 
-- 1971 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of 
Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and 
Related Extortion that are of International Significance 
(signed by the GOH February 2, 1971), and 
-- 2002 OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of 
Terrorism (signed by the GOH June 3, 2002). 
 
Near Ratification of IMO CT Convention and Protocol 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
4. The following International Maritime Organization (IMO) CT 
convention and protocol were approved by Congress in February 
2004, but it took until August for the decrees to be 
completed by the Executive Branch and until late December for 
the decrees to be approved by Congress.  The decrees are 
currently pending signature by congressional leadership and 
then will be forwarded for signature by President Maduro and 
publication in La Gaceta.  The convention and protocol are: 
-- 1988 Convention for the Suppression on Unlawful Acts 
Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (SUA Convention), 
and 
-- 1988 Protocol for the Suppression on Unlawful Acts Against 
the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental 
Shelf (SUA Protocol). 
 
Honduras Soon to be Party to All CT Conventions/Protocols 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
5. The GOH was already a party to the following 10 
international counterterrorism conventions: 
-- 1963 Tokyo Convention on Offenses and Certain Other Acts 
Committed Onboard Aircraft 
-- 1970 Hague Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful 
Seizure of Aircraft 
-- 1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful 
Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation 
-- 1973 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes 
Against Internationally Protected Persons 
-- 1979 Convention Against the Taking of Hostages 
-- 1980 Convention on the Physical Protection on Nuclear 
Materials 
-- 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of 
Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation 
-- 1991 Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for 
the Purpose of Detection 
-- 1997 Convention for the Suppression on Terrorist Bombings, 
and 
-- 1999 Convention on the Suppression of Financing of 
Terrorism. 
 
6. With the addition of the two aforementioned OAS CT 
conventions and the upcoming addition of the IMO convention 
and protocol, the GOH will become party to all 12 
international CT conventions and two regional CT conventions. 
 Post will continue to urge the GOH to rapidly sign and 
publish the last two decrees to bring this process to a close. 
Palmer 
"
"25097","1/7/2005 18:57","05TEGUCIGALPA45","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000045 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA AND TPS, JANUARY 4, 2005 
 
 
1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily \"El 
Heraldo\" on 1/3, entitled \"CAFTA with the U.S.\"  \"The year 
we have just begun brings several challenges for all 
Hondurans, and one of them is the ratification of CAFTA, an 
agreement with the biggest world power and our most 
important trading partner.\" 
 
\"The fact that we\'re a small and developing country forces 
us to insert ourselves into the process of globalization as 
soon as we can, since it\'s a worldwide trend no country can 
afford to be left out of.\" 
 
\"We must accept that getting into the movement of free trade 
isn\'t an option, it\'s indispensable, and even though we may 
be left out, it wouldn\'t be wise to do so because it would 
mean to be left practically isolated...  So, our Congress 
should ratify CAFTA as soon as possible.\" 
 
2. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily \"La Tribuna\" 
on 1/4, entitled \"TPS and CAFTA.\"  \"Before knowing the 
results of the U.S. presidential elections, President Bush 
made the courageous decision to grant a new extension of TPS 
for Hondurans.  Bush was reelected, among other factors, 
because he achieved the highest support from Hispanics yet 
among Republican candidates.\" 
 
\"If the U.S. President gambled on the immigrants, 
considering that the Hispanic population is growing in 
importance and is becoming more determinant each time in the 
electoral process, it is likely that he will also use his 
influence to ensure the approval of CAFTA by the U.S. 
Congress.\" 
 
\"Here in Honduras, CAFTA wasn\'t ratified during the holiday 
season as expected, despite the fact that several 
businessmen believed it would happen without much 
opposition.  Right now, the situation is uncertain, it\'s 
unclear whether ratification will come after Congress begins 
the new legislative session or if it will be postponed until 
after the primary elections in February.\" 
 
\"On the immigration issue, now that Bush is about to start 
his second term, the opportunity has come for Central 
Americans to obtain an amnesty or another kind of permanent 
solution.  If we let time go by in the hopes of getting more 
extensions, it may be too late.\" 
 
Palmer 
"
"25098","1/7/2005 20:01","05TEGUCIGALPA47","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

072001Z Jan 05
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 000047 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEA HQS PLS PASS TO SARI; OEM/MCABE, BOND, HUTCHINSON, 
HARRINGTON, CEREN, CERNIGLIA, GARCIA, MENDEZ; 
SOD/OSM/BELOVICH; FOM/OWEN 
DEA MEXICO FOR HOLIFIELD, BAEZA, GARAY AND WHITE 
STATE FOR INL ONLY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: N/A 
SUBJECT: SEIZURE OF $51,620 U.S. CURRENCY AND THE ARREST OF 
SIX INDIVIDUALS  TI-05-0002/UEZ1I;COLMER-LACAYO,EDUARDO 
CCX:GFTI-05-9276/OEZ1I; MONEY LAUNDERING 
GFAN-04-8002; OPERATION KNIGHT MOVES 
GFTI-98-8001/WEC1F; OPERATION WAHOO 
GFTI-05-9154; HONDURAS 
 
 
SUMMARY CASE FILE 
 
DEFENDANTS 
 
Name:FAGOT-Jardines, Edison David 
DPOB:43 YOA- UNKNOWN 
Gender: Male 
 
Name: BOLANOS, Cibio Misael 
DPOB: 36 YOA-UNKNOWN 
Gender: Male 
 
COLOMER-Lacayo, Eduardo 
Age: 40 YOA-UNKNOWN 
Gender: Male 
 
POWELL, Arbin Bordas 
Age: 19 YOA-UNKNOWN 
Gender: Male 
 
ZELAYA, Luis Santiago 
Age: 21 YOA-UNKNOWN 
Gender: Male 
 
FLORES, Lisa Iveth 
AGE: 17 YOA-UNKNOWN 
Gender: Female 
 
2.  JUDICIAL DISTRICT 
Republic of Honduras 
 
3.  DATE/TIME/PLACE 
January 5, 2005, 0500 at Barra de Caratasca, Gracias A Dios, 
Honduras. 
 
4.  DRUG EXHIBTS 
None. 
 
5.  NON-DRUG EXHIBITS 
Exhibit-N-1: $51,620 in U.S.Currency. 
 
CUSTODY OF EVIDENCE: 
Exhibit N-1 described above was processed in accordance with 
Honduran law enforcement administrative procedures. 
 
6.  ACTION ON DEFENDANTS 
All of the above named defendants were arrested in violation 
of Honduran Financial reporting statutes.  All arrested are 
pending adjudication of charges. 
 
7.  WITNESSES 
Honduran Naval Officer, Milton Roldan Meza-Sanchez. 
 
DETAILS: 
 
8. (U) During December of 2004, the Tegucigalpa Country 
Office(TCO) received a substantial increase in intelligence 
information concerning the maritime smuggling of cocaine into 
the coastal area of La Moskitia, Honduras, located in the 
remote north east coast bordering Nicaragua.  The information 
came from several independent sources. 
 
9.  (U) In response to this information, the TCO contacted 
the Navy and coordinated an increase of Navy patrols along 
the north coast, in conjunction with TCO-initiated ground 
operations that were being conducted by the TCO vetted unit 
and elements of the Frontier police. 
 
10.  (U) On December 31, 2004, C/A Mark Discenza and S/A Tony 
Sanes met with Honduran Navy Commander Jose Eduardo 
Espinal-Paz.  At the TCO\'s request, Commander Espinal agreed 
to continue the Navy\'s increased patrols, especially, along 
the northeastern coastline area of the Department of Gracias 
A Dios, HD. 
 
11. (U) On January 5, 2005, a Honduran naval vessel 
conducting a maritime patrol in the vicinity of Barra de 
Caratasca detained and searched a 25 foot, white go-fast 
boat.  A subsquent search of the go-fast resulted in the 
seizure of $51,620, and the arrest of 6 individuals aboard. 
Although cocaine residue was found on the vessel, no 
measurable quatities were discovered.  The incident was 
reported to the Honduran police and the Prosecutors office in 
Puerto Lempira. Honduran Prosecutors authorized the arrest of 
the above defendants. 
 
12.  (U) It must be noted, that although the Honduran Navy 
has always been willing to act on drug trafficking 
intelligence provided by DEA, its consistency has been 
intermittent at best for lack of fuel.  Because fuel provided 
through INL funding and DEA intelligence were part of the 
equation,  this particular operation by the Honduran Navy 
yielded six arrests and a seizure of $51,620. 
 
13.  (U) On the same day, the Honduran Navy encountered the 
Honduran flagged vessel Sheena MC II in the vicinity of 
Limon, Honduras. The Sheena MC II is owned by Bob Ward MCNAB 
(NADDIS 887780), a suspected narcotic smuggler. As the 
Honduran Navy attempted to stop the vessel, it proceeded to 
increase its speed in effort to evade capture.  The Honduran 
Navy pursued the Sheena MC II for an hour until it was able 
to stop and board the vessel.  A search of the vessel was 
negative, but the vessel was found to be in violation of two 
Honduran maritime regulations. The vessel was cited for the 
maritime violations and released by the Honduran Navy. 
 
14. (U) Subsequently, a high level Honduran Navy official 
received a call from Honduran Congressman Kerry Evans Mcnab 
(related to Bob MCNAB) demanding the justification for 
detaining and boarding the vessel at sea.  It should be noted 
that U.S. Embassy Tegucigalpa revoked Congressman McNab\'s 
visa in August 2002, because of his attempts to have the 
Honduran Navy release another vessel that was under suspicion 
for transporting contraband. 
 
15.  The TCO will report any information that becomes 
available regarding this matter. 
 
16.  (U) This cable is submitted in lieu of a DEA6 pursuant 
to the DEA Agents Manual, Section 6242.11. 
 
17.  (U) Any questions or replies should be directed to CA 
John M. Discenza, SA Tony Sanes, and/or IA John Domingue at 
(301)985-9321. 
 
 
INDEXING 
 
1. FAGOT-Jardines, Edison David-Naddis Negative 
Age: 43 
Gender: Male 
NFI 
 
2. BOLANOS, Cibio Misael-Naddis Negative 
Age: 36 
Gender: Male 
NFI 
 
3. COLOMER-Lacayo, Eduardo-Naddis Negative 
Age: 40 
Gender: Male 
NFI 
 
4. POWELL, Arbin Bordas-Naddis Negative 
Age: 19 
Gender: Male 
NFI 
 
5. ZELAYA, Luis Santiago-Naddis Negative 
Age: 21 
Gender: Male 
NFI 
 
6. FLORES, Lisa Iveth-Naddis Negative 
Age: 17 
Gender: Male 
NFI 
 
7. MCNAB, Bobby Mano - NADDIS 887780 
8. EVANS-MCNAB, Kerry - NADDIS NEGATIVE 
Occupation: Honduran Congressman 
Address: Roatan, Honduras 
Palmer 
"
"25099","1/7/2005 20:13","05TEGUCIGALPA48","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000048 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD (OHILTON); IIP/G/WHA; CA, PRM AND EB 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
STATE PASS AID FOR OFDA 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, PREL, EAID, PGOV, MARR, KPAO, HO 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON U.S. TSUNAMI RELIEF EFFORTS, 
JANUARY 6, 2005 
 
 
1. Op-ed by Carlos A. Medina in Tegucigalpa-based liberal 
daily \"La Tribuna\" on 1/6, titled \"The U.S. needs friends.\" 
\"The world has come together to assist our fellow people in 
Asia, which has represented a commendable gesture of human 
solidarity.\" 
 
\"Right after the tsunami, President Bush offered 25 million 
dollars in assistance but when some European countries gave 
two or three times as much and Japan offered 500 million 
dollars, Secretary of State Colin Powell announced the U.S. 
would give 350 million dollars.\" 
 
\"The American people are characterized by their 
aggressiveness and their humanity in times of need. 
However, the latter strength doesn\'t overcome the collective 
fierceness that may have made them great, but has caused 
them to be despised by the peoples of the world.\" 
 
\"If the U.S. would spend a third of its war budget to help 
poor countries escape from underdevelopment through 
technological support or aid in health and education, the 
world would truly see it as a leader and a friend, not as a 
feared country others have to kneel down to in order to 
survive.\" 
 
\"Most Hondurans, some because they have to and others 
because they have studied there, have a positive attitude 
toward the U.S., and that sign of friendship and admiration 
should be returned with respect and support to Honduras.\" 
 
\"There\'s nothing more to say but to remind the people and 
government of the U.S. that their great country needs more 
friends, not more enemies, and that friends are made with 
true gestures of good will just as enemies can be created by 
extreme aggression that doesn\'t do [the Americans] any 
good.\" 
 
2. The San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"Tiempo\" published 
an untitled cartoon on 1/5 in which the U.S. is portrayed as 
an overweight Uncle Sam with two pipes going from his 
pockets.  On his right side, a pipe called \"For the War\" is 
constantly pumping dollar bills into his pockets and shows a 
large stack of bills set aside for this purpose.  On the 
other hand, on his left side, a pipe called \"For Aid\" has 
only three bills coming out and shows a person with his 
hands outstretched. 
 
Palmer 
"
"25305","1/12/2005 19:46","05TEGUCIGALPA74","Embassy Tegucigalpa","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/PD; IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; AND IIP/T/ES 
DEPT. FOR EB/TPP DCLUNE, WHA/EPSC AND WHA/CEN 
DEPT. PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP, KPAO, ETRD, HO, USTR 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON CAFTA, JANUARY 11, 2005 
 
 
1. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily \"La Prensa\" on 
1/11, entitled \"CAFTA cannot wait\"  \"Such an important issue as 
the ratification of CAFTA has been put off by Congress until 
after the primary elections of February 20.  According to 
President Maduro, the textile maquila industry, the world\'s third 
biggest exporter to the U.S., would be the most affected if 
Congress keeps postponing the ratification of the agreement.\" 
 
\"Not everything people say about CAFTA is true, and some 
organizations oppose it because they probably haven\'t had a 
chance to become acquainted with all the provisions of the 
agreement.  For instance, - to cite some advantages - while 
Honduras will be able export about 91% of its agricultural 
production to the U.S. free of tariffs, this nation will be able 
to undergo a progressive elimination of duties and tariffs for up 
to 20 years.\" 
 
\"CAFTA reaffirms our national sovereignty, guaranteeing that 
trade liberalization will not affect the environment or our 
workers\' rights.  Besides, it establishes strong anticorruption 
measures for public officials that ask or receive bribes and for 
companies that allow or offer them.\" 
 
\"CAFTA is a countdown that cannot wait.  Either we introduce 
ourselves into the free market or we remain isolated from the 
world, enduring the failure of a captive, inefficient, 
speculative, and traditionally oppressive market.\" 
 
Palmer 
"