
"6439","3/17/2003 21:52","03NASSAU577","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE22225","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, WHA/PCC 
 
STATE FOR USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, BF, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: BAHAMAS - THRID ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: A) STATE 22225 
 
OVERVIEW 
-------- 
 
1.  The Bahamas, although rife with alien and drug 
smuggling, has no indications of being a country of 
origin, transit, or destination for international 
trafficking in men, women, or children.  Post 
discussed this issue with governmental sources 
including the Foreign Ministry, The Department of 
Labor, the Royal Bahamian Police Force, the 
Department of Social Services and the Department of 
Immigration, as well as NGOs such as the Red Cross, 
Amnesty International and NOWAB, the national 
women\'s rights organization.    None had any 
evidence of trafficking in persons as defined by 
reftel A.  Post believes these sources to be highly 
credible, as we have worked closely with them in the 
past and they have provided accurate information. 
 
PREVENTION 
---------- 
 
2.  Should anti-trafficking of persons become an 
issue in The Bahamas, The Royal Bahamian Police 
Force, the Departments of Immigration and Labor and 
the Attorney General\'s Office would all be involved. 
The Bahamas has not instituted any anti-trafficking 
information or education programs because 
trafficking in persons has not become a significant 
problem.  To its credit, the government promotes 
women\'s rights and Bahamian women play a prominent 
role in government and private businesses.  Bahamian 
children, required by law to remain in school until 
the age of 16, generally adhere to this rule and 
therefore are not as vulnerable to human traffickers 
who prey on inactive young children. 
 
3. National finances are limited, but the Bahamian 
government would be willing and able to support 
prevention programs if trafficking in person in 
persons was identified as a significant problem. 
Since neither the NGO community nor the government 
has recognized trafficking as a significant issue, 
little to no interaction on this issue exists 
between them.  However, the government and the NGO 
community have a cordial and cooperativeon 
relationship on other issues. 
 
4. The Bahamas, comprised of more than 700 islands 
covering more than 700 miles, is as an extremely 
porous nation.  With multiple ports of entry - 
formal and informal -- The Bahamas faces a chronic 
border control problem.  For centuries smugglers of 
all types have used the island nations.  Illegal 
immigration and drug trafficking are significant 
problems in the Bahamas.  The government devotes 
serious effort, given limited resources to 
detecting, monitoring and interdicting illegal 
immigrants and works cooperatively with American 
anti-drug forces to interdict narco-traffickers. 
 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  The Bahamas does not have a law specifically 
prohibiting trafficking in persons.  However, 
traffickers can be prosecuted under Title XIX of the 
penal code - Crimes Against Females, and of 
Kidnapping and Abduction - for attempts to procure 
any female by threats of intimidation, false 
pretenses or by administering drugs.  There are also 
provisions against forcibly taking or detaining a 
female or abduction of females.  Similar laws apply 
to child abduction cases.  Prison terms range from 
two years to life in prison, depending on the crime 
committed.  The penalties for rape or forcible 
sexual assault range from a minimum of seven years 
to a maximum of life imprisonment.  Taken together, 
these laws are adequate to cover the full scope of 
trafficking in persons, if necessary. 
 
6.  In June 2001, the government ratified ILO 
Convention 182 Concerning the Profession and 
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst 
Forms of Child Labor.  The CGOB is a party to the 
Rights of the Child Convention, but not the Sale of 
Children Protocol.  The CGOB is not a party of the 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and 
Children, supplementingation the UN Convention 
Against Transnational Organized Crime. 
 
PROECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
----------------------------------- 
 
7.  The Bahamian government does not provide funds 
to NGOs to protect and assist trafficked person 
because there is no little if any evidence of human 
trafficking.  Analogously, the government does not 
provide specialized training for government 
officials in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, nor does it emphasize the issue 
with its consulates and embassies abroad.  Children 
frequently are amongst those illegal immigrants who 
are detained in The Bahamas, including unaccompanied 
minors.  The Department of Immigration has 
procedures in place to protect these children and to 
deal with their specials needs. 
 
Blankenship 
"
"6474","3/18/2003 16:47","03NASSAU586","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2013 
TAGS: BF, ECON, EFIN, PREL, CARICOM 
SUBJECT: CARICOM SECGEN WANTS BAHAMAS IN SINGLE MARKET 
 
 
Classified By: DCM ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI, REASON 1.5 (B AND D) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.  (U)  CARICOM Secretary General Edwin Carrington, using 
fairly blunt language for diplomatic discourse, publicly 
warned The Bahamas that it needed to get in line with the 
rest of the region in regard to the Caribbean Single Market. 
He strongly implied that The Bahamas could not remain a 
member of CARICOM if it does not subscribe to the Single 
Market, which it has not to this point.  Carrington\'s words 
did not go over well in a country that sees little to gain 
and much to lose in a Caribbean Single Market, and could help 
spur The Bahamas to consider where its economic future lies. 
End Summary. 
 
Carrington Pressures 
-------------------- 
 
2.  (U)  Sec-Gen Carrington made his public comments at a 
seminar on CARICOM sponsored by the College of The Bahamas. 
Also speaking on the panel were Minister of State for Finance 
James Smith, attorney Reginald Lobosky, economist Gilbert 
Morris and Desiree Field-Riddley, adviser to the Caribbean 
Market and Economy. 
 
3.  (U)  Carrington called for The Bahamas, which has 
declined to participate in the Single Market to this point, 
to quickly make a decision to accede.  He said that The 
Bahamas must \"move, and move swiftly.\"  Carrington devoted 
most of his presentation to addressing concerns most 
Bahamians have with joining the Single Market (and the FTAA, 
truth be told).  He acknowledged that, as a service driven 
economy that produces few goods for export, The Bahamas had 
comparatively little to gain from market opening in the 
region, but said that what little The Bahamas does produce is 
not competitive without that opening.  He dismissed concerns 
with the movement of skilled labor (The Bahamas, with its 
higher income levels, is a magnet for economic migration from 
the rest of the region) and the common currency (any change 
from the current one-to-one interchangeability of the 
Bahamian and U.S. dollars could lead to sharp devaluation and 
loss of wealth in The Bahamas) by saying that The Bahamas 
could always use treaty language to opt out of those sections. 
 
4.  (U)  In the conclusion of his presentation, Carrington 
turned strangely threatening, however.  He said that this is 
\"a question, not just of the single market and economy 
membership, but of CARICOM membership indeed.\"  Carrington 
explained that the new legal structure of CARICOM requires 
that all member countries sign all agreements in their 
entirety, and that therefore, if The Bahamas reserves itself 
from the Single Market, it would be in violation of its 
responsibilities as a CARICOM member.  The audience took this 
to mean that, if The Bahamas continues to hold itself out of 
the Single Market, it could be forced out of CARICOM. 
Carrington ominously warned that, \"in this day and age, for a 
small country to be on its own in international waters, is 
not the most propitious of options.\" 
 
Bahamian Government Responds 
---------------------------- 
 
5.  (U)  Minister Smith, in his presentation took exception 
to Carrington\'s depiction of The Bahamas\' lack of options. 
He said that The Bahamas, contrary to what Carrington said, 
had three legal options: to join the single market, to be an 
associate member through a separate agreement, or to continue 
to opt out.  He did not respond to Carrington\'s threat to 
Bahamian CARICOM membership.  He and other panelists called 
clearly for The Bahamas to consider carefully its own 
economic interests before committing to the Single Market. 
Smith did acknowledge that, if the FTAA becomes a reality, 
many of the same issues would have to be addressed. 
 
6. (C)  In a March 17 meeting that Ambassador and DCM had 
with Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell, the Ambassador raised 
the CARICOM Secretary General,s public comments.  Minister 
Mitchell admitted to being &surprised8 by the Carrington 
quotes, acknowledged that they were &impolitis8 and agreed 
that they made a &tough sell (on a single market) even 
harder.8  He admitted that the Leader of the Opposition had 
also called him earlier that morning for an explanation of 
Carrington,s public comments.  The Foreign Minister said he 
was confident, however, that The Bahamas could have it both 
ways ) continue membership in CARICOM but exercise the 
reserve clause on the issues such as labor mobility. 
7.  (U)  Carrington\'s comments were generally seen as 
threatening and were not well received.  Leading daily \"The 
Nassau Guardian\" warned against precipitous action and called 
for the government to consider Bahamian economic interests 
first and to not commit fully to any organization or 
agreement that was not fully in The Bahamas\' interest. 
 
BLANKENSHIP 
"
"7314","4/10/2003 10:58","03NASSAU722","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 NASSAU 000722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/09/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, BF, SNAR, Bahamian Politics 
SUBJECT: HUBERT INGRAHAM A YEAR LATER - NO EXCUSES, NO 
APOLOGIES 
 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON Section Chief Brian Bachman, Reasons 1.5(b) and 
 (d) 
 
Summary 
 ------- 
 
1.  (C) POL/ECON section chief met with former Prime Minister 
Hubert Ingraham on April 8 for a wide-ranging discussion of 
his tenure in office and current Bahamian politics.  Ingraham 
freely gave his opinions about current political developments 
such as the upcoming Free National Movement (FNM) convention 
(thinks Tommy Turnquest will not be seriously challenged 
until next convention), Perry Christie\'s management style and 
character (says he\'s always been indecisive and lacks vision, 
but is a good man), Christie\'s Cabinet (thinks they are a 
collection of ambitious incompetents), the Progressive 
Liberal Party (PLP) government\'s legislative agenda 
(non-existent), and bilateral relations (hopes Embassy and 
Christie government can improve cooperation).  He also 
vigorously defended his record during his ten years in 
office, claiming to have no regrets.  Ingraham said he was 
unsurprised that the FNM lost last May, but only reluctantly 
agreed that he might share some of the blame for that loss. 
He said he was fully confident of his continued popularity 
and consistently dodged questions about his own political 
future.  End Summary. 
 
Out to Pasture? 
--------------- 
 
2.  (C) POL/ECON chief called on Ingraham at his Cable Beach 
office, which was relatively small but nicely appointed. 
Ingraham works there alone, with just a single employee, a 
part-time receptionist who left before the meeting concluded. 
 He did not seem to be terribly busy, as the phone only rang 
twice during an hour and half long conversation, and neither 
call seemed work-related.  His desk was near empty and his TV 
was on and tuned to CNN to watch war news.  Ingraham freely 
admitted that he was not very active in Parliament and didn\'t 
anticipate that he would become more active any time soon. 
He said he still considers himself an FNM, and will vote with 
the FNM block, but is taking no role in ongoing party 
politics.  When asked if he would complete his term or retire 
completely from politics, Ingraham said he hadn\'t given it 
much thought. 
 
Perry and Hubert 
---------------- 
 
3.  (C) Ingraham quickly warmed to the political discussion 
however, and his love for the game sparkled in his eyes as we 
covered a broad range of topics.  He told POL/ECON chief that 
he and Perry Christie remained good friends and said they 
talked by phone a couple of times a week.  Ingraham said that 
they didn\'t always talk politics, but didn\'t avoid the topic 
either, and said that he offered advice to Christie 
regularly.  He said that he believes Christie is a good man, 
and well-intentioned, but criticized his leadership style. 
Ingraham said \"Perry has always been indecisive, and will 
always be indecisive.  It\'s just the way he is.  He can\'t 
change.\"  He also alleged that Christie had no real vision 
other than a general desire to improve social programs, and 
nothing he really wanted to accomplish.  Ingraham contrasted 
Christie with himself, saying he had come in with a definite 
agenda and moved decisively to accomplish it, whereas 
Christie \"enjoys being Prime Minister\" but doesn\'t really 
feel any urgency to get things done.  Ingraham also said that 
Christie is, however, head and shoulders above anyone else in 
the PLP, and their only real option as leader.  He is the 
only one with broad enough appeal to bring in swing voters, 
largely because he, unlike many other PLP politicians, is 
viewed as \"trustworthy\" and \"solid\".  Even FNMs Ingraham 
said, don\'t fear for the country with Christie in charge, as 
he is unlikely to do anything rash.  Combined with the fact 
that he loves the job, Ingraham sees Christie as firmly 
implanted in the PLP leadership and consequently, the PM\'s 
office.  \"It would take dynamite to get him out of that 
seat\", said Ingraham, when asked if he thought Christie would 
run for another term. 
 
A Sorry Bunch 
------------- 
 
4.  (C) Despite his generally complimentary words about 
Christie, Ingraham had nothing good to say about the rest of 
his government.  He gleefully discussed at length PLP 
missteps since coming into office, highlighting most of all 
the fact that they \"have no legislative agenda.\"  Ingraham 
pointed out that the PLP Parliament has passed almost no 
legislation that hadn\'t been initially proposed by his 
government, and doesn\'t seem to be working on anything now. 
He also comprehensively criticized the PLP Cabinet, saying 
\"Once you get past Perry, what have you got?\"  Ingraham said 
that the Christie Cabinet was inexperienced, incompetent and 
politically unschooled.  He also said many of them harbor 
further political ambitions and have their own agendas, and 
shook his head at Christie\'s seeming inability to control 
them.  Ingraham said he \"never would have tolerated such 
behavior\" in his own Cabinet.  He sympathized with Christie, 
however, noting how, under the Westminster system, it is 
difficult to just remove a Cabinet Minister or discipline him 
effectively, as all it may do is create a political enemy who 
retains his seat in Parliament.  Ingraham acknowledged that 
this had never stopped him, but claimed, with a mischievous 
gleam in his eye, that that was \"because I was always 
confident -- confident that I had the support of the people. 
Perry doesn\'t have that confidence.\"  In fact, Ingraham said 
he believed the PLP had squandered its mandate almost 
immediately and no longer enjoyed the support of the people, 
because of its inaction and political stumbles.  One 
political blunder he highlighted was the PLP\' apparent 
hostility toward the civil service, whom they believe to be 
in bed with the FNM after ten years of FNM rule.  Ingraham 
said \"They don\'t even realize that the public service 
overwhelmingly voted for them (the PLP) in the election, and 
now they\'re alienating this key block of swing voters.\" 
 
FNM Needs Unity 
--------------- 
 
5.  (C) Ingraham acknowledged that just because the PLP was 
losing support didn\'t mean that people were ready to turn 
back to the FNM.  He said that the FNM had a lot of work to 
do before it would be competitive politically again.  What 
was most needed, he said, was unity.  According to Ingraham, 
many of the FNM\'s wounds were self-inflicted, and he had 
harsh criticism for former ministers Algernon Allen and 
Tennyson Wells, who attacked the leadership process that saw 
them unsuccessfully challenge Tommy Turnquest, Ingraham\'s 
hand-picked successor and then complain bitterly in public 
about Ingraham\'s stacking the deck.  Ingraham vehemently (but 
unconvincingly) denied influencing the leadership process, 
and defended Turnquest as \"the best man for the job at the 
time.\"  He did criticize Turnquest\'s decision to accept a 
celebratory party financed by a contractor doing business 
with his Ministry, saying it gave the PLP and Allen and Wells 
a convenient target.  Ingraham said it was an \"unfortunate 
decision\", because until then no one could say Tommy wasn\'t 
honest.\"  He thought it was very damaging to Tommy\'s chances 
in the election. 
 
6.  (C) Nonetheless, Ingraham predicted that Tommy would 
survive any leadership challenge in the upcoming May FNM 
convention.  In fact, he predicted that no serious challenge 
would emerge at this convention.  According to Ingraham, 
those most likely to challenge Tommy Turnquest would lie low 
at this convention, since they don\'t really have any desire 
to be the leader of an opposition party for the next four 
years, and would bring out their serious challenge at the 
next convention, which he predicted would be in another 18 
months, by which time the next election would already be in 
sight on the horizon.  Ingraham quickly and confidently 
rattled off who he believed the new FNM leadership team would 
be after the election: Turnquest as leader, former Minister 
of Industry and Development Zhivargo Laing as deputy leader, 
former Attorney General Carl Bethel as party chairman, and 
former legislators Johnley Ferguson and Darrin Cash to round 
out the leadership slate, a group he characterized as \"young, 
energetic and talented.\"  With respect to Brent Symonette, 
who has publicly ruminated about challenging for the 
leadership, Ingraham dismissed his chances, but denied that 
Symonette\'s race (he is white) had anything to do with it. 
Rather, Ingraham said it was his personality and lack of 
appeal outside the bounds of his wealthy constituency.  In 
fact, he said the best thing that could happen would be for 
Symonette to challenge for the leadership, because he \"would 
be beaten so soundly that it would shatter all his 
illusions.\"  Ingraham confidently predicted that the FNM 
would win the next election, saying Christie\'s PLP \"already 
had the markings of a one term government.\" 
 
No Mistakes 
----------- 
 
7.  (C) When asked if he had any regrets from his ten years 
in office, or if he would do anything differently if given 
the opportunity, Ingraham quickly responded \"Absolutely not!\" 
 He said he was a contented man, and that he had accomplished 
virtually everything he set out to do.  On further 
reflection, he admitted that he wished that the FNM 
leadership transition had been handled better, but he 
deflected blame for that, saying that it should have been 
done earlier and smoother, but he was delayed by FNMs who 
kept urging him to put it off and trying to get him to run 
again.  With regard to the failed constitutional referendum, 
which many point to as a key factor in the FNM\'s electoral 
loss, Ingraham denied that it was a factor.  In fact, he 
said, he had already become convinced by January of 2002 that 
the FNM would lose the general election, and scheduled the 
referendum because he was confident that it would pass and 
would give the FNM momentum going into the election.  He 
admitted to being shocked when the PLP came out against the 
referendum, since they had all voted for the various 
amendments in Parliament, but refused to characterize it as a 
political miscalculation. Ingraham showed a glint of anger at 
the suggestion that some in the FNM blamed him for the 
electoral loss, and fired back.  He strongly defended his 
record and claimed that he was still the FNM\'s most popular 
politician.  He pointed out that he had won in 1992 and 1997 
by strong margins, and that it was only after he left the 
leadership that the FNM lost.  According to Ingraham, the FNM 
asked him to step away from the campaign not because he was 
unpopular, but because his popularity left Turnquest in his 
shadow.  Finally he did grudgingly admit that he might have 
to share some of the blame for the FNM loss. \"I guess if I 
take credit for the victories I also have to take credit for 
the losses,\" Ingraham said, but added with fire in his voice, 
\"And no one can deny that I was responsible for the victories 
in 1992 and 1997!\" 
 
Bilateral Relations 
------------------- 
 
8.  (C) Ingraham also raised his concern with publicly 
reported spats between the Embassy and the PLP government. 
He offered no criticism of the Embassy, but said \"I hope 
things are patched up and calm down.  We need a strong 
bilateral relationship.\"  He offered some mild criticism of 
the GOCB\'s handling of the bilateral relationship.  In 
particular, he obliquely criticized Christie by saying that 
under his government, ministers would not have been given as 
much leeway.  He also said he believed Foreign Minister 
Mitchell could have handled the controversy over the 
Ambassador\'s remarks at the Joint Task Force meeting in 
December better, and chalked it up to \"inexperience and 
pride.\"  Ingraham acknowledged, that with the exception of 
what he termed  \"the Defense Force allegations\", none of the 
issues raised by the Ambassador were new or should have been 
a surprise.  In particular, he ruefully admitted that his own 
government had failed to fulfill its promise of several years 
to create a national drug control strategy, but said that it 
was his understanding that it had been \"nearly done\" when he 
left office. 
 
Cagey About the Future 
---------------------- 
 
9.  (C) When asked about his own political future, Ingraham, 
dodged artfully.  He said that he had only run for MP this 
last election at the urging of the party, and considers 
himself retired.  Ingraham claimed that he had no intention 
of defending his seat in 2007, and does not intend to take an 
active role in the upcoming FNM convention.  When asked 
directly if he would ever consider reentering politics, 
Ingraham dodged the question completely.  He did admit that 
various people within the FNM continued to push him to retake 
the leadership, however, and refused several clear 
opportunities to say he was definitely not interested. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  (C) Supremely self-confident, unapologetic and, dare we 
say, arrogant as ever, Ingraham still has a forceful and 
formidable presence.  Currently inactive in Parliament and 
largely out of the public view, he obviously is still keeping 
a close eye on political events both inside and outside the 
party, and we have little doubt that he still has influence 
within the FNM if he chooses to use it.  Ingraham is still a 
relatively young man for a politician, and seems to have 
little desire to return to his former trade (the law).  If 
the Christie government continues to struggle against a weak 
economy and the widespread perception that it is inactive, 
and Bahamian voters begin to feel a little nostalgia for the 
strong hand on the tiller, we wouldn\'t be surprised if Hubert 
Ingraham reemerges as a potential \"savior\" for his party and 
The Bahamas.  End Comment. 
 
 
BLANKENSHIP 
"
"7512","4/17/2003 14:36","03NASSAU766","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/17/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PREF, HA, BF, Haiti 
SUBJECT: BAHAMAS UNLIKELY TO PRESSURE ARISTIDE 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert M. Witajewski, Reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
 
1.  (C) After returning from the OAS/CARICOM meeting on Haiti 
in Miami, Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell dismissed the 
possibility of invoking the democracy provision of the OAS 
Charter in the case of Haiti.  He acknowledged problems with 
democracy in Haiti, but made it clear that the Bahamian 
government preferred continued engagement with President 
Aristide to any type of public confrontation.  He also 
announced a decision to provide $500,000 in economic 
assistance to Haiti, while admitting that it would not do 
much good if the political situation did not improve. 
Mitchell\'s main concern is doing whatever he can to slow down 
illegal immigration from Haiti - a key domestic political 
imperative - and he has been fruitlessly pursuing an 
immigration accord with the Government of Haiti for several 
months.  A high official at the Foreign Ministry, although he 
proclaimed himself \"not competent\" to comment on Haiti policy 
(or much of anything else), confirmed that Haiti believes it 
must stay engaged with the Aristide government to prevent a 
mass migration.  End Summary. 
 
Democracy in Crisis... 
 
2.  (U) Upon his return from Miami, Foreign Minister Mitchell 
discussed the situation there with the press.  He admitted 
that the CARICOM Foreign Ministers were \"frustrated with the 
situation in Haiti, and said that Aristide had put the 
international community \"in a difficult position\" by not 
living up to his commitments.  He spoke frankly about Haiti\'s 
failure to: select an appropriate police commissioner, arrest 
an important fugitive involved in political violence, and 
plan for elections.  While he placed some of the blame for 
the lack of progress toward a political solution on the 
opposition, he acknowledged the government\'s greater share of 
blame and discussed the reasons why the opposition might feel 
threatened and unwilling to make concessions. 
 
... But Need to Give Aristide Another Chance 
 
3.  (U) However, Mitchell went on to say that he thought it 
was \"likely that the deadline will be extended,\" and Aristide 
should be given yet another chance to meet his commitments. 
He pointed out that The Bahamas, in his opinion has no 
choice: \"We cannot afford to disengage from Haiti because 
disengaging for us is not an option.\"  According to Mitchell, 
the issue of Haitian migrants and the potential for mass 
migration is the key issue for The Bahamas.  Such a mass 
migration must be prevented at all costs, and Mitchell made 
it clear that he believed the best way to do that was 
continued engagement with the Aristide government in an 
attempt to improve Haiti\'s political and economic situation. 
 
4.  (U) Mitchell was dismissive of the possibility of 
invoking the democracy provisions of the OAS Charter, saying 
that although \"Some people argue that\'s the case in Haiti ... 
I think that is taking it a little bit too far.\"  He 
described the U.S. position on Haiti as \"hard-minded\", and 
called for continued dialogue.  Mitchell also announced a 
$500,000 economic assistance package for Haiti.  In 
announcing it, he acknowledged that the assistance would 
likely not do much good unless the political impasse were 
resolved.  Mitchell defended the package, however, by 
reiterating that the Government of the Bahamas must do 
whatever it can to improve the economic situation in Haiti 
because of the impact The Bahamas would likely feel if 
further economic and political crisis resulted in a mass 
migration.  He made it very clear that this is the paramount 
issue for The Bahamas. 
 
Who Is Competent Then? 
 
5.  (C) DCM and POL/ECON section chief raised the issue of 
Haiti with Ministry of Foreign Affairs Undersecretary for 
Political Affairs Marco Rolle in an April 15 meeting 
requested by Rolle to go over the list of pending items 
between the Embassy and the MFA.  Rolle, despite being the 
number three official at the Ministry of Embassy (he is the 
Bahamian equivalent of Undersecretary Grossman) and having 
accompanied Mitchell to both Miami and the press conference, 
told us that he \"was not competent\" to talk about Haiti 
policy with us.  He couldn\'t even confirm any details about 
the aid package the Minister had announced in his presence. 
Nor could he comment on progress made toward an immigration 
accord with Haiti or the upcoming visit by Mitchell to Haiti 
in late March beyond confirming the dates (May 22-23).  The 
one specific response we received to a question was whether 
or not Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell planned to make any 
trips or telephone calls to Haitian counterparts prior to the 
April 30 OAS meeting in Washington.  The answer is: No. 
 
Consistently Not Competent 
 
6.  (C) Inability to provide specific responses to queries 
was a consistent theme of our conversation with Rolle.  Of 
the fifteen pending items on our agenda, he was unable to 
comment meaningfully on any single one of them, and could not 
point to MFA progress in resolving any of the issues which 
have been pending anywhere from 2-3 weeks (dip notes 
regarding a trade dispute, RBDF training and a proposal to 
form an anti-alien-smuggling task force) to 6 years (request 
for a bilateral work agreement).  Rolle, a career civil 
servant with no background in foreign affairs, has only been 
with the ministry for about seven months, so it can be 
understood that he might not be familiar with every issue, 
but we would think he could do better than 0 for 15.  The 
Bahamian civil service has honed sloth and delay disguised as 
deliberation and consensus-building to a fine art. 
Comment 
 
7.   (C) We believe the bottom line for The Bahamas on Haiti 
is their fear of mass migration and doing anything that might 
trigger an outflow.  Mitchell in particular has made 
conclusion of an immigration agreement his top foreign policy 
priority.  Our sources in the Immigration Department tell us 
the negotiations are not going well, stalled over Haitian 
insistence on an amnesty for the 30,000 - 100,000 Haitians 
already in The Bahamas (most illegally).  Such a concession 
would be suicide for Mitchell in the xenophobic Bahamian 
political landscape.  Pursuit of this agreement and any other 
means to slow down migration will continue to push any 
concerns for democracy and human rights into the backseat. 
While The Bahamas will remain engaged on Haiti, the Christie 
government will resist any effort to put real teeth into any 
diplomatic effort to pressure President Aristide, preferring 
(endless) conversation and dialogue to the alternative. 
 
BLANKENSHIP 
"
"8044","5/13/2003 21:55","03NASSAU925","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/13/2013 
TAGS: PREL, BF, PGOV, CARICOM, China 
SUBJECT: ARTICLE 98 -- A NON-ISSUE FOR CARICOM 
 
 
Classified By: DCM ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI 
 
Summary 
------------ 
 
1.  Bahamian Ambassador to CARICOM Archer infers that CARICOM 
will not support Article 98 and clears post confusion based 
on mixed signals from the Prime Minster (positive) and the 
Foreign Ministry (negative).  In relation to Cuba, he states 
that CARICOM will not support discussion on the country in 
the OAS forum where Cuba is unable to defend itself.  End 
Summary 
 
 
Article 98: Dead in the Water? 
------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U)  Deputy Chief of Mission, accompanied by Econ/Comm 
officer, met May 13 with Leonard Archer, Bahamian ambassador 
to CARICOM and the senior Foreign Ministry official who 
accompanied Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell to the May 8-9, 
2003, CARICOM Foreign Ministers meeting held in Kingstown, 
St. Vincent. 
 
3.  (U)  DCM had requested the meeting earlier in the week in 
order to obtain clarification and the Bahamian interpretation 
of the CARICOM communiqus dealing with Article 98 and Cuba. 
 
4. (C)  Ambassador Archer was candid.  In response to DCM,s 
request for clarification of CARICOM\'s stance, he stated 
categorically that the fifteen CARICOM member states were 
agreed that they could not sign an Article 98 bilateral 
agreement with the United States because to do so \"would 
negate the Rome Treaty\" establishing the International 
Criminal Court.  He reminded the Embassy that the CARICOM 
member-states had been \"instrumental in initiating and 
resuscitating\" the concept of the international criminal 
court. Ambassador Archer insisted that the CARICOM members 
felt that to sign an Article 98 agreement with the United 
States now would \"neutralize or neuter\" the Rome Treaty. 
\"The (Rome) Treaty and an Article 98 agreement simply can,t 
legally co-exist in our opinion,\" he insisted. 
 
5. (C)  Asked what the particular position of The Bahamas was 
in light of the revised, customized texts of a proposed 
Article 98 agreement that had been provided to the GCOB, 
Ambassador Archer responded that the \"many different 
versions\" of a draft agreement that the United States had 
been circulating had been itself a cause of concern within 
CARICOM  The fact that the United States was circulating \"so 
many\" different drafts to different countries, rather than 
one single text was, to him and his colleagues, Archer 
insisted,  \"proof that something was fundamentally wrong with 
(this) approach.\"  Reminded that the United States had indeed 
initially proposed one single text and had modified it -- 
reluctantly -- in response to the desires expressed by 
individual countries for a text that addressed their 
particular circumstances, Ambassador Archer had no response. 
 
6. (C) Asked about next steps, Ambassador Archer said that 
while CARICOM will keep the issue \"under review\" and was 
\"open to discussion\"  he saw little, if any possibility of 
any movement.  CARICOM he stated categorically, would not 
itself propose a revised, acceptable single draft Article 98 
text to the United States.   Asked if this meant the ball was 
in the United States, court to propose a new draft, Archer 
responded that while the United States could do so, \"it was a 
very big if that CARICOM would respond...  in any event.\" 
 
 
Cuba and Natural Justice 
-------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Turning to the communiqu on Cuba that the CARICOM 
foreign ministers had also issued, Ambassador Archer said 
that it was the \"unanimous\" view of the CARICOM membership 
that seeking to pass a resolution condemning Cuba in the OAS 
when Cuba was not permitted to defend itself as a member 
\"violated the rule of natural justice.\"  Pressed if this was 
really a unanimous view or simply a strongly-held position by 
some member-states, Archer responded that \"no one in the room 
objected to the communiqu\'s wording.\" 
 
8. (C)  At the end of the conversation, and following an 
extended exchange with DCM on the Castro dictatorship and its 
historical record of human rights and other violations, 
Ambassador Archer closed the conversation by telling DCM that 
\"it was illogical\" for the United States to continually try 
to obtain resolutions condemning Cuba since \"the United 
States also had blood on its hands there,\" criticized the 
influence of Cuban-American and Cuban exile groups in 
Florida, and insisted that it was unlikely that the United 
States would ever obtain a sympathetic hearing from CARICOM 
members until it altered \"its irrational Cuba policy.\" 
 
Comment 
------------ 
 
9. (C)  In contrast to other members of the Bahamian Foreign 
Ministry, Ambassador Archer was refreshingly candid and 
forthcoming in explaining the GCOB position within CARICOM on 
these issues -- even if the news he delivered was unpleasant 
and tinged with outdated ideology.  On Article 98, Archer 
confirmed the view that the Foreign Minister and the Foreign 
Ministry have no political desire, or ideological 
inclination, to conclude an Article 98 agreement and are 
pleased to hide behind CARICOM solidarity on this issue. 
Further reinforcing their position is the fact that the 
Foreign Ministry officials are also well aware that unless 
and until they ratify the International Criminal Court 
treaty, they can free ride on this since there will be no 
consequences to opposing the U.S.  When Ambassador Archer was 
asked if there was any timetable to submit the treaty to 
parliament for ratification, an act that would trigger 
sanctions, Archer coyly responded that he \"wasn\'t aware of 
any plans to do so.\"  Since the Prime Minister has been much 
more positive on this isse than the Foreign Minister, the 
only possiblity we see for an Article 98 agreement is if the 
PM overrules Foreign Minister Mitchell and gives him a direct 
order.  We have seen nothing in PM Christie\'s governing style 
and personality to indicate that this is likely. 8 
BLANKENSHIP 
"
"8458","6/3/2003 20:54","03NASSAU1066","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 NASSAU 001066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, BF, Bahamian Politics 
SUBJECT: POWERS BEHIND THE THRONE IN THE PLP GOVERNMENT - 
PROTIGIS OF THE                    COUNTRY\'S FIRST PRIME 
MINISTER 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert M. Witajeski, Reason 1.5 (B) and 
(D). 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1.  (C) In two separate meetings May 27 and 28, DCM and 
POL/ECON section chief met the two individuals outside of the 
Bahamian government considered to have the most influence on 
Prime Minister Perry Christie\'s government.  Wealthy 
businessman Frankie Wilson, a prominent campaign contributor 
and friend of the Prime Minister\'s, offered us a spirited 
defense of the former Pindling administration\'s drug record, 
gave his perspective on various recent ambassadors, and 
defended the Christie administration\'s record of inaction by 
saying repeatedly, \"But you have to understand where we have 
come from.\"  Bishop Neil Ellis, the controversial pastor of a 
large evangelical church whom Christie refers to as his 
\"spiritual adviser\", expressed his desire for closer 
relations with the Embassy, bemoaned his treatment in the 
press, and offered a fascinating intimate account of how he 
came to publicly endorse Christie in the last election.  Both 
power brokers humbly -- and unconvincingly -- denied having 
or wanting any real influence.  End Summary. 
 
Frankie Wilson 
-------------- 
 
2.  (C) Frankie Wilson is The Bahamas\' most prominent, and 
probably wealthiest, black businessman.  The owner of Arawak 
Homes and Sunshine Insurance Company, as well as many other 
businesses, is an original member of the \"Sunshine Group\", a 
group of black businessmen who were actively supported by 
former Prime Minister Sir Lynden Pindling as they created 
their empires in the 1970s and 1980s.  Pindling supported 
them as a way to break the economic power held by the \"Bay 
Street Boys\" (the country\'s traditional white elite), who 
with the support of the United Bahamas Party (UBP) had ruled 
The Bahamas both politically and economically for decades 
until majority rule arrived in 1967.  Wilson is very proud of 
his rise to meteoric wealth and, during the course of the 
meeting, repeatedly referred to his humble past, when, as the 
youngest of 11 children in a working class family, he had to 
sleep on the floor until his older sisters grew up and moved 
out of the house and a bed opened up for him.  He is 
fanatically devoted to Pindling, who identified him, became 
his godfather, and opened the doors that allowed Wilson to be 
successful.  That loyalty has transferred to Pindling\'s 
Progressive Liberal Party (PLP), and today Wilson is a major 
financial contributor to the party and close adviser to Prime 
Minister Perry Christie.  In fact, when we arrived, Wilson 
summoned his own son and Perry Christie\'s son (both of whom 
work for him) into the office for the meeting.  Wilson, who 
served for the PLP in Parliament from 1992-1997, was defeated 
in 1997, has declined to take several positions offered to 
him by the Pindling administration, insisting they would take 
too much time from his business concerns. 
 
Pindling the Hero 
----------------- 
 
3.  (C) Wilson, a bombastic speaker who frequently cuts 
others off in conversation, spent much of the hour and half 
meeting offering a passionate defense of the record of Sir 
Lynden Pindling.  He insisted that allegations of narcotics 
corruption against Pindling were completely unfounded and 
claimed that the Commission of Inquiry bore him out on this 
point.  He brushed aside questions about how Sir Lynden had 
amassed his obvious wealth during his years in office and the 
influence of notorious Colombian narcotics kingpin Carlos 
Lehder, and said that the stories about Pindling were the 
result of jealousy and ingratitude, a plot orchestrated by 
former U.S. Ambassador Carol Boyd Hallett and former Prime 
Minister Hubert Ingraham who \"wouldn\'t have been anything 
without Pindling.\"  Wilson claimed \"no one has cooperated 
more\" with the U.S. on drug interdiction than Pindling, and 
said that seizure statistics bear him out on this assertion. 
He expressed great scorn toward Hubert Ingraham for betraying 
Pindling and then setting out to destroy his reputation after 
Ingraham became Prime Minister, which Wilson claimed 
destroyed Pindling\'s health and led to his death (this is 
also the opinion of Lady Pindling, Sir Lynden\'s widow). 
Wilson said that only when Pindling neared his death did 
Ingraham \"repent\" and seek reconciliation with Pindling on 
the latter\'s death bed.  Wilson claimed that the impressive 
sendoff given to Pindling by Ingraham\'s government when he 
died in 2000 was proof that Ingraham felt \"remorseful\" about 
what he had done to Pindling\'s reputation.  (Ingraham would 
say that the impressive funeral was appropriate for the man 
who, whatever his faults, was the country\'s \"founding 
father\", and that the kind words offered by Ingraham then 
were simply an example of not speaking poorly of the dead.) 
Wilson believes that the seeds of the PLP\'s 2002 election 
victory were laid at that funeral, as the state ceremony and 
effusive eulogies allowed the PLP to escape from its image of 
corruption. 
 
Wilson\'s Take on Diplomacy 
-------------------------- 
 
4.  (C)  Wilson offered his opinion on the performance of 
former U.S. ambassadors here.  He singled out Ambassador 
Carol Hallett for scorn, blaming her for demonizing Pindling 
and dragging his reputation through the mud.  He said that 
she \"played the game\" politically and was very shrewd, but 
that he despised her for her actions.  Wilson alleged that 
she interfered directly in Bahamian internal politics for 
reasons he failed to understand, offering tangible support to 
Hubert Ingraham and the FNM - support Wilson claims they 
could not have won the election without.  He reserved his 
highest praise for Ambassador Sydney Williams, saying that he 
had a quiet style and didn\'t make waves.  Wilson said that 
Bahamians prefer that style of diplomacy, and do not like 
confrontation. 
 
5.  (C) Wilson also pleaded with us to engage constructively 
with The Bahamas and support Foreign Minister Mitchell\'s 
desire to play a more prominent role on the world stage.  He 
said that, as a country with shared democratic and capitalist 
values, the Bahamas could help the United States a good deal 
in international fora, and that the U.S. should take 
advantage of that. 
 
\"To Understand Where We Are, You Have to Understand From 
Where We\'ve Come\" 
------------------------------- 
------------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) In response to various questions about issues of 
concern in The Bahamas, such as overcrowding, lack of 
investment and urban planning, Wilson kept coming back to the 
same theme.  Essentially, he dismissed current problems by 
saying that regardless of their gravity, The Bahamas, and 
more specifically, black people in The Bahamas, have come a 
very long way since majority rule.  He spoke proudly of the 
way the Pindling administration broke first the political and 
then the economic monopoly on power of the Bay Street Boys, 
and declared his optimism about the future.  He dismissed 
foreign investor concerns about the PLP\'s program of 
\"Bahamianization\" saying you had to view it in the context of 
Bahamian history, and that the PLP government welcomed 
foreign investment, pointing to the recent signing of the 
Atlantis expansion deal.  He wondered why it was a South 
African who brought that kind of investment to The Bahamas, 
rather than an American. 
 
7.  (C) Wilson confidently predicted the PLP would win 
election again in 2007, and dismissed the FNM as disorganized 
and poorly led.  He also said that for the first time in 
2002, the PLP was \"competitive\" in terms of campaign 
financing.  According to Wilson, the PLP spent approximately 
$7 million on the 2002 campaign (the FNM claims to have spent 
about $4 million, but neither is required to provide any 
accounting for campaign contributions or expenditures, so 
both figures are suspect).  That would amount to close to $70 
per registered voter.  He dismissed questions about whether 
or not this was an excessive amount for such a small country, 
and did not elaborate on where all this money came from. 
 
Bishop Neil Ellis 
----------------- 
 
8.  (C) Bishop Ellis, the pastor of a large Baptist church 
(6400 members) in a working class neighborhood of southern 
Nassau, is one of The Bahamas\' most controversial figures. 
He publicly endorsed Perry Christie during the 2002 campaign 
and reportedly told his congregation from the pulpit during a 
religious service that they must support Christie if they 
wished to remain members of his church.  Ellis also held a 
huge religious revival featuring a renowned U.S. evangelist 
that was a magnet for criticism about the reported 
\"greediness\" of its fundraising appeal.  (Establishment 
religious figures now sometimes preface fund-raising remarks 
by noting that the funds \"will not be used to build a 
vacation house in Bimini\" to distinguish themselves from the 
self-proclaimed bishop.  The press hounds him constantly 
about his flamboyant personal lifestyle and open political 
preferences.  Ellis was another protigi of Sir Lynden 
Pindling, who identified him as a promising young man growing 
up on the small island of Bimini and brought him to Nassau to 
complete his education.  He is affiliated with the Full 
Gospel Baptist Church headquartered in New Orleans, and is 
its \"bishop\" for international churches, theoretically having 
all Full Gospel Baptist churches in The Bahamas under his 
leadership.  Prime Minister Christie has openly referred to 
Ellis as his spiritual adviser, and many Bahamians assume 
that his influence runs deep within the administration. 
 
9.  (C) POL/ECON section chief arrived at Ellis\' Mt. Tabor 
Full Gospel Baptist Church, and was met by the first of 
Ellis\' personal assistants, who passed me to the second, who 
entertained him while Ellis finished a meeting with his seven 
associate pastors.  Ellis then received Emboff in his nicely 
appointed (bordering on lavish, but not quite passing over 
into poor taste) office.  He was dressed in a loud magenta 
clerical shirt with gold and diamond cufflinks, a thick gold 
chain, several large gold rings and a gold Rolex watch. 
Ellis is a thin, energetic man of middling height, in his 
early forties.  He is married and has three adopted 
daughters. 
 
Anointing of the King 
--------------------- 
 
 9.  (C) Ellis described for POL/ECON section chief the 
remarkable story of how he came to endorse Perry Christie in 
the 2002 elections.  According to Ellis, he barely knew 
Christie before the run up to the election in 2001.  At that 
time, he says Christie began seeking an appointment with him, 
saying he needed to speak with him for several hours.  Ellis 
says that he kept putting Christie off, both because he 
didn\'t have that time to spare and because he had a bad 
initial impression of him.  Ellis said that this bad opinion 
dated from the PLP leadership battle Christie won against 
B.J. Nottage after the death of Lynden Pindling.  Nottage was 
a friend and former congregation member of Ellis and harbored 
a lot of ill will toward Christie because of his loss. 
Christie was persistent in his pursuit of Ellis, whose church 
membership has definite PLP leanings (Three PLP MPs, 
including two Cabinet ministers, call it their home church), 
however.  Finally, according to Ellis, he agreed to take 
Christie along with him on an evangelical trip to the U.S., 
promising that if Christie attended all he services he 
preached at, Ellis would give him the time in between to 
listen to his appeal.  Ellis said that, when given the 
opportunity, Christie and Ellis spoke for 13 hours straight, 
about both secular and spiritual matters and that Ellis 
progressively became more convinced that Christie had been 
\"sent by God\" to lead The Bahamas.  The meeting ended, 
according to Ellis, in a scene reminiscent of the Biblical 
story of Samuel\'s anointing of Saul, with Christie coming 
around the table they were seated at, going to his knees and 
requesting a blessing from Bishop Ellis.  At that time, Ellis 
reported \"the Spirit came upon him\" and told him that he had 
to endorse Christie. 
 
10.  (C) Ellis, on the one hand, denied having or wanting any 
political influence with Christie, but on the other hand went 
to great lengths to explain how close their relationship is 
and how often Christie calls on him for spiritual guidance. 
For example, Ellis recounted that Christie had presented him 
with the names of his Cabinet nominees before they were 
announced and asked for him to pray over them and give his 
opinion.  Ellis says that, although Christie has offered him 
several government positions (most recently The Bahamas\' 
Ambassador for Religious Tourism) and other rewards such as 
free government land to build a new church, he has turned it 
all down and wants nothing from Christie or the government 
(or at least nothing they\'ve offered yet). 
 
It\'s All Just Jealousy 
---------------------- 
 
11.  (C) Ellis claims that, ever since Mt. Tabor started to 
grow and he began to be seen as a successful pastor, he has 
come under attack by others, including other pastors, who are 
jealous of his success.  As a result, Ellis claims he has 
been unfairly vilified in the press, particularly the 
scandal-mongering tabloid The Punch.  Ellis says that during 
one stretch The Punch printed negative articles about him in 
95 consecutive editions, beginning with an unsubstantiated 
rumor that he was carrying on a homosexual affair with a 
member of his congregation.  In addition, Ellis has received 
heavy criticism for the large salary he draws (reportedly a 
tax-free $180,000 a year), and his penchant for luxurious 
living.  Recently attention has focused on the impressive 
house he is building for himself in one of Nassau\'s more 
exclusive neighborhoods, reportedly costing $1 million. 
Ellis claimed that the stories were exaggerated, but made no 
excuses for his lifestyle, implying it was only fitting for 
the pastor of such a large and thriving church. 
 
12.  (C) The one press story that he claimed hurt him the 
most, however, was the one published by leading daily The 
Tribune shortly before the election, claiming that Ellis had, 
from the pulpit, instructed his congregation to vote for the 
PLP, saying that if they didn\'t, they should \"haul hip\" out 
of his church.  Ellis said he was most hurt by the fact the 
Tribune did not contact him prior to publishing the story for 
his version of events.  According to Ellis, a rival pastor, 
Bishop Simeon Hall, a strong FNM supporter, was the source of 
the story.  He sent a tape recording of some of Ellis\' 
sermons to all of the papers.  Ellis admits that the tape -- 
which he claims contains selectively edited portions of three 
different sermons -- could easily lead you to believe he had 
instructed his church how to vote, but he denies this. 
According to Ellis, his comments were taken out of context, 
and that while he did officially endorse Christie and the PLP 
from the pulpit on several occasions (doing as he says the 
Holy Spirit moved him to do), he never tried to tell others 
how to vote or threatened anyone if they didn\'t vote for the 
PLP.  He blames the whole issue on poor journalism and the 
jealousy of other, less successful pastors.  Ellis claims the 
Tribune is biased against him because he signed an exclusive 
deal with the rival Nassau Guardian for all of the church \'s 
considerable printing business, in exchange for a full-page 
platform in the weekly religious section. 
 
13.  (C) As a consequence of his on-going bad press, Ellis 
has vowed not to respond to any of the allegations against 
him.  Doing so, he said, just legitimizes those allegations 
and gives them more life.  Many in his congregation, he says, 
have disagreed with this policy and urge him to publicly lash 
out at his critics, which he admits is tempting, but he 
continues to maintain his silence, preferring to let the 
criticism pass. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
14.   (C) Wilson and Ellis, each in a different way, wield 
considerable influence in the Christie government, despite 
not being members of that government.  Wilson is one of the 
financial mainstays of the party, and the PLP needs his money 
to counteract the FNM\'s traditional fundraising advantage 
with the traditional white business elite.  Ellis openly uses 
his pulpit in one of Nassau\'s largest and fastest growing 
churches to advance the PLP\'s political agenda, and by 
allying himself so closely with Christie, has surpassed many 
of his more established (and perhaps more respectable) 
religious brethren in influence.  Both are outspokenly 
passionate in their support for the party, having been 
nurtured by Lynden Pindling from an early age, and both will 
probably remain active and influential in PLP circles for 
many years to come.  Both have substantial power, profound 
influence, and no accountability. 
BLANKENSHIP 
"
"10232","8/21/2003 18:17","03NASSAU1635","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, EINV, PINR, PGOV, CH, JA, BF, China 
SUBJECT: BAHAMIAN OFFICIALS VISIT TO CHINA -- COURTESY OR 
CONFIDANTS? 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1.   (C)  On August 20, the Charge, and Economic Officer met 
with Mrs. Patricia Rogers, the Permanent Secretary at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Leonard Archer, the Bahamian 
Ambassador to CARICOM, and Mr. Marco Rolle, Under Secretary 
in the International Division of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs to discuss the upcoming visit of Bahamian officials 
to China.  Although the Bahamians were extremely reluctant to 
provide information regarding the visit to China, Dr. Rogers 
promised the Charge, that she would give him a briefing upon 
their return on September 9th.   Despite deliberate attempts 
at ambiguity in describing the agenda for the Foreign 
Minister,s trip, it appears that The Bahamas will accede to 
a Chinese request to close their consulate in Hong Kong and 
open an embassy in Beijing.  We urged that the GCOB also 
raise the issue of Chinese alien smuggling operations through 
The Bahamas to the United States.  Rogers claimed the China 
visit was simply to express gratitude for Chinese technical 
assistance to The Bahamas.  End Summary. 
 
OFFICIAL VISIT TO CHINA BY GCOB OFFICIALS 
 
2.   (C)  At a meeting with Mrs. Patricia Rogers, the 
Charge, inquired about the upcoming Bahamian high-level 
visit to China from August 22nd - September 9th.  Mrs. Rogers 
said that Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fred Mitchell, and 
herself amongst others planned to travel to Beijing, 
Shanghai, Shenyang, plus Japan on their whirlwind tour to 
Asia. Bahamian Ambassador to Japan, Sir Sidney Poitier, is to 
accompany the Bahamian contingent on the Japanese segment of 
the trip since it is coinciding with his annual trip to 
Japan.  Rogers laughingly noted that he was to be the \"star 
attraction\", and the rest of them, including the Foreign 
Minister, were merely along for the ride. 
 
3.    (C)  Framing it as simply a \"follow-up to an 
invitation\", Mrs. Rogers attempted to minimize the 
significance of the official trip.  But after further 
probing, she admitted that one of the purposes of the trip 
was to reassure China of The Bahamas commitment to their 
bilateral relationship.  Rogers indicated that the Government 
felt that it needed to continue to solidify Chinese 
confidence due to \"lingering distaste\" left from the fact 
that The Bahamas maintained diplomatic relations with Taiwan, 
including permitting a Taiwanese Embassy in Nassau, until 
1999. 
 
4.    (C)  Mrs. Rogers and Ambassador Leonard Archer both 
made a point of expressing gratitude towards the Chinese for 
their technical assistance in The Bahamas. When questioned 
further about the precise details of this assistance, the two 
responded by citing Chinese support for Bahamian handicraft, 
agriculture and their offer to assist in the 
remodeling/rebuilding of the National Center for Performing 
Arts located in Nassau, not Mrs. Rogers insisted a new 
convention center for The Bahamas.  (A Chinese offer to build 
a massive convention center in the Cable Beach area of New 
Providence Island has been widely rumored to be on the 
table.)  Mrs. Rogers also mentioned that Bahamian officials 
were to participate in a christening and launch of one of the 
Clipper Group ships.  The company, she obliquely noted, had 
decided to register many of its ships on the Bahamian ship 
registry, and this would be a reciprocal gesture of 
appreciation. 
 
\"NO\" AGENDA WHILE IN CHINA 
 
5.    (C)  When asked by the Charge, as to what the Bahamian 
officials had arranged with their Chinese counterparts for 
the visit, Mrs. Rogers paused and said that the visit was to 
be very informal and denied that any agenda of discussion 
topics had been agreed to.  Responding to the Charge,s 
skepticism that a major visit beginning in only two days 
remained so unfocused, Mrs. Rogers reluctantly admitted that 
it was \"feasible\" 
that some trade and cultural agreements might be signed, but 
insisted that the Bahamian delegation only planned to speak 
about general bilateral issues. 
 
SMUGGLING CHINESE TO THE US VIA THE BAHAMAS 
6.    (C)  The Charge, specifically questioned the Bahamian 
government officials about whether the issue of smuggling 
Chinese aliens into the United States through The Bahamas 
would be raised when Mrs. Rogers and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Fred Mitchell visit China.  Mrs. Rogers, again 
reluctantly, responded by saying, \"it,s a tricky one, but 
one that will have to be brought up\".  The Bahamians would 
not provide further details. 
 
CLOSING HONG KONG; OPENING IN BEIJING 
 
7.    (C)  During the conversation, Mrs. Rogers did reveal 
that The Bahamas would discuss with Chinese officials the 
possibility of \"deactivating\" their consulate in Hong Kong 
with the intention of establishing an Embassy in Beijing. 
She did not indicate if Foreign Minister Mitchell and his 
Chinese counterpart would make an announcement to this effect 
while on the upcoming trip. 
 
8.    (U)  Currently, the Bahamian Consulate in Hong Kong 
does not process visas for CARICOM members, only for Bahamian 
citizens.  Only the embassies of Guyana and Suriname in China 
have that ability presently. 
 
NEW CHINESE AMBASSADOR TO BAHAMAS 
 
9.    (C)  Dr. Rogers mentioned that the new Chinese 
Ambassador to The Bahamas, Dongcon Jiao, will be formally 
presenting his credentials on August 21st.  She made a point 
of noting that \"he speaks perfect English.\"  (Note: The 
former Chinese Ambassador, Changsheng Wu, had limited English 
skills and was always accompanied in public by an 
interpreter.  Changsheng was, however, proficient in 
Spanish.)  The Charge, noted that the Embassy had not been 
contacted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs about receiving 
the new Chinese Ambassador for an introductory courtesy call, 
observing that Andrew McKinney, Chief of Protocol for the 
Bahamas, did consider Charges of appropriate rank.  Mrs. 
Rogers appeared genuinely embarrassed, and expressed the 
intent to rectify the situation. 
 
COMMENT 
 
10. (C)      Mrs. Rogers, and other Bahamian officials, are 
reluctant to discuss the details of their relationship with 
the Chinese.  While it appears that the dynamics of the 
relationship are being driven by the Chinese, for their part 
the Bahamians have at least two reasons for acquiescing. 
First, there is the $1 billion investment by Hutchison 
Whampoa in the Freeport Container Port.  Second, a Chinese 
presence does -even if symbolically- serve as a 
counterbalance to the U.S.  The interest of the Chinese is 
more complex however, and we defer to Embassy Beijing for its 
analysis of Chinese strategic goals underlying its major 
presence in a country where apart from geography, there would 
seem to be few mutual cultural, tourist, economic, or 
political interests. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"11185","10/3/2003 16:17","03NASSAU1972","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS NASSAU 001972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INL/LP TO KEVIN BROWN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BF, SNAR, Narcotics - OPBAT 
SUBJECT: OPBAT OPERATIVE SEIZED 800 POUNDS OF COCAINE 
 
SUMMARY 
1. On October 1, 2003 charges were filed before a Nassau 
Magistrate against eight of the nine individuals arrested on 
September 27 in connection with a seizure of more than 800 
pounds of cocaine.  The seizure was completed by members of 
the Royal Bahamas Police Force in cooperation with the 
members of The Operation Bahamas and Turks and Caicos 
(OPBAT). 
END OF SUMMARY 
 
2. Acting on investigative intelligence gathered by the Drug 
Enforcement Unit of the Royal Bahamas Police Force, OPBAT 
helicopters identified an illegal air drop near the island of 
Eleuthera.  Alerted of the whereabouts of the vessel, marine 
units intercepted the vessel and arrested its occupants.  The 
aircraft crew were later arrested at Marsh Harbour on the 
island of Abaco. 
 
3. OPBAT is a three nation, interagency drug interdiction 
operation based in Nassau.  The September 27 operative 
resulted in the confiscation of an aircraft, a go-fast vessel 
and more than 840 pounds of cocaine with an estimated street 
value of $12 million. 
 
4. This spectacular seizure that attracted headlines by the 
major newspapers in Nassau is exemplary of the effectiveness 
of OPBAT drug eradication efforts in The Bahamas. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"11475","10/17/2003 14:01","03NASSAU2089","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 002089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO KEVIN BROWN, INL/LP 
PASS TO DOCONNOR, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/16/2013 
TAGS: BF, SNAR, Narcotics - OPBAT 
SUBJECT: THREE MAJOR SEIZURES FOR OPBAT THIS WEEK 
 
Summary 
 
1. (U) In a particularly successful week\'s work, the Royal 
Bahamian Police Force and Operation Bahamas Turks and Caicos 
(OPBAT) scored three significant successes during October 
10-14, arresting 13 individuals and seizing over $10 million 
dollars worth of cocaine, marijuana and hasish oil in 
addition to boats and vehicles. USG-funded assets and 
personnel were key to this week\'s results. 
End of Summary 
 
Coordination is still our best asset 
 
2. (C) During an operation on Tuesday October 14, the Drug 
Enforcement Unit (DEU), the Royal Bahamian Police Force\'s 
special vetted unit, acted on intelligence provided by USG 
sources that a \"go-fast\" boat was transporting a large 
quantity of contraband.  An OPBAT marine unit deployed 
identified the vessel, followed the suspects, and arrested 
inland 10 individuals suspected of being connected to the 
Austin Knowles drug trafficking organization. 
 
3. (U) The Knowles organization is reputedly the largest drug 
trafficking organization in the Bahamas.  Knowles is 
currently serving a prison sentence in Her Majesty\'s Prison 
at Fox Hill in Nassau.  The USG is seeking his extradition to 
face federal drug charges in Florida. 
 
Retained Memory Reveals Suspects\' Movements, Drugs Location 
 
4.  (C/Sensitive) Crucial to the latest drug seizure was the 
confiscation of two Global Positioning System (GPS) devices 
from the suspects that allowed U.S. and Bahamian authorities 
to backtrack the suspects\' movements and supply the missing 
link between the suspects and the contraband.  Once the 
suspects\' GPS devices were in OPBAT\'s possession, they 
contacted U.S. Coast Guard experts who were able to use the 
units\' software to identify the subjects\' movements over the 
previous ten hours. 
 
5.  (C) Once coordinates of the suspects\' movements had been 
downloaded  by USCG experts, it just took few hours for OPBAT 
personnel to be deployed to the coordinates and, following 
fresh tire tracks in the mud, OPBAT was able to uncover more 
than 17 bales of cocaine hidden in a cave in Eleuthera. The 
1105 pounds of cocaine have an estimated street value of $17 
million. 
 
Drug busts are adding up 
 
6. (U) Another successful operative was carried out on Friday 
October 10, when the Royal Bahamian Police Force received 
information that a vessel moored at the harbor in Nassau was 
transporting contraband.  After an extensive search, DEU 
personnel found hidden in the boat of Canadian citizen 1065 
pounds of hashish oil in addition to a small amount of 
marijuana and hashish.  Hashish oil is a narcotic favored in 
in the Canadian drug market.  The market value of the 
contraband is more than $2 million dollars.  The Canadian 
subject is cooperating with the authorities. 
 
7. (U) Also on October 10th,  OPBAT marine assets during a 
routine patrol observed a \"go-fast\" boat acting in a 
suspicious manner.  After the officers initiated a chase, the 
individuals in the boat started throwing the bales to the 
water.  The Police recovered 3,480 pounds of marijuana- with 
a street value of $3 million. 
 
Comment 
7. (C) This week\'s successful seizures again highlighted the 
effectiveness of the multi-agency, multi-national, 
multi-functional approach to illegal drug interdiction 
employed by OPBAT.  It also illustrated the key role played 
by intelligence, flexibility, and the quick response that 
having assets immediately available to respond to targets of 
opportunity play in the on-going counter-drug effort. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"11581","10/22/2003 12:35","03NASSAU2124","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 002124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PINR, PGOV, BF, CU, UK, China, Cuba 
SUBJECT: BAHAMIAN DIPLOMATIC INITIATIVES TO CUBA AND CHINA 
 
Classified By: CHARGE R.M. WITAJEWSKI, FOR REASONS 1.5 B AND D 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1.  (C)  Bahamian Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell is pursuing 
a new activist foreign policy focused around overtures to both Cuba 
and the People\'s Republic of China.  Both Havana and Beijing should 
be pleased.  Reportedly, The Bahamas will send a resident consul 
general to Havana and, in addition to moving the current Bahamian 
consulate from Hong Kong to Beijing, will permit the Chinese government 
to begin construction on a new embassy complex in Nassau. 
End Summary. 
 
 
CHINESE TO BUILD NEW EMBASSY COMPLEX IN NASSAU 
 
2.  (C)  Asked about his recent trip to China during a 
private lunch with Charge on October 20, Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell 
revealed that the Chinese will soon be granted permission to begin 
construction of a new embassy complex to be located on prime 
north-facing ocean-front property east of downtown Nassau.  (The 
proposed site is located on currently vacant land near the intersection 
of East Bay Street and Village Road.)  The approval in principle follow 
agreement that the PRC will send only \"supervisors\" to oversee the 
construction effort, rather than actual \"workers.\"  Approval has been 
delayed for years over the issue of the composition of the construction 
work force, as well as questions about the size and architectural 
dominance of the proposed Chinese design. 
 
3.  (SBU)  FM Mitchell did not indicate when the public announcement 
would be made about the construction go-ahead. 
 
4.  (C)  Asked again about his recent extensive trip to 
China, as he has since his return FM Mitchell remained closemouthed and 
uncommunicative.  He wondered  -- again -- why we were interested in hi 
and his cabinet colleagues\' trip.  Refusing to be drawn out, all he 
would say about his trip was that he found \"the Chinese to be incredibl 
industrious\" and Beijing to be \"gray and drab.\" When Charge rhetoricall 
wondered about the growing Chinese interest in The Bahamas, FM Mitchell 
replied laconically \"economic.\"  Charge looked a bit incredulous, notin 
that some 85 percent of all Bahamian purchases were made in south 
Florida and, in any event, the entire country\'s 340,000 people did not 
represent much of a market to the Chinese.  FM Mitchell said that \"the 
Chinese consider the billion dollar Hutcheson-Wampoa container port 
facility in Freeport as \'their\'s\". \" 
 
5. (C )  Responding to Charge_ observation that at least the 
Chinese embassy would not have the security setback problems facing 
the U.S. Embassy,  Mitchell joked that if the United States said that 
it too would build a new embassy, the Government would sell back at cos 
the 11 acre parcel long intended as the site of a new US Embassy 
compound that the USG sold to the Bahamian government several years ago 
 
WILL THE PRIME MINISTER TRAVEL TO PRC TOO? 
 
6. (C)  The British High Commissioner to The Bahamas believes 
that Prime Minister Perry Christie will still be making a trip to China 
in November. He called Charge October 21 to report that he found it 
strange that the trip had still not been announced.  While Christie_ 
plans, if any, remain secretive, other senior members of the Bahamian 
government have been extensive travelers to China of late.  In addition 
to FM Mitchell and Aviation Minister Hanna-Martin, Bahamas Agricultural 
and Industrial Corporation executive chairman (and reputed political 
bagman) Sidney Stubbs has also just led a delegation to China, 
presumably seeking expanded trade ties. 
Rumors of corruption and bribery continue to circle around Stubbs in 
Bahamian political circles.  One local newspaper has publicly raised 
questions about the financing of this $48,667.85 junket. 
 
 
BAHAMAS TO UPGRADE DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH CUBA 
 
7. (C)  Well-informed sources indicate that the Bahamian 
Government has come to an agreement with the Castro regime to establish 
a resident Bahamian diplomatic presence in Havana.  Reportedly, the 
Bahamians will send a diplomat with the rank of Consul General to 
Havana in the 2004-05 fiscal year when funding becomes available.  Whil 
The Cubans are represented in Nassau at the rank of Consul by Felix 
Wilson (formerly assigned to the Cuban Interests Section in Washington) 
up to now, the Bahamians have not had a resident presence in Havana. 
 
8.  (SBU)  Wilson held a press conference October 16 
denouncing the latest U.S. restrictions on travel to Cuba and announcin 
the annual Cuban attempt to have the bilateral trade embargo condemned 
at the UNGA.  FM Mitchell appears to have beenembarrassed by the 
publicity, chiding Wilson saying that the Bahamas has traditionally 
voted to lift the embargo at the UNGA, would do so again this 
year and didn_ need to be reminded of this. 
 
COMMENT 
 
9.  (C)  The openings to Beijing and Havana  -- which will 
entail considerable personnel expense for the Bahamians even if China 
and Cuba subsidize the actual operations of the Bahamian diplomatic 
missions in their countries -- come at a time of considerable budget 
constraint in The Bahamas.  The government that is delaying salary 
increases and promotions for civil servants, and cutting back on public 
works projects, apparently has decided that upgrading relations with 
Cuba and China are worth the expense.  Certain members of the Christie 
government support FM Mitchell\'s initiative out of either ideological 
sympathy, or pure balance of power political reasons. Mitchell is doing 
this for both reasons. 
 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"12358","11/24/2003 16:22","03NASSAU2321","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 NASSAU 002321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PRM FOR NANCY IRIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/24/2013 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, PHUM, SMIG, BF, Migration 
SUBJECT: CHALLENGES OF ILLEGAL MIGRATION; CAN THE BAHAMAS 
MANAGE? 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1.    (C)  Nancy Iris, Deputy Director for the Bureau of 
Population, Refugee and Migration (PRM) visited Nassau from 
October 13 - October 17, 2003.  The Political Officer and Ms. 
Iris attended meetings with various government officials, 
members from NGOs, and toured the migrant detention center in 
Nassau.  With U.S. Coast Guard assistance, Ms. Iris was also 
able to visit Great Inagua, an island strategically located 
on the southern flank of the Bahamas, in an area particularly 
vulnerable to the passage of migrants and contraband.  A 
small, temporary  migrant facility has been established on 
Great Inagua, and The Bahamas has proposed constructing a 
larger, more permanent, and better-equipped detention center 
along with a military base on the island.  Ms. Iris concluded 
that a necessary first step in the process would be 
preparation of a master plan and cost estimate for  new 
facilities on Great Inagua prior to USG consideration of any 
investment.  Ms. Iris also began a dialogue with Bahamian 
officials regarding the development of a contingency plan in 
case of a large influx in migration.  Government and 
non-government representatives welcomed this proposal, 
admitting The Bahamas has no such plan in place. 
End Summary. 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION UNPREPARED FOR MASS MIGRATION 
 
2.    (C)  Nancy Iris was able to elicit candid responses 
from the Director of Immigration Vernon Burrows regarding the 
Bahamian lack of planning or resources available if a spike 
in the level of migration should occur.  He admitted, 
\"Migration is a scary issue for us.  We can\'t handle more 
(migrants) than we already have.\"  According to Burrows, the 
detention center on Carmichael Road in Nassau has the 
capacity to house 500 migrants indoors, with enough land to 
erect tents to provide shelter for an additional 500 
detainees.  Currently in this Detention Center there are just 
under 200 people being detained, the majority being Haitians 
and Cubans.  If there should be a sudden increase in these 
numbers, there is no GCOB (Government of the Commonwealth of 
The Bahamas) plan for how to attain the additional food, 
beds, or shelter.  Burrows suggested that GCOB has no 
contingency plan for a spike in migration, although this was 
disputed by other government officials who claimed that a 
draft plan is under preparation. 
 
3.    (C)  Senior Immigration Official Mechelle Martinez-Amor 
explained the complexity and inefficiency of processing 
asylum request in The Bahamas.  Once Ms. Martinez-Amor, or 
one of her very few trained colleagues, has completed the 
interview, the information is sent to UNHCR in Washington for 
an assessment of the case.  Their recommendation is then 
forwarded to the Department of Immigration, who then passes 
it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for Cabinet approval. 
She admits that this is a slow and laborious process, 
especially given that the final designation must be made by 
Cabinet, an unusually high level of decision making for such 
a determination. 
 
4.    (C)  Ms. Martinez-Amor told Ms. Iris that where Cubans 
are automatically pre-screened for asylum, Haitians must 
request the interview.  Few Haitians actually request an 
interview for asylum, perhaps because they believe their 
efforts would be futile.  Haitians are also at a disadvantage 
in the interview process because there is no full-time 
Creole-speaker at the detention center, and despite 
relatively high Haitian\' migrants\' rate of illiteracy, there 
is limited help in filling out the requisite forms for 
seeking asylum.  For calendar year 2002, only four migrants 
were given refugee status, according to Bahamian officials. 
 
 
SALVATION ARMY AND OFDA NOT IMPRESSED WITH GOVERNMENT PLANNING 
 
5.    (C)  Major Raphael Mason, Director of the Salvation 
Army in The Bahamas and local UNHCR representative, told Ms. 
Iris that he had made an offer to the Director of Immigration 
Vernon Burrows to provide meals and support for the detention 
center if the number of detainees exceeded the facility\'s 
capacity.  The Salvation Army currently operates a daily 
feeding program for 60-100 people.  The Salvation Army head 
disagreed with Immigration Head Burrows\' assessment that the 
detention center could hold up to 1,000 migrants.  Mason also 
requested that UNHCR representatives come to The Bahamas to 
do an awareness program on migrant issues. 
 
6.    (C)  Ms. Beryl M. Armbrister, consultant to the Office 
of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA), provided insight into 
the government perspective of contingency planning.  She 
noted that the head of the National Disaster Planning 
Commission is Mr. Carl Smith, Under Secretary of Finance in 
the Prime Minister\'s office.  Because this organization is 
not formal or legislated, and Mr. Smith\'s position is not 
permanent, Ms. Armbrister believes that this organization 
lacks continuity and effectiveness.  She proposes that this 
organization apply for a more formal status by achieving a 
legislated mandate under the Cabinet.  Political Officer 
learned that such a proposal is working its way slowly 
through the Bahamian system.  Apparently, it is \"stuck\" in 
the Attorney General,s office. 
 
 
DISCONNECT WITHIN GOVERNMENT REGARDING MIGRATION ISSUES AND 
GREAT INAGUA 
 
7.    (C)  Mr. Peter Deveaux-Isaacs, the Under Secretary at 
the Ministry of National Security, is convinced of the 
necessity for The Bahamas to develop a base on Great Inagua 
for the Royal Bahamas Defence Force.  Great Inagua is 
strategically located 50 nautical miles north of the Windward 
Passage, the maritime choke point between Haiti and Cuba. 
Much of the contraband smuggled through the Caribbean, be it 
migrants or drugs, is smuggled through the Windward Passage. 
Deveaux-Isaacs acknowledged that \"as a sovereign nation, we 
can\'t always expect people to do things for us\", referring to 
OPBAT and Coast Guard operations.  If possible he would like 
to build a multipurpose facility in Great Inagua to house 
500-600 people. 
 
8.    (C)  The southern flank of The Bahamas is a \"nightmare 
to patrol\", but with a fueling station at Great Inagua, 
Deveaux-Isaacs thinks the Defence Force could save a great 
deal of resources that are currently wasted by travel time to 
Nassau for refueling and crew rest.  Deveaux-Isaacs expressed 
a hesitancy to use the U.S. Naval Facility at Guantanamo Bay 
to refuel because he fears that utilization of this option 
might lead the USG to conclude that The Bahamas does not need 
to develop Great Inagua, relying instead on GTMO, and be less 
than forthcoming with assistance as a result.  Unlike his 
many counterparts in the government, Deveaux-Isaacs seems to 
believe that a Great Inagua based could be developed without 
U.S. assistance. 
 
9.    (U)  The migrants that are detained in Great Inagua now 
are held at the small RBDF site on the island adjoining the 
airport.  Because of its very limited resources, all effort 
is made to repatriate these migrants within 48 hours. 
Although strategically located to interdict Haitian migrants, 
the shallow marine basin in Great Inagua is incapable of 
handling any US Coast Guard vessels.  As a result, migrants 
must be shuttled off cutters to the island via small boats. 
 
10.   (C)  Ms. Donna Lowe, the Deputy Permanent Secretary of 
the Legal Division at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, gave a 
much different perspective than Immigration Director Vernon 
Burrows regarding a migration and natural disaster 
contingency plan.  According to Lowe, not only did she 
recommend that migration be taken into consideration after 
attending a UNHCR meeting in Miami in December 2002, but she 
also indicated that a plan to incorporate this contingency is 
in an advanced stage of preparation.  Apparently the 
Government of the Bahamas went to the University of Southern 
Florida to request assistance in this process.  She admitted, 
however, that getting the draft legislation is a slow process 
because it was not very high on the priority list at the 
Attorney General\'s office. 
 
11.   (C)  Ms. Lowe claims to have encouraged the Attorney 
General to make a migration contingency plan because both 
UNHCR and Amnesty International have continuously criticized 
The Bahamas for the treatment of migrants and the lack of a 
coherent plan for the future.  Although it wasn\'t to be 
distributed to the public until November 5, Lowe had seen an 
advanced copy of the new Amnesty International report on The 
Bahamas, and she admitted it is extremely critical of the 
government\'s handling of migration and detention issues. 
 
 
DETENTION CENTER NEEDS FUNDING 
 
11.   (C)  The Detention Center on Carmichael Road in Nassau 
appears inadequate in terms of space and services for the 
number of detainees currently housed there.  On the day of 
Ms. Iris\' visit, there were a total of 156 migrants being 
detained. Of these there were 56 Haitians and 80 Cubans with 
the balance made up of migrants from Venezuela, Honduras, 
Jamaica, Ecuador, Nigeria, China, Cape Verde, the 
Netherlands, and Dominican Republic.  Haitians typically are 
repatriated much more quickly than other nationalities at an 
average of 5 days.  Cubans tend to be detained on average for 
approximately 6 to 8 months at a time while the Bahamian 
government negotiates with the Cuban government for their 
repatriation.  Children held at this facility are given no 
access to education even if their length of stay extends for 
several months.  Limited healthcare, restricted access to 
outside communication and legal advice, difficulty in 
obtaining toiletries and necessary clothing, and small food 
portions are the main complaints from migrants. 
 
12.   (C)  Five large cinder-block huts sit on the Detention 
Center land holding approximately 65 beds each.  The 
Department of Immigration handles the administrative tasks at 
the detention center, and the Royal Bahamas Defence Force 
handles all security issues.  Although a doctor was 
originally scheduled to be on-site on a daily basis, the 
Chief Immigration Officer Hubert Ferguson said in actuality 
the doctor pays weekly visits to the center.   Relatives can 
visit during visitation hours and bring goods. 
 
13.   (C)  Should the Detention Center ever receive a large 
increase in its numbers, Ferguson admitted that the sewage 
and plumbing systems, security and the current food 
distribution method would be woefully inadequate.  The 
Detention Center currently offers no opportunity for 
recreation for the migrants.  There is no television, books, 
or any other form of entertainment.  Some of the migrants are 
held at this center for months at a time with little contact 
to the outside world.  Ferguson admitted a fear of an 
uprising should the migrants\' numbers increase.  Various 
ethnic groups of different languages and cultures are held in 
the same dorms at a time. 
 
14.   (SBU)  \"Bahamas: Forgotten Detainees?  Human Rights in 
Detention\", an Amnesty International Report released on 
November 5, 2003, paralleled Embassy observations of the 
conditions in the Carmichael Detention Center.  Bahamian 
Government officials have defensively responded that these 
reports were \"unbalanced\" while acknowledging that they are 
trying to improve both prison and detention facilities. 
(septel) 
 
COMMENT 
 
15.   (C)  GCOB officials in the Ministries of Labour and 
Immigration, Foreign Affairs and National Security all agreed 
that The Bahamas needs to add a mass migration contingency 
component to its ongoing natural disaster planning.  This 
idea was also supported by the Salvation Army, which 
identified areas in which it could be helpful in the event of 
such an emergency, and by AID/OFDA\'s regional consultant.  To 
date, the GCOB has taken its first wobbling step in this 
direction by moving to make its national disaster-planning 
group an official and legislated office. 
 
16.         (C) The state of planning to develop Great Inagua 
into a larger detention center with an augmented facility for 
the Royal Bahamas Defence Force depends heavily upon whom you 
talk within the Bahamian government.  Although all are in 
agreement that Great Inagua -- geographically close to both 
Haiti and Cuba -- is perfectly located for both a re-fueling 
station and migrant detention center, many are doubt that the 
Bahamian government will be able to commit sufficient 
resources to even initiate and see to fruition such a massive 
project given other, equally compelling, demands on its 
limited resources.  Prime Minister Christie argued to 
President Bush at their breakfast meeting in New York City 
recent breakfast meeting for help in developing Great Inagua. 
 The benefits of this development are numerous, but a major 
investment would be required to expand the harbor, dredge an 
entrance and construct a breakwater, build the detention 
center, upgrade airport facilities, and construct the needed 
infrastructure to provide communications water, electricity, 
and waste disposal.  Prior agreement on the conditions under 
which the USG could use these facilities would also be 
required and is likely to be a lengthy process as well. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"12620","12/9/2003 18:04","03NASSAU2421","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","03NASSAU1066|03NASSAU2056","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 002421 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/08/2013 
TAGS: BF, PGOV, PINR, SCUL, SOCI, Bahamian Politics 
SUBJECT: BISHOP ELLIS RELISHES ROLE AS POLITICAL 
\'ANNOINTER,\' AND WITH GOOD REASON 
 
REF: (A) NASSAU 1066 (B) NASSAU 2056 
 
Classified By: Charge Kay Crawford for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
- - - - 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
(1) (U) On December 2, Charge and Political Officer paid 
courtesy call to hard-to-pin-down, charismatic Bishop Neil 
Ellis.  During the nearly two hour meeting, Ellis described 
the enterprise his parish has become.  He also outlined his 
role as the local Dixville Notch, New Hampshire of Bahamian 
politics -- the one visit that all aspiring politicians must 
make in order to confirm their legitimacy.  Ellis has come 
far, from a humble background, mentored and supported by 
prominent businessman Frankie Wilson, with whom he maintains 
a close personal and business relationship. End Summary 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
THOU DARE NOT CROSS THE RELIGIOUS LEADERSHIP 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(2) (C) As reported ref. B, the conventional wisdom holds 
that former Freedom National Movement (FNM) Prime Minister 
Hubert Ingraham sealed his fate by displaying arrogance 
towards the religious leadership.  The electorate in The 
Bahamas is devout, and the church leaders refused to remain 
silent after the former PM had expressed views antithetical 
to religious conservatives, such as welcoming to port a 
cruise liner catering to gay clientele and advocating for 
constitutional reform targeted toward improving women\'s 
rights.  Ellis continued along this line, claiming that 
Ingraham is not religious and is definitely \"not a man of 
God,\" even if he does attend church.  However, nor does Ellis 
regard current Prime Minister Perry Christie as a \"true man 
of God,\" although he feels that the PM is trying to be 
religious.  Ellis then described a strange ritual (reported 
similarly ref. A) whereby Christie sought a meeting with 
Ellis over a several week period as he was gearing up his 
election campaign.  Ellis kept rebuffing the PM\'s request, 
offering him only a 10 minute slot.  Finally, however, Ellis 
offered the PM the opportunity to travel with him on a 
religious speaking tour in the U.S., promising that if the PM 
attended three of his sermons, he would be available to 
counsel the PM throughout the tour.  Thus, the two men spent 
many intense hours together, during which time Ellis looked 
into the PM\'s soul and concluded that the PM has religious 
inclinations, but is \"not yet there.\"  Though the PM is not 
one of Ellis\'s regular parishioners, since the last election, 
he attends from time to time, as do all but three cabinet 
ministers. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
MOUNT TABOR BAPTIST CHURCH -- A TRULY REMARKABLE INSTITUTION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(3) (U) Launched by a then very young Bishop Ellis from 
scratch in the late 1980\'s, Mount Tabor is now a thriving 
community of more than 7,000 members, including more than 500 
who tithe.  The church supports a wide range of missions and 
scholarship programs in The Bahamas, in the United States, 
and in Africa.  The Church has a full-time staff of 27, 
including two who manage its insurance and banking 
businesses.  During his adolescence, Bishop Ellis received 
encouragement and financial support from maverick businessman 
Frankie Wilson, with whom he lived in for 14 years.  Wilson 
is now a leader in the Bahamian insurance industry which 
underwrites a branch in Ellis\'s parish.  The church compound 
also houses a cooperative bank.  Both are exclusively for 
church members.  Ellis claims that his members pay the 
guaranteed lowest premiums for insurance products in The 
Bahamas. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
(4) (U) Bishop Ellis is certainly a player in the local 
political scene.  He also very much enjoys life in the 
limelight as he recalls visits with prominent local 
politicians and local and international celebrities.  He 
knows how to weave names into discussions without crossing 
the line into arrogance.  While he and other religious 
leaders continue to claim credit for Christie\'s dramatic 
victory in the last election, this claim may be overstated. 
Ingraham had been in power for 10 years, and given his 
autocratic style, he had ruffled many feathers. 
Nevertheless, in the current context, political leaders seem 
to have learned their lessons as they increasingly pay homage 
to religious leaders, such as Bishop Ellis. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"12704","12/15/2003 16:25","03NASSAU2452","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS NASSAU 002452 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO WHA/CAR DOCONNOR 
STATE PASS TO INL/LP KBROWN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BF, SNAR, Narcotics - OPBAT 
SUBJECT: OPBAT OPERATIVE SEIZED 1159 POUNDS OF COCAINE 
 
1. Summary.  On December 8, 2003 charges were filed before a 
Nassau magistrate against three individuals arrested on 
Saturday in connection with the seizure of 1,159.40 pounds of 
cocaine.  The seizure was completed by members of the Royal 
Bahamas Police Force in cooperation with members of the 
Operation Bahamas and Turks and Caicos (OPBAT). End of 
Summary. 
 
2. Over the weekend, drug traffickers braved the rough waters 
brought by a neighboring tropical depression to move a large 
cocaine shipment from Haiti to The Bahamas.  Acting on 
intelligence gathered, OPBAT mobilized air, marine and land 
resources to conduct a round the clock surveillance on two 
small vessels believed to be involved in the contraband near 
the Lucayan waterway of the island of Grand Bahama. 
 
3. After the crew ran the vessels ashore, the police 
confiscated the cargo and arrested three of the four Bahamian 
nationals crew members The men were charged with possessing 
dangerous drugs with intent to supply.  It is estimated that 
the narcotics have a street value of USD $16 million. 
 
4. This significant seizure that attracted the headlines of 
one of Nassau\'s major newspaper took place in a busy weekend 
that netted, in separate mission, intercepts of 1200 pounds 
of marijuana and a Haitian migrant smuggling boat with more 
than 300 people on board. OPBAT is a multi-nation, 
multi-agency initiative that includes a strong USG 
participation and support and is the largest and longest 
cooperative efforts overseas of any government involved in 
drug enforcement. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"13551","1/27/2004 20:46","04NASSAU153","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 NASSAU 000153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2014 
TAGS: BF, CA, PGOV, PREL, SMIG, SNAR, UK, Migration, Haiti 
SUBJECT: TURKS AND CAICOS: HAITIAN INFLUX THREATENS PARADISE 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1. 
4 (B) AND (D). 
 
Action Request for Embassy Ottawa:  See Paragraph 17. 
 
- - - - 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
1.  (C)  Charge, NAS, CONS, USCG, and DEA officers visited 
Turks and Caicos Islands (TCI)  January 20-23, 2004 and met 
with the Governor, Chief Minister, other cabinet members and 
senior civil servants and law enforcement personnel.  TCI 
officials were unanimous in fearing further degradation of 
the political-economic situation in Haiti and a consequent 
Haitian outflow to TCI that the country would be unable to 
deal with.  Embassy reassured TCI officials that they will 
further strengthen illegal drug and alien interdiction 
programs through OPBAT and provide information about 
developments in Haiti that might impact their country. Demand 
for consular services resulted in a vastly oversubscribed 
appointment list.  Charge appeared on three national 
television and radio programs. 
End Summary 
 
 
Illegal Haitian Immigration -- Problem No.1 in TCI 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2. (U)  Charge, accompanied by DEA, CONS, NAS, USCG, and 
OPBAT officials, visited Turks and Caicos Islands for 
meetings with government officials and media January 20 - 23, 
2004, on consular and OPBAT related issues.  The Turks and 
Caicos (TCI), although a British colony, are within Embassy 
Nassau\'s consular district and TCI is one of the three 
countries, along with the United States and The Bahamas, 
participating in OPBAT (\"Operation Bahamas, Turks and 
Caicos\"). Senior TCI officials were unanimous in their view 
that the political situation in Haiti was in secular 
deterioration and that TCI would be faced with an onslaught 
of illegal migrants in the coming months. 
 
3. (U)  Charge and NAS officer visited several Haitian 
communities that have arisen on Providenciales in the \"Five 
Cays,\" \"Blue Hills,\" and \"Thompson Cove\" areas of the island. 
 Following are a summary of Embassy observations: 
 
--  Border controls are essentially non-existent. Haitians 
can arrive/depart essentially at will by boat. 
 
--  Slums and solid middle- and upper-class housing for 
Haitians co-exist.  Rooms were being rented to Haitians for 
$50 a week. 
 
--  Small shops were ubiquitous with one or more located on 
the corners of most roads or blocks.  The neighborhood 
entrepreneurs have developed an informal system apportioning 
inventory so that there was little direct competition.  There 
was also an informal system to maintain uniform prices for 
products among the shop owners. 
 
--  Few of the (mostly male) adult Haitians we met with spoke 
English.  Haitian children, on the other hand, were rapidly 
acquiring a TCI accent from their schooling.  Haitian 
children, again being allowed schooling, appeared eager in 
the mornings to depart for school, and equally happy 
returning from schools homework in hand. 
 
--  Even the Haitian ghettos were quite crime free, nor was 
there a crime problem in nearby multi-million dollar ex-pat 
residences. 
 
--  As with The Bahamas, work for illegal Haitian immigrants 
in the construction and service industries of TCI was readily 
available. 
 
 
A Cabinet of Worried Ministers 
------------------------------ 
 
4. (C)  Charge met privately January 22 with Michael Missick, 
Chief (Prime) Minister of the Islands, at his oceanfront 
residence in the upper-class \"Leeward\" section of 
Providenciales.  Chief Minister Missick made the following 
points during the meeting: 
 
--  Appreciation for the support from OPBAT and reiteration 
of the Government\'s commitment to contribute 10 percent of 
the cost for replacing the deteriorated housing used by OPBAT 
personnel on Great Inagua OPBAT base. 
 
--  The influx of large numbers of Haitians into TCI presents 
serious health, cultural, financial, and national security 
concerns. 
 
--  The Government is worried about the \"revolving door\" in 
which repatriated Haitian migrants return to TCI within weeks 
of being deported.  The cost of the \"merry-go-round\" is 
seriously impacting on the government\'s budget. 
 
--  The Government is unhappy with London\'s response to the 
migration situation. Because London considers the Haitian 
problem to be an immigration, not a national security issue, 
it is not providing the TCI Government with financial support 
to defray the expense of either enforcement or repatriation. 
 
--  A promise to move quickly to implement machine readable 
passports for TCI passports as a first step in reducing 
border porosity. 
 
Give Us Pre-Clearance, Please 
----------------------------- 
 
5. (U)  Chief Minister Missick argued forcefully for 
establishment of pre-clearance facilities in Providenciales. 
He noted that 80 percent of the 165,000 yearly visitors were 
U.S. citizens arriving and departing on U.S. carriers.  The 
Chief Minister also argued that on a percentage basis, TCIers 
probably had one of the highest percentages rates of 
visitation to the United States to study, shop, and seek 
medical attention. 
 
6. (U)  The Chief Minister also argued strongly for 
establishment of a permanent U.S. consular presence in 
Providenciales to both assist U.S. citizens, as well as to 
provide visa services.  He argued that TCI residents spent 
more per capita in the United States than citizens of any 
other country while complaining that having to travel to 
Nassau for visas was both time-consuming and expensive, 
requiring a minimum of a two-night stay.  He indicated that 
his government considered a regular U.S. consular presence of 
such importance, that it would consider absorbing a 
significant percentage of the cost of building a security 
facility for Embassy personnel. 
 
7. (U)  Charge reviewed security, budgetary, and personnel 
limitations that made establishment of either a permanent 
Embassy consular presence or a pre-clearance facility in the 
near term unlikely. 
 
8. (SBU)  Chief Minister also raised the concerns of his 
government regarding both issuance of A and G visas for 
official travel, as well as airport courtesies for him and 
members of his cabinet.  Charge responded citing the various 
procedures in place in the Embassy that assured that most 
applicants received visas within one hour of paying the 
application fee,  promised that the Embassy would do all 
necessary to facilitate rapid issuance of visas for official 
travel, and reviewed the steps that the British Embassy in 
Washington would need to take to arrange for airport 
courtesies and special security handling for TCI cabinet 
members. 
 
 
Senior Officials Share Chief Minister\'s Concerns 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
9.  (C)  In a separate meeting chaired by the TCI senior 
civil servant, Acting Permanent Secretary William Clare, with 
Charge, DEA and OPBAT officials, Mr. Clare and a group of 
senior TCI police and immigration officials: 
 
--  Were effusive in praise of the assistance that they have 
been receiving from the U.S. while asking for an even greater 
OPBAT and Coast Guard presence. 
 
--  Reiterated their belief that Haitian migrants were almost 
exclusively economically, not politically, motivated. 
 
--  Insisted that the country was approaching a saturation 
point in accepting Haitians.  While \"we can hardly blame them 
for trying to escape (Haiti)...we in TCI simply cannot 
accommodate them at the rate they are coming in,\" Clare 
declared.  Clare estimated that there were 15,000 illegal 
Haitians residing in a country of 30,000 citizens and only 
6,500 registered voters. 
 
--  Repeated concerns that the country\'s social services, 
schools, medical facilities, and public health were at risk. 
Officials noted that a majority of all pregnant mothers in 
the country were illegal Haitians. 
 
--  Requested an additional USCG presence between TCI and 
Haiti to interdict both illegal drugs and illegal aliens. 
 
10.  (C)  TCI officials told Embassy officials that they 
would need at least three additional ocean-going vessels to 
have any impact deterring Haitian immigration to TCI.  TCI 
police also noted that they currently have only one 
functioning blue water vessel. 
 
11.  (U)  TCI officials also indicated that because of their 
limited resources and on-island expertise in criminal 
investigations, they would like additional Embassy assistance 
in interceding with the FBI and other U.S. law enforcement 
agencies in doing criminal checks, providing forensics 
experts for investigations, and assistance and training in 
detection of forged documents including passports, visas, and 
U.S. currency. 
 
 
Governor: Some Similar -- and Some Different -- Concerns 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
12. (C)  In a private meeting with Governor Jim Poston, First 
Secretary David Peate,his chief deputy, Governor Poston made 
 
SIPDIS 
the following points to Charge, DEA, and OPBAT officials from 
the Embassy: 
 
--  Inquired if the Embassy was aware of a proposal of a 
Canadian member of parliament to make TCI a \"freely 
associated state\" with Canada and asked how seriously Charge 
considered such a proposal. 
 
--  Noted that if TCI decided to formally declare 
independence from the United Kingdom, London would interpose 
no objections as long as there was a sufficient transition 
period to arrange the transfer and assurances were received 
regarding assumption from the UK of TCI\'s legal and financial 
obligations. 
 
--  Noted that London was no longer providing any capital 
contributions to TCI and believed that the TCI government 
should be entirely self-financed. 
 
--  Praised the current level of cooperation and assistance 
to TCI being provided by OPBAT. 
 
--  Expressed concern about the honesty and integrity of some 
senior TCI law enforcement officials.  Embassy DEA officials 
responded that they were not aware that any confidential drug 
information provided to TCI officials had been compromised. 
 
--  Noted that because of the islands\' small population, 
getting a jury to convict TCI citizens of certain crimes such 
as drug trafficking was \"problematical.\"  For that reason, 
Governor Poston continued, he had no objection to arrests and 
trials of traffickers in other jurisdictions such as the 
United States or The Bahamas. 
 
--  Expressed concern that the drug problem/drug wealth in 
TCI was growing, but acknowledged that evidence was, at this 
point, still mostly anecdotal. 
 
--  Pointed out that since TCI had no national development 
plan, opinions about the presence of illegal Haitians was 
mixed.  He wryly observed that contractors, builders, and 
developers welcomed cheap Haitian labor even while decrying 
the threat to TCI society that they posed.  The 
compartmentalization of opinions about Haitians was such that 
even organizing a forthcoming police raid of illegal Haitians 
working in Providenciales had been complex and time-consuming. 
 
--  Acknowledged that the country continued to side-step the 
issue of the legal status of Haitians born in TCI and whether 
or not to admit them as TCI \"belongers.\" 
--  Agreed to work with telephone provider Cable and Wireless 
to provide OPBAT with a wire and cellphone monitoring 
capability as new technologies were introduced. 
 
 
Police and Immigration:  Drugs, Terrorists, and Haitians 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
13. (C)  TCI Police Commissioner Paul Harvey admitted to 
Embassy officials that the Turks and Caicos had \"essentially 
open borders.\"  He was concerned about reports that Haitians 
were building vessels to depart their country if political 
instability threatens, that Colombian drug cartels were 
stockpiling drugs in Haiti for shipment through TCI and The 
Bahamas to the United States, and a growing incidence of 
Haitian sloops being used for dual purpose cargoes:  illegal 
drugs and illegal migrants.  Other points made by Harvey 
included: 
--  An apparent concentration of drug smuggling activities on 
Providenciales 
where it is much easier for both drugs and illegal migrants 
to integrate into an already large Haitian community vice 
Grand Turk where newcomers \"would immediately stand out.\" 
 
--  Recognition of heightened post 9-11 security concerns and 
the impact on TCI of a terrorist incident, but lack of 
resources to conduct even minimal background checks on 
airport employees. 
 
--  Frustration from a lack of intelligence within the 
Haitian community due to an inability to recruit confidential 
sources. 
 
14.  (C)  Senior Immigration officials echoed Harvey\'s 
concerns and Government fears of a worsening situation in 
Haiti.  Asked how TCI would cope with a sudden influx of new 
migrants, officials responded candidly, \"Call the Embassy and 
turn to the United States for help.\"  OPBAT/Coast Guard 
officers reviewed recent activities by the USCG to interdict 
illegal migrants and USCG plans for an increased presence in 
the region in the coming months.  Officials complained that 
they had only daylight operating capability with the result 
being that most illegal Haitian migrants now arrived, 
undetected, in TCI at night. 
 
 
Public Outreach 
--------------- 
 
15. (U)  Embassy officials spent significant time in public 
outreach.  Charge was interviewed for 10 minutes on the 
national news and separately for 20 minutes for a new 
interview program on bilateral relations, the situation in 
Haiti and Embassy consular services to TCI.  In addition, 
Charge and Consular Chief spent over an hour being 
interviewed and responding to callers\' questions on policy, 
immigration, and visa  questions on the country\'s national TV 
and radio network. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
16.  (C)  If the Bahamians are anxious and concerned about 
the impact of a large illegal Haitian presence in their 
country, citizens of the Turks and Caicos, with less than 10 
percent of the population of The Bahamas, are petrified. 
They fear the imminent loss of their cultural identity and, 
perhaps, political control of their country.  But, like their 
neighbors to the North, they do not know how to resolve the 
problem.  Even were they willing to increase taxes to acquire 
additional resources, a country of 30,000 could never create 
the impermeable boundary that would be required.  And, like 
The Bahamas, TCI would have trouble functioning without the 
presence of inexpensive \"gastarbiters\" who perform the 
essential manual labor that drives the construction and 
service industries that are the country\'s economic foundation. 
 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
17.  (SBU)  Embassy would appreciate Embassy Ottawa\'s 
analysis of the seriousness -- or lack thereof -- and 
prospects of success of a Canadian MP\'s plan to offer TCI 
\"freely- associated\" status with Canada that some within the 
TCI Government see as possible solution to many of their 
immediate financial and migration problems. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"13970","2/13/2004 16:45","04NASSAU322","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU285","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000322 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2014 
TAGS: MCAP, PBTS, PHSA, PINS, PREF, Security, Haiti 
SUBJECT: ROYAL BAHAMAS DEFENSE FORCE PREPAREDNESS -- A ROOT 
CAUSE FOR BAHAMIAN CONCERN 
 
REF: NASSAU 285 
 
- - - - 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
(1) (C) The possibility of uncontrolled outflows from Haiti 
is a dominant undercurrent in the on-going domestic debate in 
The Bahamas about the implications of current unrest 
throughout Haiti.  Underlying this debate is Bahamian 
recognition that the country of 305,000 inhabitants is 
ill-equipped to control is own borders.  The assets that the 
Royal Bahamian Defence Force (RBDF) could bring to bear in 
the event of large migrant outflows from Haiti to, or 
through, The Bahamas are extremely limited.  The Royal 
Bahamas Defense Force navy includes only four currently 
functioning vessels.  The Bahamas would be completely 
dependent on the United States in the event an uncontrolled 
outflow occurs. 
END SUMMARY 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HOW HELPFUL CAN THE RBDF BE IF A MASS MIGRATION OCCURS? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(2) (C) The answer is, in summary, \"not much.\"  The RBDF has 
four currently operational medium/large vessels to patrol 
Bahamian territorial waters encompassing 100,000 square miles 
-- an area equal in size to the state of California. 
 
3. (C) The RBDF naval complete inventory is 15 vessels, nine 
of which are currently operational, only four of which are 
large enough to patrol large areas.  The inventory is as 
follows: 
 
 
HMBS Nassau; HMBS Bahamas 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4.  (SBU)  These are two 60 meter, 375 ton displacement 
vessels, each with a patrolling range of 3,000 miles.  Both 
of these two ships regularly patrols Southern Bahamian 
waters, under normal circumstances. 
 
5. (C)  The HMBS Nassau is operational.  The HMBS Bahamas is 
out of service for the past three months for major engine 
repairs estimated to cost $600,000.  The  government hopes 
that repairs could be effected by early March, but this goal 
is unlikely to be met.  On February 9, Foreign Minister Fred 
Mitchell told Charge that he expected the \"Bahamas\" to be 
back in service by March 5.  However, FM Mitchell\'s optimism 
has not been seconded by other Bahamian officials.  RDDF and 
a senior Ministry of National Security official acknowledged 
to Charge February 11 that the HMBS Bahamas was unlikely to 
be returned to service before the end of March, at the 
earliest. 
 
6. (C)  To compensate for the absence of the HMBS Bahamas, 
the senior-most National Security officials have told Charge 
that they strongly favor using the U.S. Naval Base at 
Guantanamo for refueling and re-provisioning in order to 
increase the HMBS Nassau\'s on-site presence.  FM Mitchell is 
reluctant to support this action for political reasons.  RBDF 
Commodore Rolle is simply reluctant. 
 
HMBS Yellow Elder; HMBS Port Nelson; HMBS Samana 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (SBU)  These are 33-meter vessels, each with a patrolling 
range of 600 miles.  One of the ships in this category 
regularly patrols Southern Bahamian waters. 
 
8. (C)  HMBS Yellow Elder is operational.  The \"Port Nelson\" 
and \"Samana,\" are currently out of service with no return to 
service date predicted. 
 
HMBSA Inagua 
- - - - - - 
 
9. (SBU)  The \"Inagua\" is an 18 meter, 30 ton vessel with a 
patrolling range of 650 miles.  This vessel regularly patrols 
the Exuma Islands and the Ragged Island Basin. 
 
Smaller Vessels With Limited Patrolling Capabilities 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
10. (SBU)  There are also two 12-meter vessels, each with a 
patrolling range of 600 miles.  One regularly patrols the 
Exumas and southern New Providence islands.  The other is 
currently out of service for an engine rebuild.  The return 
to service date is unknown, but the repair has been scheduled. 
 
11. (SBU)  The fleet rounds off with four 6-meter Boston 
Whalers that are based at Nassau Harbor and perform security 
patrols in the country\'s principal cruise ship port and three 
\"go-fast\" boats.  One of the go-fasts is currently 
operational and based at the RDDF headquarters base in Coral 
Harbor on New Providence Island.  The other two \"go-fasts\" 
are undergoing repairs with unknown return to service dates. 
 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
12.  (C)  As this overview indicates, the Bahamian fleet is 
modest and effectively incapable, even under normal 
circumstances, of fulfilling the RBDF\'s roles of drug and 
alien interdiction, interdiction of fish poachers within The 
Bahamas\' exclusive economic zone, and frequent search and 
rescue operations in the 100,000 square miles of Bahamian 
territorial seas.  Effectively, there are only eight vessels 
suitable for patrol between The Bahamas and Haiti and half of 
these are out of service for mechanical reasons. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"14064","2/18/2004 22:01","04NASSAU341","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR/D.OCONNOR, 
USDOC FOR ITA/TD/OETCA/BUSBY, 
3134/USFCS/IO/WH/MANN, AND 
4322/ITA/IEP/WH/OMCB/MBROOKS 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV, BEXP, ETRD, BF, Tourism 
SUBJECT: TOURISM UPDATE FOR 2003 
 
 
1.   SUMMARY.  Led by cruise ship arrivals, particularly to 
the Family Islands, overall tourism arrivals to The Bahamas 
increased in 2003 for the fifth consecutive year.  However, 
there was a downturn in hotel room revenues and arrivals to 
Grand Bahama also declined slightly.  After highly 
contentious negotiations, the tourism industry recently 
concluded a major a 5-year contract for tourism workers. 
The Ministry held the first annual National Tourism 
Conference in an effort to inform tourism officials about 
changes in the industry and to strategize on keeping The 
Bahamas competitive.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
TOURISM YEAR END 2003 STATISTICS 
-------------------------------- 
 
2.   In 2003, tourism arrivals for the entire Bahamas 
increased to 4,594,042 up from 4,405,971 in 2002.  However, 
hotel room revenues for the entire Bahamas fell by 4.8 
percent in 2003 compared to 2002 levels, dropping to 317 
million dollars from 333 million dollars in 2002. 
 
3.   Overall average daily room rates for 2003 increased by 
5.1 percent to 163.97 dollars over 155.97 dollars in 2002. 
The average room occupancy level stood at 59.6 percent for 
2003 compared to a 62 percent for 2002. 
 
4.   The Nassau/Paradise Island hotel industry represented 
268 million of overall room revenues for the first 11 months 
in 2003, with an average daily room rate of 187.68 dollars 
and an average occupancy level of 66.7 percent.  Both 
figures fell short of 2002 levels. 
 
5.   In 2003, Grand Bahama generated 35 million dollars in 
room revenues, with an average daily room rate of 83.95 
dollars -- an increase of 3.1 percent over 81.46 dollars in 
2002.  The average occupancy level for 2003 stood at 48.5 
percent -- a decrease of 6.3 percent over 2002 levels. 
 
6.  Room revenues in the Family Islands fell 10.1 percent 
from 15 million dollars in 2002 to 13 million dollars in 
2003.  Average room rates stood at 160.74 dollars, only a 
slight decrease over the 2002 level.  Occupancy levels 
increased slightly to 35.3 percent. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FACING THE TOURISM INDUSTRY 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
7.   The Ministry of Tourism held its first Annual Bahamas 
Tourism Conference during the week of January 26 to discuss 
challenges and opportunities facing the tourism industry. 
The Director General of Tourism Vincent Vanderpool-Wallace 
said that the Ministry\'s target is to attract five million 
visitors to The Bahamas, and increase tourism spending to 2 
billion dollars per year by 2005.  Some of the challenges 
facing The Bahamas that he discussed include: the relatively 
high cost of flights to The Bahamas; attracting the best and 
brightest Bahamian talents into the industry, and increasing 
hotel occupancy.  The Ministry also has to tackle the many 
complaints by visitors about the high price of the 
destination; uncleanliness of the islands, and the request 
for more guided tours. 
 
8.  A special guest speaker at the conference, marketing 
expert Dr. Peter Yesawich, conference attendees of schemes 
that would make The Bahamas seem \"fresh\" to American 
travelers.  He noted that revamping the Nassau International 
Airport is only the first step The Bahamas must take in 
order to keep its product \"fresh.\"  Yesawich said that there 
is a growing interest among Americans for family vacations 
and weekend travel, which is a good market for The Bahamas 
to target.  He also suggested that The Bahamas reach out to 
weekday vacationers.  Instead of complaining about \"slow 
months\" in the tourism industry, he suggested that the 
country build a convention center.  He further stated that 
The Bahamas should exceed visitor expectations through 
exceptional experience and service and fortify and sustain 
visitor arrivals through marketing and promotion.  He 
emphasized that most Americans are looking for something 
different when searching for travel destinations and that 
The Bahamas should promote diversity by highlighting its 
uniqueness and combining it into the visitor\'s experience. 
 
--------------------------- 
HOTEL UNION CONTRACT SIGNED 
--------------------------- 
 
9.   After 16 months of contentious negotiations, leaders of 
the Bahamas Employers Association, The Bahamas Hotel and 
Allied Workers Union and the Minister of Labor finally 
signed a 17 million dollar, five-year industrial agreement 
for hotel union employees on January 29.  The contract 
provides for an across-the-board increase in salaries for 
hotel workers retroactive to January 7, 2003, and is valid 
to January 7, 2008.  The 16-month contract negotiations have 
been the longest in the history of negotiations between the 
two bodies.  Additionally, the extended negotiation process 
resulted in a targeted \"slowdown\" during the December visit 
of South African President Tabo Mbeki, which caused great 
embarrassment to Prime Minister Perry Christie. 
 
10.  As a result of the long negotiation period and the 
labor unrest experienced during this time, the Prime 
Minister announced plans to review labor laws in order to 
avoid future disruptions in the tourism sector, which 
generates 40-60 percent of GDP.  The government is 
considering the Barbados Protocol Four as a model.  The 
Protocol is aimed at ensuring the resolution of industrial 
issues without causing disruption to the economy. 
 
11.  Hotel Union President Pat Bain has, however, stated 
that the union resents the position taken by the government 
regarding changes to the labor laws and said that such 
changes would be met with \"strong and endless\" resistance. 
Bain further stated that whoever is entertaining such a 
thought is moving in the wrong direction.  Mr. Bain noted 
that the union believes that all laws should be progressive 
and not regressive, nor should laws be changed as a reaction 
to unions exercising their legal right.  He stressed that 
labor laws should not be made without consultation with all 
social partners. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
ATLANTIS - THE ANCHOR FOR THE BAHAMIAN TOURISM INDUSTRY 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
12.  Kerzner International\'s Atlantis Resort continues to be 
the anchor for the Bahamian tourism industry.  Kerzner 
reported a net income of 3.0 million dollars for the 2003 
fourth quarter, compared to a net income of 0.9 million 
dollars for the same period in 2002.  Adjusted net income 
for the quarter was 4.8 million dollars compared to 4.4 
million dollars in 2002.  Adjusted net income per share for 
the quarter was 0.16 dollars as compared to 0.15 dollars 
achieved in 2002.  Butch Kerzner, Chief Executive Officer of 
the company, said that in 2003 they combined strong earnings 
performance with major future growth initiatives.  During 
the 2003 fourth quarter, Atlantis achieved an average 
occupancy rate of 73 percent with a 218 dollar average daily 
room rate, compared to an average occupancy of 72 percent 
and average daily room rate of 216 dollars during the same 
period in 2002.  The company expects its average room rate 
to increase this year by an additional 3 percent for 
selected visitors.  The high occupancy levels it is 
currently experiencing bode well for this prediction. 
 
13.  COMMENT:  The tourism industry is expected to remain 
stable, but sluggish throughout the year.  The Ministry of 
Tourism has much work to do, however, to maintain its 
competitive edge in the industry.  Given the slow pace that 
the government is moving to launch plans for the 
refurbishment of Nassau International Airport, it is 
unlikely this major project will be completed in order to 
coincide with the scheduled completion of Atlantis Phase III 
by the end of 2005, unless Kerzner also delays his project 
start date.  END COMMENT. 
 
Witajewski 
"
"14198","2/23/2004 21:20","04NASSAU364","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU211|04NASSAU212|04NASSAU263|04NASSAU322","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 NASSAU 000364 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, SMIG, BF, HA, Haiti 
SUBJECT: ANXIOUS PRIME MINISTER REQUESTS MEETING ON HAITI 
 
REF: A) NASSAU 211 B) NASSAU 212 C) NASSAU 263 D) 
     NASSAU 322 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
- - - - 
Summary 
- - - - 
 
1  (C)  At a special luncheon function to honor Junior 
Achievement on February 19, Prime Minister Christie twice 
came to the Charge\'s table to request an \"urgent\" meeting the 
morning of February 20, later set for 12:30 in the PM\'s 
office.  As events in Haiti continue to deteriorate, the 
sense of vulnerability by the Government of the Commonwealth 
of The Bahamas (GCOB) at being overwhelmed by mass Haitian 
migration continues to grow.  In this light, both the PM and 
Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell have exerted considerable time 
and energy in recent weeks to mediate peace talks between 
President Aristide and the opposition (reported reftels A, B 
and C).  Increasing deterioration in conditions in Haiti are 
also reinforcing the Bahamian Government\'s sense of 
dependence on the United States in the event uncontrolled 
Haitian migrant outflows occur.  At the 60 minute meeting on 
February 20 in his private office, PM Christie updated Charge 
on recent developments on Haiti from his Government\'s 
perspective. 
END SUMMARY 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - 
FOREIGN MINISTER BRIEFS THE UN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - 
 
2. (C)  Christie initiated the discussion with a report on 
Foreign Minister Mitchell\'s just-concluded presentation at 
the United Nations General Assembly that morning.  The 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs later faxed the Embassy a copy of 
Mitchell\'s speech, which focused on the CARICOM proposal, 
including a constitutional role for a Prime Minister, rules 
governing protests and demonstrations by the opposition, the 
professionalization of the Haitian National Police, and 
additional security and economic support.  FM Mitchell also 
called for the international community to \"provide immediate 
security assistance to bring stability to Haiti, including 
helping the legitimate authority of Haiti to restore law and 
order and disarm the elements that now seek to violently 
overthrow the government, and who have interrupted 
humanitarian assistance.\"  Mitchell continued using -- for 
him -- unusually strong language: \"Those armed gangs who seek 
now to overthrow the constitutional order should be urged to 
lay down their arms and if not they should be disarmed.\" 
 
3. (C)  Christie related to Charge that in New York Mitchell 
had sought out and obtained additional support, particularly 
from Central and South American countries, for the CARICOM 
approach.  Christie was particularly proud that Bahamian 
efforts had resulted in Venezuela, Bolivia, and Argentina 
agreeing to send police or military to Haiti as he observed, 
wryly, that these three countries did not normally agree with 
the U.S. of late.  Christie also announced that FM Mitchell 
and Assistant Secretary Roger Noriega would fly to Haiti 
Saturday to continue to work all sides of the issue. 
Christie spoke authoritatively about conversations between FM 
Mitchell and A/S. Noriega and between Mitchell and NSC 
Western Hemisphere Director Tom Shannon. He also indicated 
that he had been in contact with members of the U.S. 
Congressional Black Caucus to allay their \"deep concerns\" 
about the \"good faith\" of the U.S. and others in seeking a 
resolution to Haiti\'s crisis. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
A RELUCTANT ROLE IN HAITI FOR MITCHELL? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. (C)  The Prime Minister described his week of frantic 
conference calls on the Haitian crisis and a U.S. preference 
for the Bahamian Foreign Minister to play a new, and 
significant on-going role in Haiti as the third member in a 
tripartite committee that, Christie seemed to believe would 
effectively serve as a kind of \"Council of Wise Men\" in 
governing the country.  Christie said that as he understood 
current plans, the council would be composed of three 
members: a representative from the Haitian Opposition, an 
independent Haitian Prime Minister, and Bahamian FM Mitchell 
representing Caricom and others.  According to the Prime 
Minister, however, President Aristide had expressed 
reservations about the constitutionality of formally creating 
such a body.  However, Christie continued, he believed from 
his conversations with him that President Aristide would 
accept an arrangement in which the same group would 
\"informally\" advise him on matters. 
 
5. (C)  Continuing his exposition, Christie then went on to 
say that his preferred solution would be for the United 
States or the French to assume the leadership of this body 
and supply the \"third member\" rather than The Bahamas. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - 
PRIME MINISTER WORKS THE PHONES IN NASSAU -- DEFERS TO U.S. 
AS \"TOP DOG\" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - 
 
6. (C)  The Bahamian Prime Minister appeared comfortable in 
his newly-assumed role of international mediator. He noted 
that he had spoken \"at least a dozen times\" with Haitian 
President Aristide of late, and this week alone reported that 
he had spoken with the Haitian President at least once each 
day.  Explaining his frequent telephone conversations, PM 
Christie declared that, given the urgency of the situation, 
he did not want to risk having his message diluted or 
distorted \"by leaving (the resolution of the crisis) to 
ambassadors.\" 
 
7. (C)  Noting that President Aristide had claimed that 
\"bandits\" were responsible for attacking the Opposition, not 
government forces, PM Christie said that each time he spoke 
with Aristide he had stressed the importance of Aristide 
appealing directly to the U.S., France, or Canada for 
assistance in re-equipping Haitian police so that law and 
order could be restored.  Christie indicated some sympathy 
for Aristide\'s claimed plight, telling Charge that \"there is 
simply no way that a demoralized police force of less than 
5,000 can maintain law in order in a country of more than 7 
million.\"  Christie seemed hopeful that the U.S. would 
reconsider its position against supplying the Haitian police 
with lethal weapons, and at a minimum do more to support the 
Haitian police with non-lethal support. 
 
8. (C)  Christie indicated his preference for continued 
direct high-level involvement in Haiti.  He felt that it was 
important that he and others at the head of state level 
continue to involve themselves in the situation and interact 
directly with Aristide in order to reinforce the urgency of 
the situation. Christie said that it had been his idea to 
contact South African President Thabo Mbeki to try to involve 
him in Haiti.  It would be appropriate, he said, for the 
world\'s \"newest black nation\" to help the world\'s \"oldest 
black nation.\"   At regular intervals during the one-hour 
meeting, Christie reiterated the pleas for assistance to 
restore law and order in Haiti made by himself and others to 
Secretary Powell, President Bush, Secretary General Annan, 
 
SIPDIS 
and the O.A.S. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
SYMPATHIZES WITH ARISTIDE\'S CONCERNS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
9. (C)  Christie stressed his agreement with his Foreign 
Minister that the best resolution would be an agreement that 
conferred some \"dignity\" to Aristide.  Christie specifically 
sympathized with Aristide\'s complaint that he (Aristide) was 
being asked to take unconstitutional actions.  The Bahamian 
Prime Minister indicated that based on his conversations with 
Aristide, he believed that Aristide was not opposed to 
working with the opposition on the joint appointment  of a 
new Prime Minister and subsequently a new cabinet, but is 
objecting to being left out of the process or becoming a 
figurehead for the remainder of his term in office.  Christie 
also made clear his position that President Aristide is 
Haiti\'s legitimately elected constitutional leader.  But 
Christie then coupled this principled stand with an 
evaluation of the state of the Haitian opposition from his 
position as a practicing politician.  \"Even with a year to 
organize,\" he said, \"the opposition will not match Aristide\'s 
level of support, and would lose if Aristide decided to run 
again, which he will not.\" 
 
10. (C)  In this vein, Christie volunteered what he thought 
might be the outcome of the February 21 talks in Port au 
Prince, Christie said that he assumed that the United States 
had the power to achieve a solution.  Christie said that he 
was confident that A/S Noriega \"had the clout\" to bring 
Haitian Opposition leader Apaid around, and that once Apaid 
signed on to an agreement, the rest of the Opposition \"would 
follow\" in permitting President Aristide to serve his term 
out since they couldn\'t organize themselves to win an 
election now. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
TURNING TO THE U.S. IN EVENT OF AN OUTFLOW FROM HAITI 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
11. (C)  Turning from the crisis in Haiti to the consequences 
for The Bahamas if that country\'s political instability 
results in a migrant outflow, PM Perry Christie went on at 
great length to reiterate his determination to build a deep 
water port at Great Inagua that would serve as his country\'s 
strategic southern base.  As he lamented: \"The Haitian 
problem isn\'t going to go away for years to come.\"  Given 
this reality, he was convinced that the Royal Bahamian 
Defence Force (RBDF) will always need to patrol the country\'s 
vast southern waters.  Moreover, he continued, the drug 
problem will always be there, and The Bahamas faces a 
consistent problem of fish poaching in by neighboring 
countries.  According to Christie, \"Last year the Dominican 
Republic exported $2 million in conch, and their ain\'t no 
conch in Dominican waters!\"  Clearly, he declared, it is in 
the best interests of The Bahamas to have a deep water port 
and refueling station at its southern tip.  Christie 
reiterated the common interests of the United States in 
having access to a similarly-situated facility and again 
asked for the Charge\'s help in obtaining U.S. funding for 
construction of a harbor and breakwater at Great Inagua. 
 
12. (C)  Charge responded that the U.S. would like to support 
the Bahamian plan, but that it had been extremely difficult 
to get RBDF and National Security officials to go beyond 
global declarations and obtain specific plans regarding GCOB 
intentions on Great Inagua.  Given budgetary constraints in 
the United States, Charge explained that until specific plans 
were forthcoming, backed up by a GCOB actually committing its 
own funds, U.S. agencies would be reluctant to even consider 
blocking off possible funding.  Noting that the U.S. was 
already looking at FY 06 budgets, Charge urged the Prime 
Minister to accelerate internal GCOB decision-making on Great 
Inagua.  The Prime Minister agreed, indicating that his 
government is willing to work out the details immediately. 
 
13. (C)  In addition to construction of a southern strategic 
base in Great Inagua, the Prime Minister also revealed that 
he was in negotiations to conclude an agreement with Royal 
Caribbean Cruise Line to build a deep water port at Great 
Inagua.  Though the island is currently barren, it is home to 
more than 50,000 pink flamingos, a huge Morton Salt plant, 
and at least one nice beach.  He was hoping that the flamingo 
national park would provide cruise ship passengers with an 
interesting diversion to the normal Caribbean port of call. 
Christie took on board Charge\'s suggestion that costs of 
constructing a base on Great Inagua could effectively be 
reduced if any Royal Caribbean construction were to be made 
part of the GCOB\'s plans. 
 
- - - - - 
NO ASYLUM 
- - - - - 
 
14. (C)  Regarding what The Bahamas would do in the event 
that large numbers of Haitians started appearing on Bahamian 
territory, the Prime Minister indicated that he would turn to 
the United States to effect repatriation.  The Bahamas, he 
said, simply had no capacity to maintain large numbers of 
migrants for any period of time.  Declaring that he had no 
concert with \"those liberals\" on this issue, he declared that 
there would never be asylum in The Bahamas for Haitians.  The 
total population of The Bahamas was, he said, \"less than that 
of a small town in the United States.  We simply cannot do 
what Amnesty International and other groups would insist on 
us.\" 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
OPERATION COMPASSION HAS A NEW RELEVANCE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
15. (C)  Christie was surprisingly well versed on the 
proposed latest iteration of Operation Compassion, a joint 
patrolling exercise that involves enhanced communication and 
coordination between the RBDF and the U.S. Coast Guard.  PM 
Christie reported that the Cabinet had discussed 
participation in \"Op Compassion\" the previous day and had 
approved Bahamian involvement.  As the Haitian crisis has 
evolved, the GCOB has deliberately taken steps in its public 
comments to publicize an increased RBDF presence in southern 
Bahamian waters.  Charge indicated that we believed that the 
USCG would be prepared to engage in planning discussions for 
this iteration of Op Compassion as early as March 3-4. 
 
16. (C)  However, as Ref D reports, only four of the eight 
RBDF vessels capable of long range patrolling are 
operational.  Charge queried the Prime Minister on the return 
to service date of the HMBS Bahamas noting that effective 
Bahamian participation in this six-month extended \"Op 
Compassion\" required that there be at least three functioning 
RBDF vessels (the HMBS Bahamas, Nassau, and Yellow Elder) so 
that one would be on station 24/7 throughout the exercise. 
Similarly, Charge noted that the logistics of keeping a 
Bahamian vessel on site 24/7 also presumed that the RBDF 
vessels would re-fuel and re-provision at Guantanamo Naval 
Base rather than make extended return trips to its home port 
of Coral Harbour in New Providence.  Finally,  Charge noted 
that we would need assurances of the commitment and 
cooperation of RBDF Commodore Rolle to commit the necessary 
assets to the operation.  PM Christie responded that the 
repairs have started and completing them is a government 
priority.  He also acknowledged Commodore Rolle\'s reluctance 
to commit the necessary assets by explaining that Rolle 
claims he needs to keep some ships in reserve in the event of 
other problems in other areas of the country.  The Prime 
Minister said that he overrode the Commodore\'s objections by 
asking him rhetorically, \"What other crisis could impact on 
The Bahamas right now that is more critical than preventing a 
migrant outflow from Haiti?\" 
 
17. (C)  Closing this part of the discussion,  the Prime 
Minister also urged the U.S. to simplify matters by providing 
fuel to RBDF vessels at no cost, as the relative costs are a 
mere \"drop in the bucket\" for the U.S.  As Charge responded 
that refueling costs to the GCOB would probably be much lower 
at Guantanamo than in Nassau, the Prime Minister jokingly 
accused Charge of \"trying to nickel and dime me!\" while 
thanking him for not yet pressuring him for an Article 98 
agreement in the meeting. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
18.  (C)  The fact that the over-programmed Prime Minister 
would budget more than one hour for a meeting on one day\'s 
notice speaks to the overriding importance Haiti has in local 
politics.  PM Christie is clearly committed to remaining 
engaged on finding a solution to the Haitian problem, and 
accepts that this is currently the dominating project of his 
Foreign Minister, who is also the Minister of Public Service. 
 While his decision-making style may be protracted and 
indecisive, Bahamian Prime Minister Perry Christie is also an 
impressive, dynamic, charismatic  and ebullient presence and 
an indefatigable seeker of consensus.  For the purpose of 
promoting peace in Haiti, his personality compliments that of 
Foreign Minister Mitchell, which is steadier, stealthier, and 
more methodical.  Given The Bahamas\' proximity to Haiti, both 
feel The Bahamas has no choice except engagement. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"14236","2/24/2004 22:20","04NASSAU384","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU211|04NASSAU212|04NASSAU263|04NASSAU322|04NASSAU364","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000384 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2014 
TAGS: BF, HA, PGOV, PREL, SMIG, Haiti 
SUBJECT: BAHAMAS GOVERNMENT SEEKS SUPPORT FOR FUTURE UN 
SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING ON HAITI 
 
REF: A) NASSAU 211 B) NASSAU 212 C) NASSAU 263 D) 
     NASSAU 322 E) NASSAU 364 
 
Classified By: Charge Abdelnour Zaiback for reasons 1.5 (B) and 1.5 (D) 
 
- - - - 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1) (C) On February 24, Acting Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Permanent Secretary Marilyn Zonicle separately demarched each 
UN Security Council member with representation in The Bahamas 
for support for a possible UN Security Council meeting on 
Haiti that may be requested by Jamaica Prime Minister 
Patterson as early as Thursday.  The original plan was to 
request the Security Council to meet on February 25 on Haiti, 
however, President Aristide asked that the meeting be 
deferred for 24 hours while he pursued the ongoing 
negotiations.  For its part, The Bahamas seeks the active 
support of the U.S. as the \"most important\" member of the 
Security Council as it engages on a full scale diplomatic 
press to achieve peace in Haiti.  If diplomacy fails, The 
Bahamas believes that military assistance will be essential, 
and is willing to contribute troops to a multinational effort 
to maintain law and order.  END SUMMARY 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
FOREIGN MINISTER MITCHELL ON STAND BY TO NEW YORK 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2) (C) Anticipating that Prime Minister Patterson would make 
the request for the Security Council to hold a special 
session on Haiti tomorrow, FM Mitchell had already packed his 
bags and made plans to fly to New York tonight.  Patterson 
and CARICOM delayed making the request for the session only 
because Aristide convinced them that the opposition and 
rebels could still agree to CARICOM\'s peace plan.  However, 
as the situation on the ground in Haiti continues to 
deteriorate, Zonicle anticipates that Mitchell will fly to 
New York tomorrow for a requested Security Council special 
session on Thursday. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
SIX TALKING POINTS FOR PROJECTED SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3) (C) Follows are the six talking points presented to Charge. 
 
i) (C) Pending the outcome of the OAS/CARICOM-sponsored 
negotiations between the Government and the Opposition in 
Haiti, the CARICOM countries may request the convening of an 
emergency meeting of the Security Council to address the 
matter, considering the deteriorating situation in that 
country and the inability of the Haitian National Police 
(HNP) to deal with the insurgency. 
 
ii) (C) An open debate in the Security Council would allow it 
to pronounce on the matter and would provide Haiti with the 
opportunity to request military/police assistance,  and, 
perhaps, increased humanitarian assistance, as may be 
necessary.  Haiti is reluctant to take the matter to the 
Security Council before the current political negotiations 
have been exhausted and wishes to avoid the matter being 
dealt with on \"parallel tracks\" by OAS/CARICOM and the UN. 
 
iii) (C) While France has indicated a willingness to send 
military assistance to Haiti, the specter of French troops in 
Haiti at this time is a very sensitive issue, particularly as 
France is the former colonizer and Haiti is currently 
\"celebrating\" the 200th anniversary of discarding that yoke. 
A joint dispatch under the UN banner would be more palatable. 
 
iv) (C) With the United Nations, CARICOM Ambassadors are 
seeking the support of the Group of Latin America and the 
Caribbean (GRULAC) for the initiative and a meeting of the 
GRULAC to discuss the matter is being convened Wednesday 
afternoon.  Brazil and Chile, the two members of GRULAC on 
the Security Council have indicated their support for the 
initiative.  Other member of the GRULAC that have voiced 
strong support are Mexico and Venezuela. 
 
v) (C) Beyond the GRULAC, CARICOM Ambassadors are in touch 
with Canada and France, as well as with President of the GA, 
Ambassador Colin Granderson of the CARICOM Secretariat, and 
the other Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs in 
seeking to garner support for the initiative and move it 
forward, as appropriate. 
 
vi) (C) It has been said, although not officially announced 
that, Ambassador Reggie Dumas, of Trinidad and Tobago, has 
been appointed as the Special Advisor on Haiti by the UN 
Secretary-general.  Perhaps, the stigma of a direct request 
 
SIPDIS 
from Haitian authorities for military assistance could be 
alleviated by having the request channeled through the 
Special Advisor. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
BAHAMAS VIEW ON OUTSIDE INTERVENTION CLARIFIED 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4) (C) Charge and Political Chief sought clarification on 
Mitchell\'s vision for outside intervention.  In recent days 
Mitchell has made several statements that international 
support for Haiti\'s police was crucial, including \"to disarm 
the rebels if they did not disarm themselves.\"  Zonicle 
relayed that the first priority of The Bahamas is the 
principles in the CARICOM proposal, most notably reinforcing 
the ability of the Haitian police to maintain law and order. 
However, if this fails, Zonicle reiterated Mitchell\'s oft 
stated plea of late, that \"law and order must be restored.\" 
Zonicle volunteered that The Bahamas was prepared to 
contribute troops, \"perhaps as many as 100.\"  While the 
preferred mechanism is the United Nations, Zonicle confirmed 
Mitchell\'s view that any outside intervention would be 
preferable to continued and increased chaos. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
BAHAMIAN AMBASSADOR TO CARICOM SEEKS INSIGHTS ON RELATIONSHIP 
BETWEEN OPPOSITION AND REBELS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5) (C) Ambassador to CARICOM Leonard Archer sought Charge\'s 
insight on the relationship between the rebels and the 
opposition, but in the exchange of views it became clear that 
all sides knew about the same.  Several rebel leaders have 
connections with the former military.  While the opposition 
may currently feel that they are the beneficiaries of rebel 
activity, they may soon learn that \"the enemy of my enemy is 
not always my friend.\"  Archer is an experienced diplomat who 
has studied Haiti at length. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
6) (C) As reported reftels, The Bahamas is seized on the 
Haitian crisis.  It is certainly Foreign Minister Mitchell\'s 
dominant preoccupation.  It is also clear that The Bahamas 
regards U.S. leadership and engagement on Haiti as crucial to 
any peaceful outcome.  As has also become increasingly 
explicit in Mitchell\'s recent statements, while The Bahamas 
and CARICOM lobby for peace, they have concluded that a 
peaceful outcome without international intervention is 
increasingly unlikely. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"14408","3/1/2004 14:43","04NASSAU413","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE27013|04SECSTATE7869","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, BF, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: TIPS REPORT - FOURTH ANNUAL - BAHAMAS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 07869 
     B. SECSTATE 27013 
 
- - - - - 
OVERVIEW 
- - - - - 
 
1.  (SBU) There is no currently-available indication of 
trafficking in persons in, from, or through The Bahamas. 
Although migrant smuggling and drug trafficking are serious 
problems for The Bahamas, no evidence is available to show 
that men, women, or children are being forced by coercion or 
fraud into domestic servitude, sexual exploitation or other 
slavery-like labor.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the 
Ministry of Labor and Immigration know of no instances in 
which trafficking in persons has been an issue or even 
alleged.  However, these ministries were receptive to offers 
of prevention training and assistance by the United States 
Government. Post considers these sources to be highly 
credible. 
 
 
- - - - - - 
PREVENTION 
- - - - - - 
 
2.  (SBU) The Royal Bahamas Police Force, the Ministry of 
Labor and Immigration and the Attorney General\'s Office would 
become the responsible agencies involved if the Bahamas ever 
receives an allegation of, or information about, trafficking 
in persons.  To date, the Bahamas has not instituted an 
education campaign on this matter as there is no evidence of 
a  need.  The Government of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas 
(GCOB) actively promotes womens\' rights and equality of 
opportunity in both government and the private sector. 
Currently, four of sixteen cabinet ministers are women. 
Bahamian children are required to remain in school until the 
age of 16, generally do so, and are therefore less vulnerable 
to human traffickers. 
 
3.  (SBU) The financial resources of the Bahamas are limited, 
but the Bahamian government would most likely be willing to 
support a campaign to prevent or counteract human trafficking 
should it become a significant issue given its long history 
of support for human rights.  Little interaction, if any, has 
taken place between NGOs and the GCOB to date because of the 
fact that a trafficking problem has not been identified. 
 
4.  (SBU) Given the geography and lay-out of the Bahamas, 
border control is of utmost importance to the Bahamian 
Government, which looks to the United States Coast Guard to 
help the Royal Bahamas Defence Force protect its borders. 
Illegal migrants, most often from Haiti and Cuba, travel 
through the Bahamas on their way to the United States.  Many 
stop in The Bahamas and settle permanently.  While the 
government is extremely concerned with illegal migration, 
government officials make no distinction between illegal 
migration and human trafficking.  Therefore, a separate 
program for monitoring of this issue is not available.  The 
government is dedicated to stemming illegal migration and 
cooperates closely with U.S. efforts to interdict both 
migrants and narcotics passing through or to the Bahamas. 
Currently, the Bahamian government does not have a national 
plan of action to combat trafficking in persons. 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5.  (SBU) The Bahamas does not have a law specifically 
prohibiting trafficking in persons.  However, traffickers can 
be prosecuted under Title XIX of the penal code - Crimes 
Against Females, and of Kidnapping and Abduction - for 
attempts to force a woman by threats, intimidation, false 
pretenses or illegal drugs to do something against her will. 
There are also provisions against forcibly taking or 
detaining women or children.  Prison terms vary from two 
years to life in prison, depending on the crime committed. 
The penalties for rape or forcible sexual assault range from 
a minimum of seven years to a maximum of life imprisonment. 
Taken together, these laws are believed sufficient to cover 
trafficking in persons concerns should a case ever be brought 
to trial. 
 
6.  (SBU) In June 2001, the government ratified ILO 
Convention 182 Concerning the Profession and Immediate Action 
for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor.  The 
GCOB is a party to the Rights of the Child Convention, but 
not the Sale of Children Protocol.  The GCOB signed the 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime on April 9, 
2001, but has yet to ratify it. 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7.  (SBU) Due to the lack of evidence of trafficking in 
persons in, or through, The Bahamas, the government does not 
provide funds to NGOs to protect or assist victims. 
Similarly, The Bahamas does not provide specialized training 
for government officials in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, nor does it emphasize the issue with its 
consulates and embassies abroad.  Children are frequently 
among the illegal immigrants interdicted and sent to the 
migrant detention center pending repatriation.  Although 
there are some provisions made for their safety and special 
needs, no educational or recreational materials are provided 
for these children (many of whom are not English-speaking) on 
the assumption that their stay will be of limited duration. 
 
- - - 
NOTE 
- - - 
 
8.  (U) The principal drafter for this year\'s TIPS Report is 
Stacie M. Zerdecki.  She can be contacted at the following: 
     Tel: 242-322-1181 ext. 4510 
     Fax: 242-356-0222 
     Email: zerdeckism@state.gov 
ZAIBACK 
"
"14752","3/9/2004 17:17","04NASSAU487","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000487 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR TOM SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, SMIG, HA, BF, Haiti 
SUBJECT: CARICOM SURPRISED, UPSET, BUT NOT ANGRY BEING LEFT 
OUT OF ARISTIDE\'S DEPARTURE 
 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1.  (C) Charge and Political Officer met with the Bahamian 
Ambassador to Haiti, Dr. Eugene Newry, and the Under 
Secretary in the Consular Section at the Ministry of Foreign 
 
SIPDIS 
Affairs and Bahamian-Haitian expert, Mr. Carlton Wright, on 
March 8, 2004 to discuss Bahamian views of the current 
situation in Haiti.  Ambassador Newry claimed that Caricom is 
not \"angry\" with the U.S. involvement in the departure of 
Aristide, but rather was \"surprised\" by the abrupt 
decision-making, and Caricom\'s lack of involvement.  Newry 
downplayed incendiary phrases in Caricom\'s statement on Haiti 
such as expressing \"alarm and dismay\" as matter-of-fact 
descriptions of members\' disappointment, but on a positive 
note he was quick to say that Caricom will be satisfied as 
long as their 10-point action plan remains the basis for 
post-Aristide Haiti and is implemented \"as quickly and 
painlessly as possible.\" Only history, declared Newry, can 
determine whether or not ex-President Aristide left 
voluntarily, because neither he (i.e., The Bahamas) nor his 
regional colleagues were involved in that process. Bahamian 
officials were extremely complimentary and positive about 
joint U.S.-Bahamian efforts to deter or interdict intending 
Haitian immigrants. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
 
\"LIKE A RIVER, THINGS MUST MOVE ON\" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2.  (C) At a meeting with the Charge, Bahamian Ambassador to 
Haiti, Dr. Eugene Newry, characterized Caricom\'s harshly 
worded \"Statement on the Situation in Haiti\" as \"frank,\" but 
was not a message of \"anger.\"  In fact, he said he and fellow 
Bahamian officials were quite pleased that changes being 
implemented now in Haiti, such as the Tripartite Council and 
the Council of Eminent Persons, come straight from the 
10-Point Caricom Plan for Haiti.  In Newry\'s opinion, the 
only place in which Caricom has disagreed with the Opposition 
was in its desire for the Democratic Platform to be the only 
political group. 
 
3.  (C) Although Ambassador Newry suggested that Caricom\'s 
members were irritated with the lack of consultation and the 
abruptness by which Aristide left office, he also indicated 
that Caricom is pleased, nonetheless, that its plan is 
apparently still being implemented.  As he put it, \"a rose by 
any other name is still a rose.\"  He said he will leave it to 
the historians to determine what exactly happened on the 
night Aristide fled Haiti.  However, he concluded, Caricom 
needs to get over its pique because \"like a river, things 
must move on\", and he understood that Haiti cannot advance 
without the help that only the United States with the 
ancillary support of other \"major powers\" such as Canada and 
France could deliver. 
 
 
WHEN WILL CARICOM RE-ENGAGE? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4.  (C)  When asked at what The Bahamas would \"re-engage\" in 
Haiti, Ambassador Newry ardently argued that neither Caricom 
nor The Bahamas has ever \"disengaged\" from Haiti.  He 
stressed that he only left Haiti for \"consultations\" with the 
Bahamian Government, and that as the only Caricom ambassador 
actually resident in Haiti, he plans to return \"shortly.\" 
When pressed, however, Ambassador Newry acknowledged that he 
couldn\'t define a time frame.  But, he hastened to add, from 
Nassau he was in \"daily contact\" with Ambassador Foley and 
both pro-Aristide and opposition figures in Haiti. 
 
5.  (C)  From a personnel standpoint, Ambassador Newry 
admitted that Caricom would not be involved in the initial 
multinational interim force in Haiti, but said that Caricom 
would be willing to participate -- if only symbolically -- in 
the follow-on stabilization UN presence.  He thinks that this 
stabilization phase could start as early as the next 60 days. 
 
 
 
INTERIM HAITIAN GOVERNMENT - NOT TOO SHABBY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6.  (C)  Ambassador Newry told Charge and political officer 
that he was pleasantly surprised with the transition now 
occurring.  He indicated that it was a good sign that the 
Haitian people overall had focused their mistrust and dislike 
on the ex-President.  He said that his contacts with the 
opposition has assured him that they would continue to work 
with the Lavalas party and that the party itself had not been 
tainted by the same image of corruption as was ex-President 
Aristide.  Newry also found to be positive the fact that the 
interim government retained some of the people closely 
associated with ex-President Aristide in positions of power. 
Ambassador Newry took this as a sign of good faith on the 
part of the opposition. 
 
7.  (C) Discussing the composition of the interim authority, 
Ambassador Newry was optimistic.  He knew personally and 
professionally many of the members of the Tripartite 
Committee as well as the Council of Eminent Persons and 
considered them of high calibre.  He also considered it an 
asset that these individuals were not predominantly 
attorneys, but rather surgeons, sociologists, and other 
professionals. 
 
8. (C)  The Bahamian representative in Haiti believed that it 
would be premature to try to hold elections in the near 
future.  In his view, he thought that it would take at least 
90 days for the interim government to re-establish itself. 
Newry did not believe that the country\'s political parties 
would be prepared to hold meaningful elections for at least 
twelve to eighteen months, at best. 
 
9.  (C)  Asked about the danger of the interim authority 
using the period until elections to consolidate its power and 
thereby arrange to win the forthcoming elections, Ambassador 
Newry said that this had been anticipated by Caricom in its 
action plan.  As a consequence, one of the key elements in 
Caricom\'s action plan was a stipulation that no one in the 
transitional government in Haiti can run for office once the 
permanent government is established.  Ambassador Newry saw 
this provision as a \"sign of maturity\" and a way to  prevent 
innumerable problems. 
 
 
U.S.- BAHAMIAN COOPERATION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
10. (C)  Turning to U.S.-Bahamian cooperation to prevent an 
outflow of Haitian migrants to either The Bahamas or to the 
United States, the Bahamian Foreign Ministry officials were 
effusive in their praise of the current effort. The U.S., and 
Bahamian, presence in the Windward Passage had \"never been so 
successful\" in deterring an outflow of illegal migrants, 
Newry declared.  While noting the costs of such an on-going 
operation, both Newry and Wright acknowledged that it was 
still much less expensive for The Bahamas that would be the 
total costs of detaining, maintaining, and then re-patriating 
illegal Haitian migrants once they reached The Bahamas. 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
10.  (C)  Ambassador Newry was perhaps overreaching in trying 
to put a positive spin on Caricom\'s March 3 statement on 
Haiti and reflecting more of the real politik position that 
The Bahamas takes regarding Haitian migration than the more 
ideological position of some of the other, less affected, 
Caricom members. Newry has also briefed both the Prime 
Minister and the Cabinet en banc on the situation in Haiti 
and his effusive praise of U.S.-Bahamian cooperation in the 
Windward Passage reflects the realism of Prime Minister Perry 
Christie and Deputy Prime Minister Cynthia Pratt than Foreign 
Minister Fred Mitchell.  Surprisingly, Newry downplayed 
ex-President Aristide\'s attempt to remain engaged from afar. 
He did not think that Aristide\'s attempts to regain support 
via press encounters in the Central African Republic would 
impact on future Haiti developments.  His one caveat was that 
Aristide\'s Lavalas Party is still extremely organized, 
especially relative to the loose coalition of opposition 
\"parties\" united only by a negative...their opposition to 
Aristide.  His fear was that Aristide\'s support network would 
re-group in time for the next set of elections while the 
Opposition coalition would fall apart fall once the \"negative 
force,\" i.e., Aristide, disappeared from the scene as an 
effective player. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"15759","4/6/2004 15:13","04NASSAU733","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE71329","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 NASSAU 000733 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHSA, HA, BF, CARICOM 
SUBJECT: BAHAMIAN PERSPECTIVE ON CARICOM AND HAITI 
 
REF: SECSTATE 71329 
 
Classified By: Charge Robert M. Witajewski for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
1.    (C) Charge hosted a lunch for the Bahamian Foreign 
Minister Fred Mitchell, and Foreign Ministry Permanent 
Secretary, Ms. Patricia Rodgers on March 29.  A/DCM and 
 
SIPDIS 
Consular Section Head also participated.  The discussion 
covered a number of topics: The dynamics of 
recently-completed Caricom heads of government 
inter-sessional meeting, Caricom-U.S. relations, status of 
Bahamian ratification of the bilateral Comprehensive Maritime 
Agreement (CMA), the status of ex-Haitian President Jean 
Bertrand Aristide, and Caricom,s request of UN investigation 
of the events related to Aristide,s resignation and 
departure from Haiti. 
End of Summary 
 
 
CARICOM INTER-SESSIONAL MEETING IN ST. KITTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2.     (C) The Charge began the discussion by asking Foreign 
Minister Mitchell \"How did the meeting go in St. Kitts?\" 
Mitchell responded that Caricom,s statement reflected the 
aggregate view of Caricom members, however he continued, the 
Bahamas maintains its own views on these matters.  Mitchell 
revealed a bit of internal Caricom dynamics in his response. 
According to FM Mitchell, there was a definite \"north-south\" 
division within Caricom on Haiti.  In contrast to the more 
categorical positions taken by Grenada, Guyana, Surinam, and 
Trinidad and Tobago, he claimed, the \"northern Caribbean 
countries\"  who have more concrete interests  took  more 
\"considered\" positions regarding Haiti because of their 
geographic proximity.  The northern Caribbean countries, he 
continued, are obliged to deal with the realities and are 
also cognizant of the importance of their relations with the 
United States and thus are more careful in balancing their 
interests with Caricom and the U.S.  The southern Caribbean 
members are more detached from the practical issues and are 
guided by political agendas, according to the Bahamian 
Foreign Minister. 
 
3.    (C) Continuing on the Haiti theme, Foreign Minister 
Mitchell expressed the view that the United States 
overreacted to Jamaica,s offer to let ex-President Aristide 
reside in the country and to Caricom,s declarations.  He 
appeared to be arguing that Caricom was entitled to express 
its views and not necessarily be held accountable for them. 
Mitchell also claimed that despite Caricom,s verbal shots at 
the United States over recent events in Haiti, there would be 
little net impact on overall U.S.-Caricom relations...as long 
as the United States didn\'t \"overreact.\" 
 
4.    (C) Expressing irritation at Caricom,s cumbersome 
decision-making style, Mitchell complained that too much time 
was wasted by the ceremonial opening and closing of the 
sessions as each successive host felt compelled to spend time 
and money on needless pomp and circumstance.  He also 
expressed annoyance at the prolixity of his colleagues, 
noting that had not each government head not insisted on 
\"getting their own paragraph\" into the final declaration, 
they might have both accomplished more and not have been 
forced to hold their closing press conference at 2 a.m. in 
the morning. 
 
 
CARICOM,S SPECIAL ENVOY AND CALLS FOR AN INVESTIGATION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5.         (C) Regarding the naming of Caricom,s \"special 
envoy\" to address the Haiti issue, Mitchell indicated that 
Caricom had been unable to reach consensus on who this person 
should be by the end of the inter-sessional and that this 
would be subject to continued intra-Caricom negotiations.  He 
said that personally hoped that it would be an individual who 
both had prior diplomatic experience and someone closer to 
The Bahamas, position on Haiti than that of some eastern 
Caribbean states.  He discounted the prospect of anyone from 
The Bahamas being selected for this role. 
 
6.    (C) Asked to clarify Caircom,s call for an 
investigation into the circumstances of Aristide,s 
resignation, Mitchell sought to downplay its significance. 
He said that he personally envisioned the \"investigation\" as 
equivalent to resolution of a \"routine credentials challenge\" 
to a government such as occurs at the UNGA or another 
committee.  If the LaTortue government is seen to be 
exercising effective control in the country then, thought 
Mitchell, it ought to be seated in Haiti,s chair at the UN 
without controversy, Mitchell claimed.  He  explicitly sought 
to minimize the scope, the impact, and the significance of 
the Caricom-requested investigation -- but without indicating 
whether his views reflected a broader Caricom view, those of 
the Bahamian Cabinet, or his own personal view of an exit 
strategy out of Caricom\'s dilemma. 
 
7.    (C) Questioned about recognition of the LaTortue 
government, FM Mitchell reiterated his previous statements 
that most Caricom members, as does The Bahamas, follow the 
\"Estrada Doctrine\" when it comes to recognition and rather 
than making value or moral judgments about a government, will 
recognize whomever exercises effective control in Haiti as 
that country\'s legitimate government.  He assured the Charge 
that The Bahamas would not break with its long-held policy of 
dealing with any government in control in Haiti, pointing out 
that bilateral relations between The Bahamas and Haiti had 
never been suspended during the transition from Aristide to 
LaTortue  Foreign Minister Mitchell complained that the press 
has exaggerated the recognition controversy and that matters 
were not as bad as they appeared to be.  He noted that 
Haitian Prime Minister LaTortue had called him personally and 
assured him that press reports on Haiti refusing to permit 
the return of the Bahamian Ambassador to Haiti were totally 
untrue.  Mitchell also cited repeated phone conversations 
between LaTortue and Jamaica\'s Prime Minister P.J. Patterson, 
who apparently had a close working relationship in the past, 
as evidence that Caricom and the new Haitian government could 
work together.  He said that he expected the Haitian 
Ambassador to return to The Bahamas in the near future as 
well. 
 
 
Ex-President Jean Aristide in Jamaica 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
8.    (C) The Foreign Minister insisted that the United 
States should not be concerned with, or opposed to, 
Aristide,s presence in the Caribbean.  He argued that a 
perceived \"Banishing Policy\" has racial and historical 
overtones in the Caribbean that reminds inhabitants of the 
region of slavery and past abuse.  The Charge inquired on 
what would happen if Aristide were to meddle with Haitian 
internal affairs and give his supporters the impression that 
he is still a player in the future of Haiti.  Foreign 
Minister Mitchell was emphatic that Jamaica will not allow 
Aristide to play such an intrusive role and would \"deal\" with 
Aristide if such a situation were to arise. 
 
 
COMPREHENSIVE MARITIME AGREEMENT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - 
 
9.    (C) Queried about the status of ratification of the 
comprehensive maritime agreement (CMA) that has now been 
negotiated over the last 18 months, FM Mitchell reported that 
due to the document,s significance and complexity it had 
been decided to prepare a formal briefing to the entire 
Cabinet.  Optimistically, Mitchell thought that this could 
completed in two cabinet sessions over a two-week period. 
Questioned about the need for such a time-consuming review of 
what is essentially a codification and rationalization of 
existing agreements, Mitchell again wistfully muse about how 
the Bahamian cabinet decision-making process might be 
improved.  He related that he had learned as a result of his 
Caricom attendance that in other Commonwealth countries, 
debate and intervention on issues in the cabinet is 
restricted to their ministers whose portfolios are directly 
impacted by the issue, or ministers that assert fundamental 
issues of principle.  In contrast, Mitchell intimated, in the 
Christie Cabinet of the Bahamas operates much less 
efficiently since any minister can intervene and express a 
view on any issue before the government. 
 
 
JOINT TASK FORCE MEETING 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
10.   (C) Queried about his preferences for a date for the 
next session of the Joint Task Force on Illegal Drug 
Interdiction (JTF), Mitchell expressed agreement for an early 
summer meeting in late May/early June.  He agreed with 
Charge,s suggestion that the JTF would best be held 
following ratification of the CMA and successful 
implementation of a major anti-drug round-up that is being 
planned for the near future so that participants could review 
both past successes since the last JTF meeting and consider 
specific goals to be accomplished for the coming year. 
 
 
COMMENT 
 - - - - - - - - - - 
 
11.   (C) Foreign Minister Mitchell was his usual 
business-like self during lunch as he pursued his agenda of 
downplaying the consequences of a division between Caricom 
and the United States on Haiti.  Underlying many of 
Mitchell\'s arguments was the premise that Caricom/The Bahamas 
as small countries take (and are entitled to take) principled 
stands while the United States necessarily engages in real 
politik. 
12.  (C)  Despite a life-long career as a politician in a 
country were politics is personalized to the extreme, neither 
kissing babies nor making small talk comes naturally to Fred 
Mitchell.  He prefers to deal with agendas expeditiously and 
then engage in philosophical discussions or reviews of 
international relations drawing on his seminars at Harvard,s 
Kennedy School.  Holding two time-consuming portfolio,s 
(managing the civil service and foreign policy) is also 
taking its toll on Mitchell,s private time.  Mitchell told 
Charge a year ago that he hoped to write a twelve-chapter 
(one chapter for each month of the year) book combining 
policy, history, and personal ideology to be published on his 
fifty-first birthday.  Ruefully, he admitted that he hasn,t 
progress beyond chapter four. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"16604","5/4/2004 16:13","04NASSAU937","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 000937 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP KBROWN 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, BF, Narcotics - OPBAT 
SUBJECT: BAHAMAS: BUDGET CUTS HINDER OPBAT OPERATIONS 
 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1.  The withdrawal of air assets currently committed to 
Operations Bahamas, Turks and Caicos (OPBAT) has already had 
a measurable impact on drug interdiction in The Bahamas. 
Over the longer term, failure to restore assets committed to 
OPBAT to the status quo ante could adversely impact bilateral 
relations with The Bahamas, reduce the safety margin of 
helicopter crews, reduce Search and Rescue (SAR) capability, 
and ultimately increase the flow of drugs through the region 
into the United States as traffickers take advantage of 
OPBAT\'s reduced capabilities. Post urges the Department to 
work with other Washington agencies to examine options to 
restore full operational capability as soon as practicable. 
End of Summary. 
 
Deterring Migrants also Deterred Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  Last month, at the onset of the Haitian crisis, the U.S. 
Coast Guard re-directed many of its resources to respond to a 
potential illegal migrant flood.  At its height, twenty 
cutters were positioned in Caribbean waters, ready to respond 
to the unstable political situation that culminated in the 
resignation of ex-President Jean Bertrand Aristide.  The USG 
presence off the coast of Haiti and in the Windward Pass had 
a noticeable impact on drug trafficking in the region. 
During this period of increased USG presence in the region, 
OPBAT missions observed a decline in both the amount and 
frequency of narcotics shipments through the area. 
 
Doing More with Less 
-------------------- 
 
3.  As part of this re-alignment of assets to address 
instability in Haiti, OPBAT lost one of its assets as a 
helicopter and its crew were re-assigned from Andros Island 
to intercept illegal migrants in the Mona Passage off the 
western coast of Puerto Rico.  Earlier, in March 2003, 
another helicopter and crew were reassigned from OPBAT duty. 
This helicopter has yet to be returned to OPBAT duty.  The 
result of these decisions is that in the past eighteen 
months, OPBAT\'s effective asset strength provided by the USCG 
has declined from four helicopters and four crew to two 
helicopters and two crew- an effective reduction in assets of 
50 percent. 
 
4. OPBAT remaining helicopter assets are assigned as follows: 
-- The Coast Guard maintains two HH-60 Jayhawk helicopters in 
The Bahamas, one at the OPBAT base in Matthewtown, Great 
Inagua; and one at the OPBAT base on Andros Island, AUTEC 
facility. 
-- The U.S. Army also maintains three UH-60 Blackhawk 
helicopters in Georgetown, on the island of Great Exuma. 
 
5. In addition, OPBAT has access to three fast response boats 
pursuit boats that were donated by NAS and deployed across 
the archipelago to provide much needed \"end game\" to 
anti-drug helicopter missions. 
 
6.  The loss of these valuable assets has made drug 
interdiction missions over Bahamian waters even more 
difficult.  The reduction in the number of helicopters, and 
crews available has hampered OPBAT ability to conduct routine 
patrol and surveillance missions.  Limited to 12-hour shifts, 
instead of past 24/7 coverage, OPBAT controllers have much 
reduced scheduling flexibility and conduct only hard 
intelligence driven and no anti drug patrolling or 
intelligence gathering missions. 
 
Loss Opportunities 
------------------ 
 
7.  The reduction is starting to have an impact on OPBAT \'s 
ability to react to information on the movement of 
contraband.  During March 2004, OPBAT documented at least 
four occasions in which it was not able to react to 
intelligence regarding possible trans-shipments of narcotics 
for lack of an available helicopter. 
Conclusion 
---------- 
8.  Any permanent, unilateral withdrawal of OPBAT\'s assets 
would send the wrong message to drug traffickers who 
regularly monitor our operations as well as the GCOB.  OPBAT 
is a multi-national, multi-agency, multi-functional model 
that requires long term, consistent commitment of assets by 
all parties if it is to continue its track records of 
success.  All elements of OPBAT face the same resource 
constraints and temptation to pull out assets on the 
assumption that the other players will pick up the deficit. 
Post believes that the USG must set the example of resisting 
this temptation.  Second, the message to drug traffickers in 
the region of a permanent force reduction in OPBAT\'s air 
assets would be equally devastating - the once off-limits 
Bahamian waters are again open for business.  Intelligence 
gathered by OPBAT reveals that narcotics traffickers monitor 
the flights of helicopters when they are trying to move 
contraband through Bahamian waters.  It is only a matter of 
time before traffickers realize the decreased presence of 
helicopters in the area. 
 
9.  Members of Congress who have visited Post and have been 
briefed on the situation have expressed concern at the 
reduction in the Mission\'s drug and alien interdiction 
capabilities, as well as its SAR response capability implied 
by a permanent reduction in OPBAT air assets.  Post urges 
Department to work with other Washington agencies to examine 
options to restore OPBAT full operational capability as soon 
as practicable. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"17155","5/21/2004 12:24","04NASSAU1033","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, BF, Bahamian Politics 
SUBJECT: LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: AN UNDERDOG FIGHTS AN 
UPHILL BATTLE 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1. (C)  Charge and Political Officer met with Senator Tommy 
Turnquest, Leader of the Opposition, on May 18, 2004, to 
discuss current events in The Bahamas.  Under the Ingraham 
administration from 1992-2002, Tommy Turnquest held the 
positions of Minister of Public Service, Immigration and 
Housing, Minister of Public Works, and Minister of Public 
Service and Labor.  Turnquest failed to hold his elected seat 
in the 2002 election, a humiliation given that he had been 
made party leader only two months earlier.  In The Bahamas, 
Senators are appointed by party vote based on a predetermined 
formula, which allowed Turnquest to regain an unelected 
presence in Parliament.  The possible bi-election for Sidney 
Stubb\'s seat in the Holy Cross constituency was discussed at 
length.  Mr. Turnquest claims not to be personally interested 
in running for this seat, and plans to leave that campaign to 
his deputy, Mr. Carl Bethel.  Tommy Turnquest questioned the 
Charge somewhat aggressively about the relationship between 
the United States and The Bahamas, as if he were looking for 
fodder with which to attack the current Christie government. 
 
 
BI-ELECTION FOR HOLY CROSS CONSTITUENCY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (C)  The leader of the opposition party, the Free National 
Movement (FNM), Turnquest told Charge that he does not plan 
to run in the possible summer by-election for the Holy Cross 
constituency, middle-class swing seat, located in Nassau. 
Controversy currently surrounds the present holder of the 
seat, Sidney Stubbs, regarding a recent court determination 
that he was in bankrupcy.  The Bahamian constitution requires 
bankrupt members of Parliament to resign within 120 days of 
such a finding.  A resignation, and a subsequent by-election, 
is viewed as an important referendum on the first two years 
of the ruling Progressive Liberal Party\'s performance in the 
run-up to the 2007 general election and an opportunity for 
the FNM to gauge its mid-cycle standing with the Bahamian 
electorate. 
 
3. (C)  Turnquest indicated that he has no plans to run for 
this seat, but fully supports \"his close friend\", Carl 
Bethel, to represent the FNM.  Turnquest estimated the FNM\'s 
chances of winning the seat at 50-50.  Claiming that the 
sitting government had tremendous resources -- public works 
projects and jobs -- to bring to bear in the campaign, 
Turnquest sniped that were the PLP government not so weak its 
odds of retaining the seat would be 70-30. 
 
4. (C)  The Holy Cross constituency contains approximately 
4,000 middle-class voters, including a large number of 
mid-level civil servants.  The election, predicted Turnquest, 
would be costly for both parties as each would pour resources 
into it, his FNM to embarrass the government, the PLP to 
avoid an embarrassing defeat.  Each of the voters in the 
constituency would be personally contacted and both parties 
would hold almost nightly (and expensive) rallies.  As many 
as 40-80 campaign workers would be brought in by each party 
for the campaign. 
 
5.  (C)  Turnquest estimated that the FNM would spend between 
$150,000 - $250,000 on the election, should it take place. 
When asked how he could possibly spend that much money on so 
few voters, Turnquest merely replied: \"Bahamians like free 
paraphernalia\". 
 
6.  (C)  Turnquest expressed some doubt that the election 
would even be called, pointing out that Stubbs could avoid 
resignation if his attorneys succeed in overturning the 
court\'s bankruptcy finding.  He also noted that there is a 
second vacancy in the St. Cecelia constituency that is firmly 
PLP and PM Christie may chose to call that by-election 
simultaneously.  Turnquest hinted that the odds of FNM 
victory in the PLP stronghold of St. Cecelia were so slim 
that his party might not even contest the election. 
Nevertheless, he insisted that even a 50-50 split in the two 
by-elections would be a FNM victory since both seats are 
currently held by the PLP. 
 
7. (C)  Asked about the issues likely to dominate the 
campaign, Turnquest acknowledged that the FNM had hired a 
marketing company to conduct polls during the general 
election -- although the results were closely held within the 
party leadership -- and that he had lately been commissioning 
\"focus groups\" to probe public opinion.  Turnquest said that 
he had personally attended quite a few of these \"focus 
groups\". 
 
TOMMY BORN WITH A SILVER SPOON IN HIS MOUTH 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
8. (C)  Born to the wealthy family of Sir Orville and Lady 
Edith Turnquest, Turnquest admitted that he comes from 
\"privilege\".  He subsequently married into a wealthy Bahamian 
family as well.  As a shareholder of Focal, a Freeport-based 
oil company, the Turnquests have a steady stream of income. 
Many Bahamians see this as a barrier to his political career. 
 Whereas his father was a self-made man, \"Tommy\" is seen by 
some Bahamians as a spoiled brat.  His three children are all 
attending/have attended exclusive prep schools in the United 
States and all are bound for similarly-expensive Ivy League 
universities. 
 
9. (C)  Turnquest maintains fierce loyalty to the FNM Party 
and queried repetitively the U.S. view of the performance of 
the Christie administration.  He ranted that Prime Minister 
Christie\'s slow decision-making has wasted valuable Bahamian 
resources, lost many contracts and put the Bahamian people at 
a disadvantage.  On the FNM website, Turnquest gives the PLP 
an \"F\" for effectiveness. 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
10. (C) In a small country where the \"Cheers\" phrase 
\"everyone knows your name\" really is true, charisma and 
dynamism, both personally and publicly, is a prerequisite for 
a politician.  Bahamians expect their political leaders to 
\"perform\" when giving speeches.  As the son of the former 
Governor General Sir Orville, Tommy\'s opportunities to date 
have come because of his family lineage.  Privately Turnquest 
does not project the \"gravitas\" expected of a leader, nor 
publicly the rivalist oratorical skills expected of a 
politician. 
 
11. (C)  Previously, former (most Bahamians would argue true) 
party leader Hubert Ingraham told us that he expects Tommy to 
fight a Stubbs by-election to prove he has the guts and skill 
to win an election on his own as party leader.  Turnquest 
apparently didn\'t get the word, insisting to us just a week 
later that rather than engage in a messy internal dispute 
with his rival (and deputy) Carl Bethel, he, Turnquest, in 
the spirit of self-abnegation will allow Bethel to contest 
for the seat if a vacancy occurs.  Only in a scenario in 
which Bethel loses ignominiously does Turnquest possibly come 
out a winner.  A Bethel victory (or even a close defeat) 
immediately projects Bethel into a leading position and makes 
Turnquest\'s own position as party leader almost untenable. 
Even a Bethel defeat keeps Turnquest\'s future in doubt since 
many in the party may well conclude that none of the \"next 
generation\" leaders can win and only calling Hubert Ingraham 
recalled from retirement has the oomph to make Perry Christie 
a one-term prime minister. 
 
12. (C)  As expensive as Bahamian elections have become, they 
remain relatively unsophisticated.  Turnquest\'s belief that 
he can sit in on a \"focus group\" probing his own character 
and image without biasing the results reflects the relative 
navet with which Bahamian politicians approach survey 
research. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"17328","5/27/2004 19:49","04NASSAU1072","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS NASSAU 001072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP/KEVIN BROWN 
JUSTICE FOR OPDAT/ROBERT LIPMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, BF, Narcotics - OPBAT 
SUBJECT: OPBAT SETS STAGE FOR $200 MILLION DRUG BUST 
 
1. Operation Bahamas and Turks and Caicos (OPBAT) 
provided vital intelligence and assets to USG drug 
enforcement authorities that led to six arrests and 
the seizure of 820 kilos of cocaine. 
 
2. On May 25, 2004 OPBAT personnel received human 
intelligence of two go-fast boats attempting to 
complete a large transshipment of narcotics from The 
Bahamas to Florida.  Based on the timely 
confidential information, Bahamas-based U.S. Coast 
 
SIPDIS 
Guard and Homeland Security Department\'s ICE 
authorities established surveillance on the vessels 
both with fixed wing aircraft and helicopters. 
 
3. With the support of interceptor boats, USG law 
enforcement agents boarded the first go-fast boat. 
The second go-fast boat engaged authorities in a 
high-speed chase that ended ten miles off Hollywood 
Beach, Florida. Five Bahamian nationals and a 
Florida resident were subsequently arrested. 
 
4. The two boats transported 820 kilos of cocaine. 
ICE officials in Florida reported the seizure of 1 
ton of cocaine with a street value of nearly $200 
million, making this seizure one of the biggest drug 
busts in many years. 
 
5. Comment. Operation Bahamas and Turks and Caicos 
(OPBAT) once again proved to be a crucial player in 
the fight against drug trafficking by providing 
important intelligence and assets that has resulted 
in one of the largest drug bust in the area ever. 
End of Comment. 
 
 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"17735","6/10/2004 19:00","04NASSAU1148","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001148 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PARM, PINR, BF, Bahamian Politics 
SUBJECT: ATTORNEY GENERAL DEFERS TO THE ALL-POWERFUL FRED 
MITCHELL 
 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1.  (C) Charge, Political Officer, and DEA Country Attache 
held a private lunch with Bahamian Attorney General and 
Minister of Education, Alfred Sears, on June 8, 2004 to 
discuss the long list of issues he faces in his two massive 
portfolios.  Overwhelmed and underpaid, Sears still claimed 
that he has faith in the Bahamian judicial process, and that 
the extraditions of high-profile drug traffickers such as 
Samuel \"Ninety\" Knowles will in a sense \"sort themselves 
out.\"  He indicated that he hopes to be able to drop the 
Attorney General portfolio soon and return to a lucrative 
private practice while retaining his Education ministry job. 
On a number of issues, ranging from extradition to Article 
98, the Attorney General deferred all comments to Foreign 
Minister Fred Mitchell as he insisted he had no role in the 
decision-making process on these matters. 
End Summary 
 
BY DAY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, BY NIGHT THE MINISTER OF 
EDUCATION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
 
2.  (C) Minister Sears admitted up-front that he has 
difficulty managing his two high-profile, labor-intensive 
portfolios.  Claiming that he typically arrives at the Office 
of the Attorney General between 7:00 and 7:30 in the morning, 
he said that he spends the entire morning at that ministry, 
leaving just after lunch for the Ministry of Education where 
he spends afternoons and evenings.  Most nights, he asserted, 
his driver does not drop him off at home until 10:30 or 11:00 
o\'clock. 
 
3.  (C) Sears acknowledged that he has approached Prime 
Minister Christie requesting to be relieved of one of his 
portfolios.  Citing the importance he places on the children 
and their future in the Bahamas, Minister Sears said he would 
be happier giving up his responsibility as Attorney General. 
In addition to reducing by half his workload, such a move 
would also allow him to return to his lucrative private legal 
practice as well.  Sears readily acknowledged that public 
service was an expensive proposition for him while repeatedly 
professes how much of an honor it was to be in public 
service.  He made clear, however, that there was a definite 
time limit to his public career and that while he would 
remain loyal and work himself hard during this government, he 
would remain in politics \"no longer than the season\". 
 
 
AG\'S OFFICE TO RECEIVE NO BUDGET INCREASE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4.  (C) Despite the repeated sick-outs in the Attorney 
General\'s Office by an over-worked and underpaid staff that 
have been front-page news, Sears told Charge that his budget 
was staff had not been increased in the new budget presented 
to parliament last week for the coming fiscal year.  He 
estimated that 60% of the entire government budget would go 
towards salaries, 20% would go towards covering the deficit, 
and what little is remaining would go towards new programs to 
be split between all of the ministries. 
 
5.  (C) Minister Sears claimed, however, that even without a 
budget increase, he had been able to rearrange his finances 
so that he could hire five new attorneys for the Attorney 
General\'s office.  These new hires were the result of an 
earlier employee sick-out and public complaints from them 
about the increased work load due to MLAT requests from other 
countries. 
 
 
FRANCE AND SPAIN PICKING ON THE BAHAMAS? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6.  (C)   Asked about recent reports that both France and 
Spain had raised complaints about Bahamian non-responsiveness 
to their FATF/MLAT requests that were formally addressed to 
him, Sears contended that these complaints were unfairly 
directed at him and his ministry, when in reality they had 
their origins in extraneous bilateral issues. France, he 
claimed, is irritated over extradition issues, whereas Spain 
still harbors lingering resentment and issues following the 
sinking off the coast of Spain of the Bahamian-flagged oil 
tanker \"Prestige\" that resulted in massive pollution off the 
Spanish coastline. 
 
BAIL REFORM, EXTRADITION, AND ARTICLE 98 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (C)  Regarding the lengthy and slow extradition process of 
suspected drug traffickers for trial in the United States, 
Sears recalled his experience working for New York City 
judges and public outcries for the expedited carrying out of 
capital punishment sentences saying that he preferred to let 
the system work its course at its usual pace.  He was not 
prepared to move to quash appeals by defendants\' attorneys on 
grounds of \"abuse of process,\" he indicated.  Asked about 
making a technical change in Bahamian habeas corpus law 
recommended by the Privy Council that almost led to the 
release of notorious suspected major narcotics trafficker 
Samuel \"90\" Knowles release, Sears said that only now, 
several months after the Privy Council\'s decision and 
recommendation were attorneys in his office considering a 
technical amendment to the law.  On modernization of the 
country\'s bail laws, Sears insisted, as well, that his staff 
had prepared technical corrections to a law passed by 
parliament that needed only his signature to implement. 
 
8. (C)  On the issue of modernizing the country\'s procedures 
for the administrative forfeiture of the seized assets of 
arrested drug traffickers, Sears said that The Bahamas would 
defer making changes to its laws until a Commonwealth 
committee (of which The Bahamas was a member) issued its 
recommendations and a \"model statute.\"  Sears speculated that 
this could happen within a couple of years. 
 
9. (C)  Queried about his position regarding extradition 
issues and the public debate likely to break out following 
the unsealing of indictments and the arrest of several dozen 
suspected Bahamian drug traffickers later this month, Sears 
demurred.  He rejected approving their expeditious 
extradition to the U.S. because either it would be 
cost-effective for The Bahamas not to conduct the trials, 
would be more expeditious to conduct the trials in the U.S., 
or that this would spare The Bahamas the expense of multiple, 
lengthy trials.  Sears responded by making a somewhat obtuse 
and esoteric conflict of law argument as a reason why he had 
opposed a deal with U.S. prosecutions apportioning a majority 
of the prosecutions to the U.S. 
 
10.  (C) Attorney General Sears professed to find no legal 
objection to the signing of an Article 98 agreement with the 
United States, but strongly emphasized that this issue falls 
under the purview of Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell.  He 
seemed to understand however that if the Bahamas is planning 
to sign Article 98 at any point, it should do it as soon as 
possible in order to benefit from U.S. military-sponsored 
programs. 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
11.  (C) Attorney General Sears seems dedicated to public 
service, but admitted quite freely that he prefers - and is 
better suited - for the private sector.  Using the slow and 
monotonous tone of the law professor that he was, Sears spoke 
at length -- and with great deference to the complex facets 
of every side of every issue that he was asked about -- 
successfully avoiding a definitive response to most of them. 
Once a professor at Hunter College in New York City and a 
current member of the NY Bar Association, Sears contends that 
the U.S. judicial system is preferable to that of the Bahamas 
while nonetheless maintaining a strong faith in Bahamian law 
and tradition.  Taking a \"it might be slow, but it will work\" 
attitude regarding extradition, Sears didn\'t seem to think 
that the internal politics and \"90\'s\" carefully cultivated 
public image as a Robin Hood figure would have an impact on 
the eventual outcome of the process. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"18247","6/29/2004 21:25","04NASSAU1282","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE126527|04SECSTATE126846","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS NASSAU 001282 
 
SIPDIS 
 
L/T FOR TOM MALIONEK, L/OES FOR ASH ROACH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIA, PHSA, PBTS, PHUM, KCRM, SMIG, EWWT, EAIR, SNAR, BF, Security 
SUBJECT: U.S.- BAHAMAS COMPREHENSIVE MARITIME AGREEMENT 
SIGNED 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 126527 
     B. SECSTATE 126846 
 
1.  On June 29, 2004 The Bahamas and the United States put 
into force the Comprehensive Maritime Agreement at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Bahamian signatory, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Frederick Mitchell and U.S. signatory, Charge 
d\'Affaires, Robert M. Witajewski, gave brief remarks and met 
with media representatives to mark this important occasion. 
Rear Admiral Peterman of U.S. Coast Guard District 7 was 
present for the press opportunity.  In addition to the 
Foreign Minister, The Bahamas was represented by the Deputy 
Prime Minister Cynthia Pratt, Minister of Transport and 
Aviation Glenys Hanna-Martin, Director of Public Prosecutions 
Bernard Turner, and Commodore of the Bahamian Defence Force 
Davy Rolle. 
 
2.  As agreed upon in Article 24 of the CMA, the agreement 
entered into force upon signature.  The original text will be 
hand delivered by LCDR Brad Kieserman to L/T for Tom Maloinek 
on Wednesday, June 30, 2004. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"18778","7/15/2004 19:12","04NASSAU1382","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU1342","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 NASSAU 001382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CA/OCS FOR SHIRLEY CRAWFORD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/15/2014 
TAGS: CASC, PREL, BF, Tourism 
SUBJECT: TOURISM VS. RELIGION: ANTI-GAY RALLY TARGETS U.S. 
CRUISE SHIP AND CHRISTIE GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: NASSAU 1342 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M.WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1.  (C) A number of prominent Bahamian religious figures led 
a \"Save the Bahamas\" rally in downtown Nassau on July 11 to 
protest the pending arrival of the cruise ship \"Norwegian 
Dawn\" which is scheduled to dock in Nassau with a group of 
\"gay family\" travellers on board  the morning of July 16. 
Supporters claimed thousands participated; local media put 
the number of protesters at 300-500; Ministry of Tourism 
officials claimed only one hundred were in attendance.  The 
religious leaders delivered fiery denunciations of 
homosexuality; accused Prime Minister Christie\'s government 
of wanting to make The Bahamas a \"playground for gays\"; and 
alleged that the current House of Assembly has \"too many 
sexually-confused parliamentarians\" -- a not so veiled 
references to Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell.  Mainstream 
Bahamian religious figures characterized the rally\'s leaders 
as vocal extremists, though representing the overall 
anti-homosexual position that reflects most Bahamians\' 
attitudes.  Members of a local gay-rights advocacy group were 
also present at the protest and were verbally attacked by 
some of the demonstrators.  HBO has been seeking out and 
interviewing representatives of both sides of the 
controversy.  The HBO documentary film crew will also 
accompany the cruise ship and its celebrity host/financial 
backer Rosie O\'Donnell when it docks in Nassau on July 16. 
Embassy has been in touch with the Ministry of Tourism in 
anticipation of Friday\'s expected protests. 
End Summary. 
 
 
PROTESTING THE \"SEXUALLY CONFUSED\" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2.  (U) Several well-known Bahamian religious leaders 
organized and participated in the \"Save the Bahamas Campaign\" 
in Rawson Square, in the heart of downtown Nassau across the 
street from the country\'s parliament and adjoining the Prime 
Minister\'s offices, to protest the cruise ship, \"The 
Norwegian Dawn\", which will be docking in Nassau July 16 with 
a group of gay family passengers.  The cruise, reportedly 
organized to promote homosexual family values through on-ship 
seminars, is reportedly being financially backed by celebrity 
comedienne, Rosie O\'Donnell.  An HBO documentary filming crew 
is scheduled to be aboard ship during its cruise and port 
calls in order to produce a film about gay family life. 
 
3.  (U) The prospect of the group disembarking while the 
cruise ship is in Nassau has exercised several local 
conservative religious figures. At their July 11 rally, they 
attracted a vocal crowd of supporters.  Nassau\'s two 
principal newspapers estimated the protesters at between 300 
and 500.  However a representative from the Ministry of 
Tourism, Deputy Director General Ms. Vernice Walkine, balked 
at this number and insisted that there were more likely \"a 
hundred and change, max...\" when contacted by Embassy 
Political Officer on July 13, 2004. 
 
4.  (SBU) Leaders and organizers of the protest rally 
included Pastor Mario Moxey, Apostle Christopher Wallace, Dr. 
Myles Munroe, and about a dozen other religious figures. 
Apostle Wallace characterized gays as \"sexually confused\" and 
\"sissies\".  One pastor declared that  \"The Bahamas doesn\'t 
need no \'sissy money\' from Rosie O\'Donnell.\" 
 
 
ATTACK ON REPUTED GAYS IN GOVERNMENT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5.  (U) The rally\'s organizers did not limit their attacks to 
the cruise ship passengers.  Expanding on his target to the 
media, Pastor Mario Moxey asked coyly if \"The Ministry of 
Tourism has consented to HBO filming a documentary in the 
Bahamas aimed at showcasing our country as a destination for 
exclusive homosexual activist groups.\"  Apostle Christopher 
Wallace of the Christian Tabernacle Church also attacked 
unnamed members of parliament as well, declaring that \"we\'ve 
gotta fight this in Parliament because we\'ve got too many 
sissies in Parliament...next election we cannot vote for 
sexually-confused parliamentarians.\"  Apostle Russell 
continued with only a lightly-veiled reference to The 
Bahamanian Foreign Minister (and member of parliament) Fred 
Mitchell scathingly declaring, \"When we have our own 
parliamentarians saying they can\'t find no wife.  Fifty-one 
year old men can\'t find no wife?  All these gorgeous, 
brown-skinned women and you can\'t find no wife?\" (sic) 
 
 
MODERATION CAN COST YOU AIR TIME 
- - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6.  (U) In their July 13, 2004, editions, The Bahamas two 
major daily newspapers,  \"Tribune\" and the \"Nassau Guardian\", 
both reported that members of the Bahamas Christian Council, 
a powerful conglomeration of representatives from Christian 
denominations, were noticeably absent from the July 11 rally. 
 The newly-elected Christian Council had been taking a more 
modulated stance on many issues since taking office, 
including homosexuality,  than did the previous 
administration lead by Bishop Samuel Greene. 
 
7. (SBU)  When contacted by the Political Officer on July 14, 
Reverend Dr. Thompson, new president of the Bahamas Christian 
Council, said that he stands by his \"don\'t ask, don\'t tell\" 
policy.  \"We welcome anyone to the Bahamas, but do not want 
our visitors to push their beliefs on us.\"  In previous 
meetings with the Embassy, Reverend Thompson, as well as 
Anglican Archbishop of The Bahamas, Drexel Gomez, have 
explained that they will not publicly attack gay visitors or 
gay Bahamians and summarized their stance on the issue as one 
of \"hate the sin; love the sinner.\" 
 
8. (C)  Speaking with Charge July 15, His Grace Archbishop 
Gomez reiterated that he saw \"no advantage or benefit\" to any 
public demonstration against the visit, nor did he have any 
plans to speak out.  Referring to Reverend Moxey, the 
Archbishop wryly noted that Rev. Moxey \"appears to be using 
this to promote his own publicity.\"  Archbishop Gomez was 
confident that there would be a \"full contingent\" of the 
Royal Bahamas Police Force in the area to preclude any 
untoward incident from occurring. 
 
9.  (C) Reverend Thompson also said that the HBO film crew 
had already contacted him asking about his views of the port 
call by the \"Norwegian Dawn\" cruise ship.  Citing his more 
moderate stance, he claims he was told by HBO that his 
comments would not make the film, as they were looking for 
sound bites from what Thompson described as \"renegade 
fanatics\".  Reverend Thompson said that no one from the 
Christian Council would participate in the protests, nor do 
they support them.  There seems to be some dissent amongst 
the Christian Council as Bishop John Humes, Vice President of 
BCC, claims the Bahamas Christian Council fully supports the 
\"Save the Bahamas\" campaign to \"The Tribune\" on July 15. 
 
 
PROTEST AND COUNTER-PROTEST ON MORNING OF ARRIVAL 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
10.  (U) A second protest for the morning of July 16 in 
Rawson Square has been announced by the July 11 organizers. 
In the meantime, they claim they will have 50,000 Bahamian 
signatures on petitions condemning Prime Minister Perry 
Christie for allowing the cruise ship to dock in Nassau. 
Some of the organizers have also threatened that Christie 
would be voted out of office at the next election in 2007 if 
he refuses to join them in opposing homosexuals. 
 
11.  (U) Although its membership is only 150 -- with hundreds 
more reportedly \"silent members\" -- the \"Rainbow Alliance of 
the Bahamas,\" a local advocacy group for gays, lesbians, 
bisexuals, and transgenders plan to be present to welcome the 
passengers from the \"Norwegian Dawn\".  A previous cruise that 
also had a gay group of passengers in early June came and 
went without the promised opposition rally.  At this event 
the Rainbow Alliance set up a welcoming stand at the port for 
the day visitors.  Both sides have promised to turn up the 
heat -- and the attendance -- for the arrival of The 
\"Norwegian Dawn\" with Rosie O\'Donnell and HBO film crew on 
board. 
 
 
EMBASSY EFFORTS 
- - - - - - - - 
12.  (C) Political Officer contacted the Ministry of Tourism 
July 13 to inquire about security arrangements when the 
controversial cruise reaches Nassau.  Ministry 
representatives said that they would be present at Prince 
George\'s Wharf when the passengers disembark on Friday. 
Deputy Director General Vernice Walkine assured the Embassy 
that the Ministry was committed to the safety and happiness 
of all those on board, and that they planned to have extra 
security officers present at the rally.  Ms. Walkine averred 
that the prospect of any violence actually occurring was 
extremely unlikely. 
 
13.  (C) Efforts July 14 to contact the Rainbow Alliance to 
obtain information about their plans for July 16 were 
unsuccessful. 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
14.  (C) Given the country\'s peaceful culture where the fire 
and brimstone generally stays verbal rather than physical, 
Friday\'s planned protest -- if it happens -- promises to be 
loud, but non-violent.  Promised protests at the last 
gay-oriented cruise to visit Nassau fizzled out and never 
happened after all sides had appropriately postured prior to 
the ship\'s actual arrival.  Odds are that the same thing 
would have happened this time, but for two new variables 
thrust into the equation -- new factors that caused Prime 
Minister Perry Christie reportedly to spend Wednesday in an 
emergency cabinet meeting trying to defuse -- along with 
another simmering domestic political crisis.  The new 
variables are the presence of a celebrity, Rosie O\'Donnell, 
and an HBO crew looking for something controversial to film. 
 
15. (C) Bahamian culture celebrates heterosexual prowess as 
it proudly proclaims its elaborate, overt religiosity. 
Bahamians also wryly acknowledge their compartmentalized 
religious beliefs, commemorated in a popular Bahamian ballad 
recounting the shortcomings of the \"Sunday Christian\" who 
weekly repents their previous six days of sinfulness. 
 
16. (C)  PM Perry Christie finds himself between a rock and a 
hard place on this controversy.  He owes his election to the 
active intervention of the conservative end of the Bahamian 
Protestant religious spectrum.  He also knows that 60 percent 
of the country\'s GDP depends on tourism.  The conservative 
Protestant churches who were his main backers in the last 
election expect some payback.  Christie, who generally 
prefers no decision to any decision that leaves anyone 
unhappy, cannot sidestep the issue without further enhancing 
his image as the Bahamian Hamlet.  The FNM opposition is 
enjoying watching him squirm and doing its best to tighten 
the screws by repeatedly calling upon him to take a 
principled stand. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"18877","7/19/2004 15:28","04NASSAU1397","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU1342","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001397 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2014 
TAGS: CASC, PREL, PGOV, BF, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: SOME BAHAMIANS DON\'T ACCEPT ALL COLORS OF THE 
RAINBOW 
 
REF: A. NASSAU 1342 
 
     B. NASSAU 1382 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1.  (SBU) An estimated 150 protesters gathered early July 16 
in downtown Nassau to denounce the government\'s willingness 
to allow the \"Norwegian Dawn\" cruise ship, which on this 
particular cruise had a large contingent of U.S. citizen-gay 
families on a trip organized in part by U.S. celebrity Rosie 
O\'Donnell.  Embassy Political and Consular officers along 
with RSO monitored the ship\'s arrival and the demonstrations 
that lasted from slightly before 8 a.m. until 10 a.m. when 
protesters disbanded as scheduled by police. Prominent 
Bahamian pastors in the \"Save The Bahamas\" Campaign gave 
fiery speeches denouncing homosexuality as well as against 
specific members of the Perry Christie Government that they 
believe to be homosexual than they had earlier.  Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Fred Mitchell and Minister of Tourism Obie 
Wilchombe were cited as examples of the Progressive Liberal 
Party (PLP) Government\'s ignoring of what protest organizers 
claimed were the Bahamian peoples\' concerns about 
homosexuality.  Local media and an HBO documentary film crew 
from the U.S. were present for the protest in its entirety. 
The \"Norwegian Dawn\" departed Nassau at mid-afternoon. 
End Summary. 
 
 
RELIGIOUS LEADERS MEET CRUISE SHIP PASSENGERS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2.  (SBU) Consular Officer and Political Officer arrived at 
Rawson Square in the heart of downtown Nassau where cruise 
ship passengers exit the port facility shortly before 8:00 
am.  Approximately 100 protesters had already gathered and 
were listening to the impassioned speeches of various 
Bahamian Protestant ministers decrying homosexual lifestyles. 
 The speeches themselves reiterated past themes as the 
religious leaders told their followers that gay lifestyles do 
not follow Christian values. 
 
3.  (SBU) Quoting from the Bahamian Constitution\'s reference 
to The Bahamas being a Christian nation, Apostle Christopher 
Russell bashed the current Administration for \"promoting 
gays\" in The Bahamas.  Citing Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
Minister of Tourism Obie Wilchombe, both widely rumored to be 
homosexuals, by name, the religious figures dared Prime 
Minister Perry G. Christie \"to stand up as a man, if he is 
one\" and state where the Progressive Liberal Party stands on 
the issue of homosexuality. 
 
 
RAINBOW ALLIANCE HAS SMALL PRESENCE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4.  (SBU) Perhaps a dozen members of Rainbow Alliance, a 
local gay rights activist organization, were also present 
during the rally.  For the most part however, they stayed 
away from the platform and remained directly outside the gate 
where the passengers entered the Square to welcome the cruise 
ship visitors before they faced the protesters.  Embassy 
officers observed a few one-on-one debates between Alliance 
members and protesters during the course of the morning, but 
all of these were peaceful and relatively calm. 
 
5.  (SBU) Members of Rainbow Alliance supporting the gay 
contingent of the cruise ship passengers, as well as 
protesters who were opposing their presence in The Bahamas, 
gave several interviews to local media as well as to the HBO 
documentary film crew who were onboard the cruise ship to 
document the first cruise ship cruise catering to gay 
families.  One camera crew from HBO followed one gay couple 
with their children during their morning of shopping on Bay 
Street, Nassau\'s main tourist shopping strip. 
 
 
SECURITY ISSUES AT PROTEST 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6.  (C) Embassy had been in contact with the Royal Bahamas 
Police Force (RBPF) in advance of the planned protest to 
discuss security concerns as they might impact on the 
overwhelmingly U.S. passengers on the ship.  As agreed upon, 
the RBPF stationed a few dozen uniformed police force and 
Defence Force officials, with others under-cover, in the area 
of the protest/counter-protest. 
 
7.  (SBU) What appeared to be the first male gay couple 
disembarked the ship at approximately 8:30am and the couple 
walked, with their four children, from Prince George\'s Wharf 
into downtown Nassau relatively undisturbed except for the 
accompanying HBO film crews.  Although the majority of 
passengers apparently chose to stay on the ship, those who 
did chose to disembark did so 9 a.m.  Many went straight from 
the ship to waiting buses to be taken on standard tours of 
the island or to the zoo. 
 
8.  (C) Central Detective Unit Superintendent, Marvin Dames, 
contacted the RSO shortly after 10 a.m. to inform him that a 
few Bahamian protesters had been arrested for following and 
harassing some of the cruise ship passengers walking around 
downtown.  After the arrests, the protesters appear to have 
disbanded.  RSO commended the Royal Bahamas Police Force for 
their vigilance in maintaining law and order. 
 
 
EMBASSY LETTER APPEARS IN PAPER 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
9.  (C)  On July 14 the Deputy Director General at the 
Ministry of Tourism, Ms. Vernice Walkine, requested a letter 
from the Embassy -- supposedly for internal Government use 
only -- detailing the Embassy\'s concerns with the welfare and 
protection of U.S. citizens in event of any protests or 
incidents during the cruise ship\'s stopover in Nassau.  The 
text of the letter was immediately leaked to the local media.. 
 
10.  (U)  Excerpts from the letter appeared on the front page 
of the country\'s two principal newspapers, \"The Tribune\" and 
\"The Nassau Guardian\" on July 16. After referring to 
widespread media reporting of the controversy generated among 
Bahamians by the cruise ship visit and the need to balance 
the free expression of opinion with safety and security, and 
noting the Embassy\'s special interest in the protection and 
welfare of U.S. citizens, the letter requested that the 
Embassy \"be kept apprised of any developments that might 
impact the safety of U.S. citizens.\" 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
11.  (C) Minister of Tourism Obie Wilchombe seems to have 
been seeking the cover of the  U.S. Embassy by disclosing our 
letter to the media as the justification for providing an 
increased police presence during the ship\'s visit. 
 
12.  (U) As of 2:00 p.m., there have been no indications that 
U.S. citizens have been significantly inconvenienced by the 
protests.  The \"Norwegian Dawn\" has departed Nassau and three 
other cruise ships have subsequently arrived and docked at 
Prince George\'s Wharf and disembarked their passengers. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"18891","7/19/2004 19:12","04NASSAU1400","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001400 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2014 
TAGS: OFDP, PREL, CU, BF, Cuba 
SUBJECT: BAHAMAS PLANS TO UPGRADE DIPLOMATIC PRESENCE IN 
HAVANA 
 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1.  (C) On Friday, July 16, 2004, Foreign Minister Fred 
Mitchell and Under Secretary for Consular Affairs Carlton 
Wright returned from a Caricom meeting in Cuba, and held a 
conference during which Foreign Minister Mitchell reiterated 
his hope that The Bahamas will 
be able to open a consulate/embassy in Havana in the near 
future.  Mitchell justified 
the initiative saying it would provide consular services to 
Bahamian students and Bahamians imprisoned in Cuba, as well 
foster communication (and business) in agriculture and 
maritime issues in particular.  Foreign Ministry Permanent 
Secretary Patricia Rodgers (number two in 
 
SIPDIS 
the Ministry) told Charge July 19 that she expects a Bahamian 
diplomatic mission to have been established in Havana by 
January or February 2005. 
End Summary 
 
 
BAHAMIAN-CUBAN RELATIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2.  (U) Following the Minister\'s trip to Haiti as part of the 
five-person team sent by Caricom to investigate the situation 
in Haiti, FM Mitchell and Foreign Ministry Under Secretary 
Carlton Wright traveled to Havana for the 
previously-scheduled Cuba-Caricom meeting.  This meeting was 
a follow-up to the December 2002 meeting at which Cuba and 
the then \"Big 4\" of the Caribbean -- Barbados, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Guyana and Jamaica -- signed an accord and agreed to 
hold biennial meetings. 
 
3.  (U) Long-rumored to be \"in the works\", Foreign Minister 
Mitchell reiterated The Bahamas\' intention to open a 
consulate/embassy in Havana in the near future.  Mitchell was 
quoted by local media declaring that \"as a matter of 
practicality, it seems the prudent thing to do would be to 
offer consular services at the very least\".  Cuban Consul 
General to The Bahamas, Felix Wilson, has claimed that on 
average 20,000 Bahamians travel to Cuba each year for a 
variety of reasons: healthcare, medical training, tertiary 
education, and vacation. 
 
4.  (U) Mitchell proudly announced that The Bahamas is 
Caricom\'s biggest trading partner with Cuba, with traded 
goods estimated at a value of USD 22.7 million per year.  FM 
Mitchell suggested to the Minister of Agriculture that he 
look into the possibility of trading fruits and vegetables. 
 
5.  (U) During their stay in Cuba, Mitchell and Wright were 
taken to several potential building sites by their Cuban 
hosts.  Mitchell told Bahamian media that funds to establish 
a presence in Cuba were budgeted into the 2004/2005 budget. 
Under Secretary Wright has plans to return to Havana in two 
to three weeks to provide consular services to imprisoned 
Bahamians.  Minister Mitchell indicated that Mr. Wright is 
likely to be the person designated to open the facility. 
 
 
FOREIGN MINISTRY OFFICIALS SEEM TO KNOW WHAT THEY ARE IN FOR 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6.  (C) Speaking with Charge July 19, Foreign Ministry 
Permanent Secretary Dr. Patricia Rodgers said that she 
expected that the Bahamian mission in Cuba would be 
functioning \"no later than January or February of next year.\" 
 As justification, she noted that there were currently at 
least one hundred Bahamians studying medicine in Cuba, that 
thousands of Bahamians traveled regularly to Cuba for 
inexpensive medical treatment, and that there was pressure 
from Bahamian business persons to establish a diplomatic 
presence as a way of facilitating their business dealings 
with the Cubans.  Bahamian Mr. Tennyson Wells has been 
pressing the Bahamian Foreign Ministry and Ministry of 
Agriculture to establish a diplomatic presence so that his 
shipping company will have representation in Cuba. 
 
7.  (C) Musing on the benefits of a consulate versus an 
embassy, Dr. Rodgers said that with the large number of 
countries already having ambassadors in Havana, establishing 
only a consular presence would leave The Bahamas \"ignored and 
discriminated against\" by Minrex (the Cuban Foreign Ministry). 
8.  (C) Queried if they knew what conditions would be like in 
Cuba, Dr. Rodgers wanely smiled \"yes.\"  She had already her 
own list of complaints about the prices and services rendered 
by Cubalse.  Similarly, she \"hoped\" that the Government would 
send a professional diplomat and not a political appointee to 
Havana.  Aware of security concerns resulting from hiring 
Cubans, she said that she hoped that the Foreign Ministry 
would also be permitted to send their own staff to work in 
critical areas of the embassy. \"I suppose that we will have 
to train them to talk in code even in restaurants,\" she 
exclaimed.  Charge confirmed that Bahamian diplomats should 
have no expectation of any privacy either at work, in public, 
or in their homes. 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
9.  (C) It is likely that Minister Mitchell hopes to 
facilitate repatriation of illegal Cuban migrants interdicted 
in Bahamian waters with this gesture and that this is the 
quid pro quo expected of the Cuban Government.  Currently, 
the Government of Cuba only accepts its nationals back a few 
at a time, causing The Bahamas to hold Cuban nationals in 
detention for months until repatriation -- a very costly 
venture for the Bahamian government. 
 
10. (C) It is difficult to imagine any concrete benefits to 
The Bahamas from establishing a closer relationship to Cuba. 
The small size of the Bahamian population precludes major 
commercial sales to/purchases from Cuba, but Bahamians 
currently trading do make significant profits.  Medi-tourism 
is growing as fiscally prudent Bahamians seek a high-quality, 
lower-cost alternative to Miami for medical treatment. 
Ideologically, FM Mitchell and others in the Bahamian cabinet 
will also get psychological gratification from proving that 
they can conduct an independent foreign policy at odds with 
superpower neighbor. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"19627","8/11/2004 13:21","04NASSAU1515","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","03NASSAU2124|04NASSAU1412","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/11/2014 
TAGS: PREL, OVIP, BTIO, ECON, SCUL, CH, BF, ASEC, China 
SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER CHRISTIE\'S CHINA TRIP, THE LATEST 
IN A STRING OF VISITS 
 
REF: A. 03 NASSAU 2124 
     B. NASSAU 1412 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1.  (SBU)  Bahamian Prime Minister Perry Christie will lead 
an official government delegation to China on August 14-21, 
continuing a two-year upswing in diplomatic exchanges between 
The Bahamas and China.  In addition to numerous cultural 
programs, the two nations have exchanged high-level 
delegations to explore business opportunities and strengthen 
diplomatic ties.  The majority of the Bahamian cabinet visits 
have been hosted by the Chinese government -- nominally to 
discuss Chinese support of The Bahamas\' membership in the 
World Trade Organization.  Despite being separated by two 
oceans and a continental landmass, China is one of only four 
countries that maintains a resident ambassador in The 
Bahamas.  The Bahamas\' largest port facility in Freeport is 
owned and operated by Hong Kong-based Hutchison-Whampoa.  The 
Bahamian press gives generally positive and extensive 
coverage to China and interprets the growing China-Bahamas 
relationship as a sign of The Bahamas\' increasing importance 
in the world and friendship with a potential superpower. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
BAHAMIAN DIGNITARIES \"FREQUENT FLYERS\" TO CHINA... 
 
2.  (C)  Prime Minister Perry Christie is scheduled to visit 
Beijing and Shanghai from August 14 - 21, 2004.  This will be 
the Prime Minister\'s first official trip to China. 
Accompanying Christie will be his wife and daughter, Minister 
of Foreign Affairs Fred Mitchell, Minister of State for 
Finance James Smith, the Prime Minister\'s Permanent Secretary 
Ronald Thompson, and two reporters.  An advance team 
consisting of Chief of Protocol Andrew McKinney and Under 
Secretary at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Philip Miller 
 
SIPDIS 
has already departed for China.  The Bahamian Foreign 
Ministry has been unwilling to provide details about the 
delegation\'s itinerary, schedule or meetings, or the purpose 
of the trip. 
 
3.  (U)  The Prime Minister\'s trip to China is the latest is 
a stream of high-level Bahamian visitors to China since the 
PLP\'s electoral victory in May 2002.  In the past year, a 
number of Bahamian government officials have visited China 
including Cabinet-level ministers and members of parliament. 
On August 30, 2003, Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell and 
Minister of Transport and Aviation Glenys Hanna-Martin both 
traveled to China.  They met with the Chinese Minister of 
Commerce to discuss World Trade Organization (WTO) issues as 
the Bahamas prepares for WTO membership.  Ministers Mitchell 
and Hanna-Martin also met with China\'s Minister of Culture. 
While there, the Chinese arranged for Minister Hanna-Martin 
to commission a Chinese-built ship that will be registered 
with the Bahamas\' ship registry.  Just two months later in 
October, Minister of Trade and Industry Leslie Miller visited 
Beijing, again ostensibly to promote The Bahamas\' accession 
to the WTO. 
 
...AND A WHIFF OF IMPROPRIETY 
 
4.  (C)  Sandwiched between these two cabinet-level visits, 
the then-Executive Chairman of the Bahamas Agricultural and 
Industrial Corporation (BAIC), Sidney Stubbs, led a trade and 
investment mission to China in September 2003 (Ref A). 
Stubbs, controversy, and hints of scandal have been linked 
almost from the first day of Stubbs\' election as a PLP member 
of parliament. 
 
5.  (U)  In January 2000, the government hired a team of 
auditors to examine the books of BAIC to determine the 
spending habits of executives and the overall financial 
standing of the institution.  Chinese business interests 
reportedly promised to reimburse the Bahamian government for 
the $52,000 in expenses the delegation incurred making the 
trip, but to date no payment has been made.  In presenting 
their rationale for the trip to China, BAIC executives noted 
that, \"In view of China\'s growing importance to global trade 
and the wealth, which is being generated in the Chinese 
economy, China is a source of investment funds and should be 
courted to make more direct investments in the economy of The 
Bahamas.\" 
 
6.  (C)  As a result of his alleged discrimination against 
BAIC employees who were supporters of the previous 
government, Stubbs was forced to resign his position shortly 
after the China trade mission, and has subsequently been 
threatened with dismissal from Parliament due to a bankruptcy 
judgment against him (Ref B).  In addition, the 
scandal-plagued Stubbs was stopped in September 2003 by U.S. 
Customs in a California airport on his way to China during a 
random inspection and was discovered to be carrying an 
attach chase containing multiple Chinese passports with 
Bahamian visas.  Stubbs claims that these visas were to be 
given to a Chinese trade delegation who were scheduled to 
hold an international trade conference on Andros island, a 
sparsely populated island with little to no commercial 
enterprise.  (NOTE: The joint U.S.-UK undersea testing 
facility, AUTEC, is located on Andros.) 
 
CHINESE PRESENCE IN THE BAHAMAS 
 
7.  (C)  China is one of four countries to maintain resident 
ambassadors in The Bahamas.  Ambassador Dongcun Jiao 
presented his credentials to Governor General Dame Ivy Dumont 
on August 21, 2003.  During the swearing in, Governor General 
Dame Ivy Dumont thanked the Ambassador for his country\'s 
assistance in the areas of education, agriculture, fisheries 
and the arts.  Ambassador Jiao noted that the Bahamas and 
China have coordinated with and supported each other in 
international affairs.  He further stated that the Chinese 
government is ready to make concerted efforts with the 
Bahamian government to build a China-Bahamas relationship of 
all-round cooperation in the interest of mutual development. 
Currently, the exceptionally large Chinese embassy in The 
Bahamas, given the paucity of bilateral business to conduct, 
consists of an Ambassador and six accredited diplomats.  For 
its part, The Bahamas maintains a Consul General in Hong Kong 
but has announced that, following PRC suggestions, it will be 
establishing an embassy in Beijing and closing its consulate 
in Hong Kong. 
 
8.  (C) The largest Chinese investment in The Bahamas is the 
$1 billion Freeport container port owned and operated by Hong 
Kong-based Hutchison-Whampoa.  Chinese dignitaries traveling 
to the Bahamas always visit Freeport and the port. 
Hutchison-Whampoa employs only five Chinese citizens in its 
Freeport facility, all in a management capacity. 
 
9.  (U) Madam Wu Yi, State Councilor to the People\'s Republic 
of China accompanied by a delegation of 30 people, including 
six Chinese business leaders, visited The Bahamas in January 
2003.  During her visit to Nassau, Madam Wu presented the 
Bahamian government with a grant of $250,000 for various 
technical, agricultural, handicraft and cooperative projects. 
 Additionally, a delegation of Chinese government officials 
visited Nassau on June 19, 2004, to finalize plans for the 
Chinese to grant the Bahamian government $20 million for 
construction of a national stadium. 
 
COMMENT 
 
10.  (C) The Bahamas\' political and economic ties to China 
remain modest.  Bilateral trade flows have increased, 
reaching approximately $95 million for the first eight months 
of 2003, and investment projects such as the Freeport port 
facility are always welcome.  Some local commentators would 
like to believe that The Bahamas should attempt to use China 
as a counter-balance to the U.S.  It is more likely, however, 
that Bahamian officials are merely using their moment in the 
Chinese spotlight to push for kinder WTO accession terms (at 
least as a starting point for negotiations with the other 
members) and to pick up whatever spare trade and investment 
projects a country of over one billion people can offer.  For 
their part, the Chinese in The Bahamas may be a strategic 
move preparing for a post-Castro Caribbean. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"19734","8/13/2004 13:04","04NASSAU1534","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NASSAU 001534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR/D. OCONNOR, E/CBA/WALKER 
USDOC FOR ITA/TD/OETCA/W.DEAN BUSBY, 
3134/USFCS/IO/WH/REBECCA MAN, AND 
4322/ITA/IEP/WH/OMCB/MBROOKS 
SANDO DOMINGO FOR USFCS 
 
E.O. 12958: B/A 
TAGS: EINV, ETRD, BEXP, BF, Tourism 
SUBJECT:  TOURISM UPDATE 2004 
 
1.  SUMMARY:  The Bahamian tourism industry continues to 
rebound from the effects of 9/11.  Visitor arrivals are up 
and economic indicators reflect increased growth in visitor 
arrivals and tourism development throughout 2004.  The 
national flag-carrier, Bahamasair, acquired two new jets and 
resolved its dispute with local travel agents in an effort 
to position the airline to compete with additional expected 
competition.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------ 
STATISTICAL UPDATE 
------------------ 
 
2.  According to the Central Bank of The Bahamas\' Annual 
Report for 2003, total tourist arrivals to the Bahamas 
increased by 4.3% to a record 4.6 million arrivals.  After 
consecutive declines in the previous two years, air traffic 
rebounded by 1.9% to 1.4 million, which remained some 3.5% 
below 2000 arrivals.  Sea arrivals, which encompass cruise 
visitors, continued to dominate the mix, but with gains 
abated from 9.0% in 2002 to 5.4% for 3.2 million passenger 
arrivals. 
 
3.  Tourism expenditure indicators suggest that industry 
earnings rose only marginally during 2003, with receipts 
from an increased number of cruise traffic supported by 
hotel sector pricing gains.  Growth in estimated hotel room 
revenues slackened to 3.7% from 6.6% in 2002, with a 5.4% 
increase in average nightly room rates to $164.22, 
offsetting a 1.6% reduction in total room nights sold.  The 
reduction in total room nights sold occurred alongside a 
3.0% rise in total room nights available for sale, and the 
average hotel occupancy rate also softened to 59.0% from 
62.0% in 2002. 
 
4.  On a destination basis, New Providence\'s room revenue 
gains narrowed to 4.6% from 7.9% in 2002; average nightly 
room rates increased by 5.6% to $188.11 partly offset by 
slightly reduced room sales of 1.0%.  In Grand Bahama, room 
revenues registered decreased 0.4%, as reduced room sales of 
3.4% outweighed the 3.2% rise in the average nightly room 
rate to $84.05.  However, Grand Bahama experienced a 9.9% 
boost in room inventory from renovated properties returned 
to use, causing the average occupancy rate to retreat to 
48.0% from 55.0% in 2002.  For the third consecutive year, 
Family Island room revenues declined, although moderated at 
2.9% from 7.8% in 2002.  While average room rate and 
occupancy levels were unchanged, at $160.36 per night and 
35% respectively, both capacity and room sales fell by 
approximately 2.9% 
 
------------------------ 
TOURISM OUTLOOK FOR 2004 
------------------------ 
 
5.  The outlook for tourism is expected to strengthen 
throughout 2004, particularly in the stopover segment, as 
the United States\' economy expands.  The weak US dollar also 
continues to make vacations in The Bahamas a cheaper 
alternative to Europe and Asia, although travel safety 
concerns, while steadily dissipating, still persist.  The 
outlook is for healthy stopover visitor gains in the Family 
Island, concentrated in Exuma, owing to the presence of the 
upscale, 183 rooms Four Seasons Resort, which opened in 
November 2003, and further supported by the re-opening of 
Club Med property at San Salvador which was closed since 
2001. 
 
6.  Planned improvements to several major airports in the 
Family Islands and New Providence should also result in a 
favorable outlook.  Foreign investments aimed at adding more 
upscale rooms to the hotel sector within most of the major 
islands, including New Providence and Grand Bahama, 
underscore increasing confidence in the medium term outlook 
for the tourism sector.  Among these are the start of work 
on the $600 million Phase III expansion of the Atlantis 
Resort on Paradise Island, a $140 million development on 
Abaco, a 1.2 billion mega resort in Grand Bahamas, and 
another $240 million project earmarked for Exuma. 
 
7.  The Central Bank\'s Quarterly Economic Review for the 
period January - March 2004 reports visitor arrivals to The 
Bahamas rose by 13.2% to 1.4 million visitors, strongly 
outpacing 2003\'s low growth rate of 1.1% and the respective 
7.2% and 8.6% advances of 2001 and 2000.  The increase was 
led by cruise activity with Grand Bahama accounting for 
43.6% of the gains, New Providence 43.1%, and the Family 
Islands 13.3%.  This increase is attributed to the sustained 
upswing in the U.S. economy. 
8.  Sea visitors, which comprised 70.4% of all tourists, 
recorded more robust growth of 15.6% to 980,567, as compared 
to a modest 1.4% last year.  Air traffic also rebounded 
significantly and constituted 29.6% of arrivals. 
 
9.  Given the marked rise in cruise traffic and the recovery 
in air arrivals, which track the stopover market, visitor 
expenditure growth was more robust during the first quarter. 
A key indicator, average hotel occupancy rate, firmed 
marginally to 66.0% with increased room night sales of 12.7% 
outpacing expanded room capacity of 11.4%.  As occupancy 
gains more than offset the 1.6% decline in the average 
nightly room rate to $179.17, estimated room revenues rose 
further by 10.9%. 
 
10.  Expenditure growth was recorded in each of the major 
destinations.  In New Providence, higher room sales of 8.9%, 
on increased room inventory (13.8%) and a slightly firmed 
average nightly room rate of $209.10, supported a 9.0% 
advance in estimated hotel room revenues.  The improvement 
in the Grand Bahama stopover market was characterized by an 
increased average room occupancy rate of 66.3% vis--vis 
56.9% last year, as room sales growth of 24.8% outweighed 
the 7.1% rise in available rooms.  This produced a 22.0% 
rebound in room revenues, despite the decline (2.2%) in 
average nightly room rate to $94.28.  Supported by an 
improved average occupancy ratio, at 38.6% vis--vis 34.5% 
last year, and the appreciated average nightly room rate 
(1.9%) of $174.65, Family Island room revenues rose further 
by 18.5%.  Of particular note was the 3.9% rise in available 
rooms alongside a 16.3% rebound in occupied room nights, 
which combined to fully recapture occupancy losses 
experienced since 2001. 
 
---------------------------- 
INVESTMENT PROPOSALS POUR IN 
---------------------------- 
 
11.  During the 2004/2005-budget debate in the House of 
Assembly in May, Minister of Financial Services and 
Investments Allyson Maynard-Gibson announced that over the 
past year, her ministry reviewed 95 proposed investment 
projects.  She said that her ministry should shortly 
complete its work on these projects and that a significant 
number of them will be able to commence construction in the 
near future.  Embassy will monitor these proposals and 
report on them as they materialize. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
BAHAMASAIR RESOLVES TRAVEL AGENCY DISPUTE 
----------------------------------------- 
 
12.  On July 28, Bahamasair\' general manager Paul Major 
announced that the airline has resolved their dispute over 
ticket sales commissions with local travel agents.  On July 
6, the Bahamas Association of Travel Agencies (BATA) 
announced an industry wide boycott of Bahamasair because the 
airline reduced commissions paid to travel agents.  Mr. 
Major confirmed that the decision to cut rates paid to 
travel agents was a part of the overall cost cutting 
measures being instituted by the airline.  After weeks of 
negotiating with travel agents, Bahamasair has now agreed to 
double rates on the sale of domestic tickets and has offered 
travel agents a number of incentives to further boost sales 
through agencies and potentially increase its revenues by $4 
million to $5 million per annum. 
 
13.  According to Mr. Major some 37 percent of all 
Bahamasair ticket sales come through travel agencies, 
generating an estimated $18 to 20 million in annual sales. 
This means that if the 30-odd Bahamian travel agencies that 
are impacted by the decision see a 20% growth in ticket 
sales over 2003, both they and the airline could realize a 
substantial benefit.  Mr. Major said Bahamasair\'s load 
factors has been as expected for the summer, with industry 
observers saying this indicated the travel agency boycott 
did not have a material impact on the airline.  As plans for 
other airlines (Spirit and Jet Blue) to service the Bahamian 
market materialize, Bahamasair has to position itself to 
become more competitive. 
------------------------------------ 
BAHAMASAIR ACQUIRES TWO NEW AIRCRAFT 
------------------------------------ 
14.  On July 30, Bahamasair welcomed the first of two Boeing 
737-200 series aircraft to its fleet.  The second aircraft 
is scheduled to arrive in The Bahamas in several days. 
Bahamasair said the two additional 1981/82 Boeing 737-200 
advanced JT8D-17 series aircraft would allow the airline to 
increase profitability, expand its international mission and 
provide back up for the existing jet fleet.  During the 
commissioning ceremony, Minister of Public Works Bradley 
Roberts said that Bahamasair was able to cut its losses in 
the 2003/04 fiscal year from $27 million to $13 million.  He 
said with the two additional aircraft, he hoped to further 
reduce the losses of the government-run airline to a record 
$5 million.  The two planes will expand the airline\'s fleet 
to 11, which includes seven De Havilland Canada DHC-8 Dash 8 
turboprops and four Boeing 737-200 series jets. 
 
15.  COMMENT:  No doubt the Bahamas is poised for tremendous 
tourism development, however, the government has to 
carefully decide on the type of tourism development it will 
permit in the country.  Additionally, it is important to 
establish proper infrastructure to accommodate the 
anticipated increase particularly at the Nassau 
International Airport and the Prince George Dock.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"19738","8/13/2004 13:42","04NASSAU1535","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU1412","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 NASSAU 001535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/13/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, CU, BF, Bahamian Politics 
SUBJECT: THE BAHAMIAN SENATE: INFLUENCE WITHOUT POWER 
 
REF: NASSAU 1412 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ROBERT M. WITAJEWSKI FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1.  (C) Charge, Acting DCM, and Political Officer hosted 
groups of senators from the governing Progressive Liberal 
Party (PLP) and the opposition Free National Movement (FNM) 
on July 27 and August 4, 2004, respectively.  The senators, 
who were unusually frank in their assessments, discussed 
Bahamian politics, the role of the Senate in The Bahamas, and 
the future of controversial MP Sidney Stubbs and his seat in 
the Holy Cross constituency.  Animosity between the parties 
was evident.  The tiny FNM minority (25 percent) in the 
Senate was accorded little quarter by the partisan PLP 
majority and had to make due without offices, staff, or much 
access to government bureaucrats. 
End Summary 
 
 
UPPER HOUSE A STEPPING STONE TO LOWER HOUSE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2.  (U) The Bahamian Senate is an unelected body whose seats 
are filled by appointment.  The positions are part-time and 
senators have no full-time staff or any publicly-paid 
assistants to help them carry out their legislative duties. 
The annual salary for a Bahamian senator is a mere $12,500 
and as a result, the majority of senators have full-time jobs 
outside of their government responsibilities.  Because the 
Bahamian government does not provide its senators with office 
space or administrative staff, many senators use their own 
offices and personal secretaries to help with the legislative 
work. 
 
3.  (U) The Senate\'s role is to review and make technical 
corrections to legislation already passed by the Bahamian 
parliament.  Despite the Senate\'s modest formal powers, 
membership confers significant symbolic prestige.  The body\'s 
influence stems from the fact that its members are members of 
The Bahamas\' political, economic, and social inner circles 
and often bring significant personal expertise and experience 
to their position. 
 
4.  (U)  Senate membership is frequently a stepping-stone to 
a political career or a cabinet appointment.  James Smith, 
for example, The Bahamas\' equivalent of the Secretary of the 
Treasury is a non-elected member of the Senate.  Several PLP 
senators indicated that they are being groomed to run for 
seats in parliament in the next general election scheduled 
for 2007.  The leader of the Opposition, Tommy Turnquest, is 
also an un-elected senator.  The seat allocation process 
assures that the majority party in the parliament also 
controls the Senate.  The PLP currently controls 75 percent 
(12 of the 16 seats) of the Senate. 
 
 
A ONE-SIDED RIVALRY 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
5.  (C) The Charge held a lunch on July 27 for four PLP 
members of the Senate including the President of the Senate, 
Sharon Wilson (wife of long-time PLP financial backer and one 
of the wealthiest Bahamian businessmen, Franklyn Wilson), and 
Senators T. Ricardo Whylly, Paulette Zonicle, and Cyprianna 
McWeeney.  The voluble and energetic PLP senators readily 
(and gleefully) admitted that because of their numeric 
dominance in the Senate, they deliberately \"picked on\" and 
ganged up on their few FNM senator-colleagues mercilessly. 
When asked by the Charge if former Prime Minister Hubert 
Ingraham would return as the Leader of the FNM, Paulette 
Zonicle said \"I hope so... So we can beat him back down.\" 
The PLP senators told Embassy officers that they felt no 
threat from current leader of the Opposition, Tommy 
Turnquest, and seemed to almost feel sorry for him because of 
his lack of charisma and inability to lead his party. 
 
6.  (C) A week later, the Charge held a lunch on August 4, 
2004 for all four members of the FNM: Party Leader Tommy 
Turnquest and Senators Tanya McCartney, Desmond Bannister, 
and Gladys Sands.  Senator McCartney admitted the 
effectiveness of the PLP harassment acknowledging that they 
\"have to put up with a lot in Senate\" referring to the often 
dismissive or badgering attitude of their PLP counterparts 
during Senate sessions. 
 
FIGHT OVER SIDNEY STUBBS\' SEAT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7.  (C) Both the PLP and FNM senators agreed that there would 
be a by-election for Sidney Stubbs\' seat in Parliament in the 
near future.  Tommy Turnquest thinks it will happen within 
the next \"eight to twelve months realistically\", a long way 
off given that a parliamentary decision on Stubbs\' bankruptcy 
charge, which could lead to his expulsion from the House of 
Assembly, is expected on September 26. (See Reftel)  Foreign 
Minister Fred Mitchell told the Charge on August 2nd that 
despite the damage Stubbs has done to the PLP, the decision 
to ask him to resign could not come from him -- it would have 
to come from the Prime Minister...and that PM Perry Christie 
was not inclined to ask for Stubbs\' resignation from 
parliament. 
 
8.  (C) The President of the Senate, Sharon Wilson, said that 
if a by-election for Sidney Stubbs\' seat is held, the PLP 
will win, \"but the margin will say all\".  She continued that 
the seat is traditionally PLP and if an incumbent government 
cannot win a seat -- and by a landslide vote -- then the 
election would be ominous sign for the PLP Party that it was 
rapidly losing public favor.  She said \"even if we win the 
battle, we would lose the war if the votes were close.\" 
 
9.  (C) Tommy Turnquest said that a by-election campaign 
would cost the FNM \"one-hundred thousand dollars to be 
credible, and two-hundred thousand dollars to win\".  Both the 
PLP and FNM joked about how \"Bahamian votes cannot be bought, 
but Bahamians will accept all the free stuff they can carry.\" 
 A Stubbs by-election would become, all of the senators 
agreed, a mid-term referendum on the performance of the 
Christie government and both sides would go all-out to win. 
 
 
TOMMY TURNQUEST INVITED TO CUBA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
10.  (C) At previous meetings with the Charge, Tommy 
Turnquest has asked how the PLP government is managing the 
bilateral relationship between The Bahamas and the United 
States, seeming to want information on how to criticize his 
counterpart for neglecting The Bahamas\' nearest neighbor and 
biggest ally.  Ever-cautious not to step on the toes of \"the 
giant neighbor to the north\", the leader of the opposition 
asked how the United States would receive the news that he 
has been invited to Cuba, and is considering a visit. 
 
11.  (C) Charge explained to Mr. Turnquest that it is 
completely up to him as a citizen of a sovereign country to 
exercise his right to visit Cuba, but strongly urged him to 
meet with the US Interests Section and with the members of 
the democratic opposition and human rights movement despite 
what will inevitably be Cuban government pressure not to do 
so.  The Charge also offered to help him arrange meetings, 
via the Interests Section, outside of those that would be 
offered by the Castro regime, including with religious 
figures and the Catholic Church in order to give him more 
exposure and a more balanced visit in Cuba. 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
12.  (C) Although determining philosophical differences 
between the PLP and the FNM is next to impossible, party 
members are fiercely loyal.  One PLP senator said that \"the 
Progressive Liberal Party is almost a religion\".  One vestige 
that is left-over from the creation of the parties however, 
is that of the racial divide.  The FNM evolved out of the 
United Bahamian Party (UBP), which was known to be the party 
favored by wealthy white Bahamians.  Although the PLP 
admitted that this line has blurred significantly, the 
senators still felt that Brent Symmonette, a very wealthy 
white Bahamian FNM MP, will never become the leader of his 
party because he refuses to admit publicly that he has a 
black grandmother, which reinforces the perception that he, 
as one PLP senator put it, is a \"white man from the 
generation that was racist.\"  The 49-year-old Symmonette, a 
businessman/lawyer and former Minister of Tourism who 
represents Nassau\'s affluent Montagu district, is sometimes 
mentioned as a possible replacement for the uninspiring Tommy 
Turnquest prior to the next general elections to be held no 
later than May 2007. 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"19759","8/13/2004 21:05","04NASSAU1542","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001542 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/13/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, EFIN, BF, Bahamian Politics 
SUBJECT: SCANDAL IN THE FAMILY?  PRIME MINISTER DENIES 
IRANIAN BUSINESSMAN\'S CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION CLAIMS 
 
 
Classified By: CDA Robert M. Witajewski, Reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) Iranian businessman Mohammed Harajchi presented 
documentation of some of his financial contributions to the 
ruling Progressive Liberal Party during a press event held at 
his multi-million dollar Paradise Island home on 11 August 
2004.  Harajchi denied that his contributions were designed 
to gain reinstatement of his bank\'s operating license, which 
had been revoked in 2001 amidst allegations of money 
laundering.  The PLP issued a statement highlighting 
Harajchi\'s confirmation that he received no political favors 
in exchange for his contributions.  Prime Minister Christie, 
who raised Harajchi\'s pending announcement three times with 
the Charge at an unrelated event, appearing uneasy and 
preoccupied, released a press statement on August 12 angrily 
denying that he or his ministers had accepted improper 
contributions.  The PM specifically denied that he had 
received $500,000 from Harajchi to renovate his Cable Beach 
home.  Christie promised that the PLP would soon give a full 
and accurate accounting of Harajchi\'s donations. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
 
Millions in Campaign Contributions without a Quid Pro Quo? 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
2.  (U) Iranian businessman and long-time Bahamas resident 
Mohammed Harajchi held a press conference on 11 August 2004 
at which he provided reporters with \"evidence\" to back up his 
claim that he gave $10 million to the Progressive Liberal 
Party (PLP) and its candidates during the May 2002 general 
elections.  Harajchi claimed that he had been approached, 
either directly or via intermediaries, by \"90 percent of the 
(Christie) cabinet\" for campaign contributions, had helped to 
refurbish PLP headquarters, and underwritten several PLP 
political rallies, among other things. 
 
3.  (U)  Harajchi denied that his generosity was designed to 
win back the operating license of his bank, Suisse Security 
Bank and Trust, which was revoked by the Central Bank in 
March 2001 during the previous government amidst accusations 
of money laundering.  Harajchi lost several court appeals to 
have his license reinstated. 
 
4.  (U) Harajchi insisted to reporters that current Prime 
Minister Perry Christie reached out to him prior to the 2002 
campaign to express his belief that Harajchi\'s bank license 
case had been handled badly.  Harajchi said he told Christie 
that he was no longer fighting to get his license restored, 
but rather to get \"justice\" and clear his name.  When asked 
in the press conference if Christie made him any promises 
regarding his bank license, Harajchi declined to answer, 
calling the Prime Minister \"an honourable man\" and advising 
reporters to take the matter up with him directly. 
 
5.  (U) Harajchi provided receipts for a $100,000 
contribution to the \"PLP Leadership Act,\" bills from two 
fireworks displays totaling $75,000, and a $1,000 check paid 
to the \"Singing Bishop Prophet\" Lawrence Rolle, who performed 
at two PLP rallies.  Harajchi also presented the results of a 
lie detector test which he said verified that he was telling 
the truth. 
 
 
PLP Says, We Agree. 
------------------ 
 
6.  (U) The PLP issued a statement shortly after the press 
conference confirming that Harajchi had made donations to the 
party, but in amounts far short of $10 million.  The PLP 
emphasized in its press release that it is neither illegal or 
improper for political parties in The Bahamas to accept 
donations from individuals, and highlighted attention on 
Harajchi\'s confirmation that he had received no favor or 
promise in exchange for his financial donation. 
 
7.  (U) Prime Minister Christie issued his own press release 
the following day responding to Harajchi\'s allegations,  In a 
two-page press release sent to the local newspapers  August 
12, Christie declared that he \"rejected any insinuation\" 
Harajchi may have made \"in his \"relentless campaign of 
vengeance\" against the PLP government.  Christie stood behind 
his ministers and defended them against what he characterized 
as Harajchi\'s attempt to \"smear the good name and reputation\" 
of his Cabinet.  Christie attributed Harajchi\'s comments to 
resentment at not being granted a new operating license for 
his bank. 
 
8.  (U)  Addressing rumors that campaign contributions had 
financed his newly-renovated home in the Cable Beach area of 
Nassau, PM Christie said \"Mr. Harajchi did not contribute so 
much as a single cent toward the renovation of my house.\"  He 
pointedly refused to call Harajchi an \"honourable man,\" 
instead saying that Harajchi had expected Christie\'s 
government to \"pervert the course of justice and give him 
back his bank license.\"  Christie called Harajchi\'s claim 
that he had donated $10 million \"an absolute lie.\"  Christie 
insisted that the PLP was investigating its own accounting 
records and would present the details of its findings 
regarding Harajchi\'s donations as soon as possible. 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9.  (C) Prime Minister Christie spent the hours before 
Harajchi\'s press event at the opening of a disaster 
preparedness conference sponsored by the Bahamian National 
Emergency Management Agency.  During the course of the 
morning, the PM quietly raised Harajchi\'s pending press 
conference three times with the Charge as the two sat next to 
each other and talked.  Christie uncharacteristically stayed 
for the entire event and seemed reluctant to go back to his 
office where, he knew, reporters would be awaiting his 
response to Harajchi\'s allegations.  After previously leaving 
the public comments to his ministers - one of whom called 
Harajchi a \"terrorist\" before backing off - the Prime 
Minister has now personally turned his guns on Harajchi in an 
effort to decisively disassociate himself and his party from 
a shady businessman whose story is not going away. 
 
10. (C)  Both of The Bahamas\' two major political parties 
live in glass houses when it comes to campaign contributions. 
 Many Bahamian campaign contributors are not as reticent as 
Harajchi claims to have been about putting down explicit quid 
pro quo markers in return for their contributions.  As much 
as the FNM opposition might like to exploit Harajchi\'s 
corruption charges leveled against the Christie Government 
and cast some rocks at the PLP\'s home, it knows that it too 
cannot afford close scrutiny of the source -- and quid pro 
quo\'s of -- its own party\'s campaign contributions. 
WITAJEWSKI 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"21190","10/1/2004 16:34","04NASSAU1837","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001837 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NORTHCOM AND SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/01/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, BF, CARICOM 
SUBJECT: CHRISTIE WANTS TO BE THE TONY BLAIR OF CARICOM 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert M. Witajewski, Reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
SUMMARY 
 ------- 
 
1. (C) PM Perry Christie confidant Franklyn Wilson argued 
during a September 30 luncheon that the U.S. should support 
Christie\'s hope to become a regional leader since the 
Bahamian Prime Minister was America\'s \"Tony Blair\" inside 
Caricom.  Wilson again raised the Prime Minister\'s belief 
that he was ignored and left exposed by the United States 
during events surrounding the resignation of Haitian 
ex-President Aristide and that he should have been consulted 
by senior USG officials.  Wilson claimed, however, that 
Christie bore \"no grudges\" at being left out of the loop by 
the U.S. and Canada. 
End Summary 
 
 
I CAN BE YOUR BLAIR IN THE CARIBBEAN 
------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C)  During a small lunch hosted by Ambassador on 
September 30, prominent Bahamian businessman and Perry 
Christie financier and confidant Franklyn Wilson argued 
passionately that Bahamian Prime Minister Perry Christie 
wanted to become America\'s \"Tony Blair\" within Caricom.  The 
luncheon, arranged by the Deputy Chief of Mission, was 
nominally in honor of the newly-named president of the 
College of The Bahamas, Rodney Smith. 
 
3. (C)  Mr. Wilson emotionally presented the case for Perry 
Christie, calling him the United States\' \"best friend\" inside 
Caricom\'s councils.  He said that Christie\'s personality and 
manner made it possible for him to become friends with 
everyone -- including President Bush -- and thereby exert a 
moderating and calming influence within Caricom to counter 
the proclivities of that body\'s more extreme members. 
Comparing Christie to the country\'s first PLP prime minister, 
Sir Lynden Pindling, Wilson declared that back in the early 
1970\'s, many of the region\'s first post-independence leaders 
\"were a half-step from being communists...preaching socialism 
and national planning\" while Pindling -- misunderstood by the 
United States -- was, in reality \"only a half-step from being 
a conservative.\" Pindling, insisted Wilson, quietly and 
effectively served as a moderating influence during that era 
and thus served U.S. strategic interests.  What was true some 
thirty years ago, argued Wilson, was equally true today. 
 
4.  (C)  The United States, continued Wilson, needed to 
ignore tactical deviations and remember that strategically 
Perry Christie was America\'s best friend and supporter in the 
region.  \"(The United States) should keep its eye on its 
(strategic) goal,\" Wilson declared several times, and should 
support and enhance Christie\'s stature within Caricom in its 
own best self-interest.  Just as British Prime Minister Tony 
Blair was the United States\' chief supporter in Europe.  DCM 
pointed out to Wilson that Blair\'s influence came because he 
took a leadership role as British Prime Minister despite, not 
because of, Britain\'s membership in the EU and that the EU\'s 
support of U.S. policies in Iraq and elsewhere have been much 
more restrained and lukewarm than have Britain\'s. 
 
 
MONTHS LATER, STILL CLAIMING NOT TO BE UPSET 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
 
5. (C)  Addressing the issue of Haiti, Wilson, a long-time 
Perry Christie supporter and PLP financial backer, yet again 
claimed that despite feeling that he had been \"ignored\" by 
the United States during the departure of Haitian 
ex-President Jean Bertrand Aristide, Prime Minister Christie 
harbored no grudges and was not upset.  Echoing similar 
statements from Christie insiders over the months, Wilson did 
go on to express the view that Christie believes that he was 
in the forefront of the Caricom effort to persuade the 
ex-President to peacefully resign his office.  Given his 
leadership role in the effort, argued Wilson, the United 
States owed it to Christie to have received a call from 
senior USG officials, or the White House, advising him \"when 
the United States decided to change direction on Aristide\" 
and \"remove him from power.\"  DCM reminded Mr. Wilson that he 
had been briefed on the rapid spiral of breaking events that 
weekend, noted -- again -- that Caricom was not an 
organization well suited to handling crises, and that given 
the press of events that Saturday night/Sunday morning, it 
was unrealistic to have expected the Secretary or the 
President to have phoned thirteen heads of government to 
brief them on rapidly-breaking events.  Wilson responded that 
Christie had at least been able to have his call to the 
Canadian Prime Minister returned by \"Canada\'s Condolecia 
(sic) Rice.\" 
 
6.  (U)  Echoing PM Christie\'s position, and reflecting 
continuing Bahamian Government skepticism about Aristide\'s 
departure, in his speech to the UN General Assembly September 
30, Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell similarly claimed that \"No 
one will ever know what truly happened on that night as an 
elected president left his country with armed rebels nipping 
at his heels, but it filled the entire Caribbean with 
sadness.  It has raised the spectre of mistrust between 
friends.\" 
 
 
CHRISTIE ADDRESSING AMERICAS CONFERENCE 
--------------------------------------- 
 
7. (C)  Noting that Prime Minister Christie was scheduled to 
be the principal speaker at a morning session October 1 at 
the Miami Herald\'s annual Americas Conference, Ambassador 
expressed the hope that the Prime Minister would take a 
positive position that reflected the deep, long-standing, and 
overall positive relationship between the United States and 
the region. 
 
8. (C)  The theme of Christie\'s remarks at the conference are 
\"Friend or Foe?  Can the Caribbean and the U.S. Repair Their 
Damaged Relations?\"  Speaking with DCM at the Chinese 
National Day reception September 30, shortly before flying to 
Miami, Christie feigned  surprise and dismay \"at the topic 
they assigned me.\"  DCM took the opportunity to reiterate 
Ambassador\'s hope that he would use his spotlight to focus on 
the overwhelmingly positive bilateral and mutually beneficial 
multilateral regional relationship and not engage in an 
unproductive negative analysis. 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9. (C)  Franklyn Wilson is one of the wealthiest black 
Bahamians.  He has been closely identified with the PLP 
throughout his entire life and holds The Bahamas\' first 
post-independent Prime Minister, Sir Lynden Pindling, in a 
status close to sainthood.  He is a member of the Christie 
\"kitchen cabinet.\"  Wilson\'s wife, Sharon, is president of 
the Bahamian Senate.  Wilson is also one of the PLP\'s 
principal financiers and fund raisers.  He is accustomed to 
serving as a transmission belt both to send, and to receive, 
messages intended for the Prime Minister. 
 
10. (C)  Months after ex-President Aristide\'s departure, that 
both Prime Minister Perry Christie and Foreign Minister Fred 
Mitchell continue to volunteer denials that they don\'t feel 
\"dissed\" and left hanging on a limb by not being consulted by 
the United States during the hours leading up to Aristide\'s 
departure after they took what they perceive to be a leading 
role in advocating the U.S. position within Caricom, are as 
convincing as Caesar\'s thrice refusal of Rome\'s imperial 
crown.  Christie\'s spotlight at the Miami Herald conference 
will give him the opportunity to advance his long-expressed 
desire to assume a role as Caricom\'s leading statesman. 
Whether he will take full advantage of this opportunity 
remains to be seen. 
 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"21306","10/5/2004 21:18","04NASSAU1855","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001855 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ECON, BF, CARICOM 
SUBJECT: PM CHRISTIE: ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT IN U.S. 
RELATIONS WITH CARIBBEAN 
 
Classified By: CDA Robert M. Witajewski For Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1. (U)  Prime Minister Perry Christie told an international 
audience in Miami on October 1 that while U.S. good 
intentions toward the English-speaking Caribbean are not in 
doubt, there is room for improvement in the overall 
relationship.  Christie believed that the U.S. was not 
sufficiently sensitive to Caribbean concerns on issues 
including free trade, and hoped that generous international 
assistance would be forthcoming to help Caribbean countries 
recover from a devastating hurricane season which has already 
damaged them beyond their means.  Christie acknowledged U.S. 
humanitarian assistance and its support for democracy, 
efforts which only underscored the importance of the U.S. and 
the wider Caribbean working together to find a permanent 
solution to the problems in Haiti.  The Bahamian Prime 
Minister was a featured speaker at the Miami Herald\'s annual 
\"Americas Conference.\" 
End summary. 
 
2.  (U)  Prime Minister Perry Christie addressed the Miami 
Herald\'s \"Conference of the Americas\" on October 1, 2004, 
delivering remarks on the theme \"Friend or Foe? Can The 
Caribbean and the U.S. Repair Their Damaged Relations?\". 
Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell and Carl Smith, coordinator of 
The Bahamas\' \"National Emergency Management Agency\" (NEMA), 
accompanied the Prime Minister to Miami. 
 
 
REASSESS IMPACT OF FREE TRADE ON SMALLER NATIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. (U) PM Christie, taking a more positive tone than the 
agenda theme would indicate, announced that he disagreed with 
the assertion that U.S.- Caricom relations are \"damaged,\" 
declaring that he preferred instead to characterize the 
situation as leaving room for \"improvement\".  He suggested 
that many of the areas of tension existing between the U.S. 
and Caricom nations could be resolved with increased regular 
dialogue. 
 
\"I would be less than candid if I did not say that there is a 
view in some quarters that there is not sufficiently deep 
understanding in the United States of the issues and concerns 
which face our region,\" Prime Minister Christie said. 
\"Concerns for example about emerging free-trade arrangements 
seem sometimes to fall on deaf ears or are treated 
dismissively, without realizing that the entire economies of 
poor, struggling nations, especially in the Eastern 
Caribbean, hang in the balance.  Simply cutting a check or 
making a sympathetic speech does not address these issues at 
a fundamental level.  If sustainable development and economic 
viability are to remain within the grasp of these smaller and 
more vulnerable states, there simply has to be a 
re-assessment of the direction in which free trade 
arrangements are headed.\" 
 
 
PM CALLS FOR GREATER ROLE IN HAITI? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. (U) Christie told his listeners that the main source of 
tension in the region currently stems from the February 29th 
departure of former Haitian President Jean Bertrande 
Aristide, and more specifically because the U.S. government 
did not better communicate with Caricom heads of state about 
events surrounding Aristide\'s resignation at the time. 
Christie encouraged the region to come together to help Haiti 
in its time of need. 
 
\"..It is so important for the United States and the wider 
Caribbean region to jointly promote democracy, peace, 
stability and growth in our sister nation of Haiti.  The 
destruction that was wrought there by Tropical Storm Jeanne 
is of monumental and tragic proportions.  We continue to 
watch, helplessly at times, as that beleaguered national 
still struggles to find its way.  Make no mistake about it, 
all our collective talk about neighborly cooperation and 
democratization will be judged a fraud by history if we do 
not -- and by \"we\" I mean all the countries of the region -- 
pool our resources and bring the full weight of our resolve 
to bear on a permanent solution to the problems of Haiti.\" 
 
In response to a question from the press, Christie cited 
issues surrounding official recognition of the 
interim-government of Haiti and Caricom\'s relationship with 
Cuba as being the major differences in regional policy. 
 
HURRICANE RELIEF EFFORTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (U)  PM Christie told the conference that while The 
Bahamas escaped the worst of the destruction brought by this 
season\'s series of hurricanes, parts of his country are still 
reeling.  He stated that The Bahamas would need \"all the help 
in the world that we can get.\"  Christie offered to host a 
regional conference on to discuss how the United States and 
the Caribbean region can respond to natural disasters on a 
regional scale. 
 
6. (U) Making a plea for further U.S. assistance to the 
region following Hurricanes Frances and Jeanne, Christie 
announced that a consensus had been reached at the Caricom 
Heads of State meeting in Trinidad and Tobago in September 
2004 that the scale of disaster relief was beyond the 
resources of the Caribbean.  While acknowledging the need for 
U.S. help for Grand Bahama and Abaco, Christie did admit that 
Grenada and Haiti \"desperately need help from the 
international community and to the most generous extent 
possible.\" 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
7.  (C) The Bahamian Prime Minister envisions himself as a 
regional leader, and he used his speech at the conference to 
address hurricane relief issues and the concern over the 
implications of free trade agreements for the small, 
developing nations of the Caribbean.  While making a clear 
pitch for the United States to give more humanitarian 
assistance to sister countries, Grenada and Haiti, the Prime 
Minister also referred to the \"symbiotic relationship\" the 
U.S. shares with The Bahamas repeated his oft-cited statistic 
that \"eight cents out of every dollar earned in The Bahamas 
is spent in the U.S.\" as a lightly veiled attempt to 
demonstrate that Bahamian contributions to the economy in 
Florida should not go unnoticed while deciding how to 
distribute hurricane relief aid to the region. 
 
8.  (C) Indirectly via confidants and directly, Ambassador 
and DCM had previously urged that Christie not take his 
assigned theme literally but adopt a more positive stance in 
his remarks.  He appears to have done so -- either heeding 
the suggestions or simply because he is by nature invariably 
upbeat and optimistic...and a former Tourism Minister in The 
Bahamas intimately familiar from whence the bulk of his 
country\'s tourist dollars come.  Talking about the Prime 
Minister\'s remarks after he had returned from Miami, Foreign 
Minister Fred Mitchell told DCM that the Prime Minister had 
indeed deviated from his prepared text several times in the 
course of his remarks. 
 
9. (C)  Christie is anxious to play regional statesman and is 
undoubtedly pleased that his address got major coverage in 
the Bahamian and Miami media.  Not only is Christie happy 
with his reception in Miami, he is equally pleased that 
Alberto Ibarguen, Miami Herald publisher, has invited him 
back to Miami to meet with the newspaper\'s editorial board -- 
an invitation that promises to generate further positive 
regional publicity for him.  Christie brought Carl Smith, his 
disaster relief coordinator, with him on his Miami trip. 
During his trip, Christie did receive additional relief 
contributions from prominent Miami residents.  But while he 
was basking on a regional stage with fellow national leaders, 
back home in The Bahamas local media featured growing 
criticism of his government\'s handling of the relief and 
reconstruction efforts in the wake of Hurricanes Frances and 
Jeanne. 
 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"21597","10/14/2004 10:38","04NASSAU1904","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/12/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, BF, Narcotics - OPBAT 
SUBJECT: DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER EXTOLS OPBAT, U.S. 
RELATIONSHIP 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert M. Witajewski for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
Summary 
 ------- 
 
1. (C) In his courtesy call on Deputy Prime Minister Cynthia 
Pratt, Ambassador stressed the importance of Bahamian 
officials acknowledging OPBAT\'s importance to Bahamian 
national security.  The Deputy Prime Minister extolled the 
bilateral relationship and acknowledged that OPBAT was 
critical to Bahamian national security since the country\'s 
could not assure the security of its own borders with only 
its own resources.  She also admitted that Bahamian failure 
to address the issue illegal Haitian migrants in the country 
was a long-term time bomb. 
End Summary. 
 
 
The High Cost of Government in The Bahamas 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (C)   Ambassador\'s October 8, twice-delayed, courtesy call 
on the Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) and Minister for National 
Security, Cynthia Pratt, turned into a lengthy substantive 
discussion of OPBAT\'s past, present, and future.  Ambassador, 
accompanied by Deputy Chief of Mission, began the meeting by 
reviewing events since his presentation of credentials, 
including the arrival of two devastating hurricanes in The 
Bahamas.  The DPM, who was assisted by the Ministry\'s Under 
Secretary for Security Matters, Peter Deveaux-Isaacs, 
 
SIPDIS 
expressed appreciation for the DCM\'s efforts as Charge over 
the last 14 months and then immediately launched into a 
spirited review of the bilateral relationship and OPBAT\'s 
importance to The Bahamas. 
 
3. (C)  Minister Pratt noted the historical closeness of 
U.S.- Bahamian ties and observed that even as friends we can 
disagree on issues, but that The Bahamas knew that it could 
not protect its borders and maintain its national security 
without USG material and financial assistance.  She also 
reiterated the appreciation of the people of The Bahamas for 
all of the assistance that the United States had rendered in 
the aftermath of the recent hurricanes, as well as in 
rescuing survivors and victims of the mailboat collision in 
2002. 
4. (C)  The Deputy Prime Minister called OPBAT \"vital\" and 
declared that The Bahamas would clearly suffer if the assets 
committed to it were to be diminished.  She noted that the 
archipeleagic nature of the country required that many 
essential services (including police, schools, health 
clinics, airports, and roads) be duplicated or triplicated. 
This, combined with its small (350,000 inhabitants) 
population, made it extremely costly for the government to 
provide the necessary infrastructure, let alone adequate 
patrolling of its 100,000 square miles of ocean.  Even the 
country\'s efforts to expand its economy was costly, the 
Minister observed, commenting that the opening of a new Four 
Seasons international resort on idyllic, remote, 
previously-underpopulated Great Exuma island required that a 
500 percent increase in the local police force from 16 
officers to 86. 
 
 
Ambassador: OPBAT Needs Your Support 
------------------------------------ 
 
5. (C)  Ambassador responded to what was clearly a prepared 
presentation by the DPM by saying that he welcomed the 
Government\'s expression of support for OPBAT.  He noted that 
his in consultations in Washington prior to arriving at Post 
that he had detected \"red flags\" about the ability and 
willingness of some USG agencies to maintain current levels 
of support in the face of competing demands.  As examples, 
the Ambassador cited a review by INL that could result in 
substantial cuts to the NAS budget in Nassau, the demands for 
helicopters and their crews used by OPBAT in Iraq and other 
crisis locations, and the rapidly deteriorating situation in 
Haiti that could require a large new commitment of U.S. 
assets. 
 
6. (C)  Ambassador invited the Deputy Prime Minister or 
Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell to accompany him on a trip to 
Washington to explain OPBAT\'s mission and importance to The 
Bahamas and to the United States to members of Congress 
interested in the Caribbean, key committee members, and 
Executive Branch officials.  Ambassador reiterated that it 
was important that key officials know that the resources that 
they were committing to OPBAT were being properly utilized 
and having the maximum return in the face of many competing 
demands.  He noted that he had begun a program of sending 
Embassy press releases to members of Florida\'s congressional 
delegation to help keep them abreast of events here. 
 
7. (C)  Minister Pratt responded that it was Florida that 
would suffer the most if OPBAT\'s operations and effectiveness 
were to be reduced.  She noted that while The Bahamas was the 
first line of defense for the southeastern United States, 
there was no way that her country could properly secure its 
borders with its own resources.  The Ministry\'s national 
security deputy, Mr. Deveaux-Isaacs, added that any reduction 
in the resources committed to OPBAT would send the wrong 
message to drug traffickers and migrant smugglers.  He 
recalled that when the U.S. decided to close down its 
aerostat sites several years ago that there was an upsurge in 
drug trafficking as drug dealers immediately moved to exploit 
what was perceived to be a diversion of interdiction assets 
from the region.  He said that he hoped that history would 
not repeat itself. 
 
 
Impact of Hurricanes Frances and Jeanne 
--------------------------------------- 
 
8. (SBU)  Turning to the impact of recent hurricanes on The 
Bahamas, Ambassador observed that it was particularly 
important to provide relief assistance to the poor Haitian 
community, particularly those living in settlements in Marsh 
Harbor, Abaco, called \"The Mud\" and \"Pidgeon Pea.\"  Minister 
Pratt responded by acknowledging that the issue of illegal 
Haitians in The Bahamas was a problem that had been 
\"postponed twenty years too long.\"  She claimed that the U.S. 
needed to recognize that the goal of Haitian migrants was not 
to live in The Bahamas, but rather to eventually enter the 
United States.  Characterizing the Haitian problem in The 
Bahamas as \"a cancer,\" she recalled that during her election 
campaign that she was shocked to discover that some 
neighborhoods in her own parliamentary district were almost 
\"85 percent Haitian.\"  Unless The Bahamas came to terms with 
this issue, the Deputy Prime Minister continued, the country 
faced the prospect that someday Haitians could \"outnumber 
Bahamians\" in their own country. 
 
9. (SBU) Discussing relief and reconstruction efforts, 
Ambassador explained to the DPM that the Embassy was working 
closely with the local representative of the Inter-American 
Development Bank, as well as with the British embassy (as the 
local presence of the EU) to avoid any duplication of effort. 
 Ambassador also noted that he was lobbying hard in 
Washington to assure that The Bahamas received its fair share 
of funds from the Administration\'s supplemental appropriation. 
 
10.(U)  Ambassador also briefly reviewed other areas of U.S. 
assistance to The Bahamas, including working on revitalizing 
the sister city program, expanding training opportunities for 
Bahamian law enforcement officers with the FBI.  The Deputy 
Prime Minister then reiterated her long-standing concern 
about the importation of guns from the United States into The 
Bahamas and the impact that this had on the level of violence 
associated with criminal acts in the country. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
11. (C)  The Deputy Prime Minister\'s presentation of OPBAT\'s 
importance to Bahamian national security -- and contribution 
to U.S. national security -- was clearly rehearsed. 
Ambassador has stressed to Bahamian officials the importance 
of them making clear their appreciation for what OPBAT does 
for them and their country and the danger that taking it for 
granted could present in an era of zero-sum budgets and the 
demands for OPBAT resources in other crisis spots around the 
world. 
ROOD 
"
"21821","10/20/2004 11:10","04NASSAU1936","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 001936 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM - ROD MACKLER, NANCY IRIS, KATHERINE 
PERKINS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2014 
TAGS: SMIG, PGOV, PHUM, CU, BF, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: UNCONFIRMED TUBERCULOSIS AND ABUSE ALLEGATIONS AT 
NASSAU DETENTION CENTER 
 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Michael P. Taylor, Reasons 1.4 (B) AND ( 
D). 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY: On October 18, 2004, Amnesty International 
released a report alleging the abuse of two Cuban 
asylum-seekers and several Haitian detainees at the 
Carmichael Road Detention Center in Nassau.  Severe 
conditions including deprivation of food and water, an 
outbreak of tuberculosis, and the denial of medical treatment 
were also highlighted in this report.  Bahamian officials 
denied the allegations, stating that one Cuban detainee had 
manifested tuberculosis-like symptoms, but had been taken to 
the hospital and found to have AIDS instead.  A visit by 
embassy personnel to the detention center on October 18 
revealed no obvious signs of abuse or disease.  The one 
American citizen who had been detained at the center was 
released and sent back to the U.S. on October 19.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------- 
One AIDS Case Diagnosed 
----------------------- 
 
2.  (C) Two large sloops each with approximately 100 Haitians 
on board were interdicted by the Royal Bahamas Defense Force 
(RBDF) in late September.  The Embassy\'s Coast Guard Liaison 
Officer and Political Officer arranged to interview the 
migrants on October 8, but the appointment was canceled at 
the last minute due to unspecified \"internal problems.  An 
RBDF officer unofficially told the embassy that there was an 
outbreak of tuberculosis (TB) at the center. 
 
3.  (C) The Deputy Director of Immigration told the embassy 
on October 19 that confusion had occurred when a Cuban 
migrant manifested tuberculosis-like symptoms.  He was taken 
to the government-run hospital and diagnosed to have AIDS, 
however, not tuberculosis.  The detention center\'s Chief 
Superintendent confirmed that a medical team had been 
dispatched to the center for follow-up, but that no cases of 
TB were found. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Amnesty International Alleges Physical Abuse 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) On October 18, Amnesty International released a 
report alleging that Haitian and Cuban detainees had been 
beaten and mistreated at the detention center.  According to 
the report, two Cuban asylum-seekers, Rene Mendoza Banos and 
Jorge Luis Conde, were beaten with batons on October 1 and 
then subjected to a mock execution.  The Cuban detainees are 
reportedly members of the \"Partido Democratico 30 de 
Noviembre\" who left Cuba to escape police harassment. 
Amnesty also alleged that several Haitians were seriously 
injured and denied medical treatment on October 9-11 after 
being beaten in retaliation for an escape of Haitians on 
October 9. 
 
5.  (C) Bahamian officials confirm that six or seven Haitians 
did recently escape and are currently being sought by law 
enforcement officials.  All of the other Haitians interdicted 
at the end of September have been repatriated back to Haiti. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Embassy Personnel Visit Detention Center 
---------------------------------------- 
 
6. (C) On October 18, Consular Officer, accompanied by the 
Coast Guard Liaison Officer and the Political Officer, 
visited a female American citizen being held at the detention 
center for vagrancy.  The Consular Officer confirmed her 
citizenship and arranged for her departure on the evening of 
October 19 to Miami. 
 
7. (C) Embassy personnel spoke only to the American citizen 
and detention center officials.  Upon casual observation, 
approximately 100 detainees remain at the center.  They 
appear to be mainly Cubans.  The detainees showed no obvious 
injuries and seemed to be in generally good health. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
8. (C) The asylum-seeking process for Cubans in The Bahamas 
is a long and arduous one.  Bahamian immigration officials 
interview detainees and make recommendations to the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees, which in turns makes 
recommendations to the Bahamian cabinet for final decision. 
Only six refugees were recommended for asylum in 2003; the 
rest were designated for repatriation to Cuba. 
 
9. (C) To repatriate Cuban nationals to Cuba, however, the 
Bahamian government must receive permission from the 
Government of Cuba on a case-by-case basis.  The Cuban 
government supposedly does an in depth investigation into the 
individual\'s background and situation, a process which can 
takes months if not a year, while the migrants remain at the 
detention center at Bahamian expense.  Similarly, once the 
Cuban government decides to accept a Cuban migrant, the 
Bahamian government must bear the financial burden of 
repatriating them.  Speeding up the repatriation process is 
reportedly one of the reasons why The Bahamas recently agreed 
to open an embassy in Havana. 
 
ROOD 
"
"22628","11/8/2004 20:53","04NASSAU2086","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS NASSAU 002086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NORTHCOM AND SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG, PREF, PREL, PGOV, BF, Migration, Haiti 
SUBJECT: SURGE IN INTERDICTIONS OF HAITIAN MIGRANTS 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY: The U.S. Coast Guard has intercepted over 300 
illegal Haitian migrants in five separate interdictions since 
November 5, a higher rate than usual.  Deputy Prime Minister 
Pratt and other Bahamian officials have expressed directly to 
the DCM their concerns at the increased number of migrants. 
The Bahamian Defense Force has moved one of its ships into 
the Windward Passage just north of Haiti and will work with 
the U.S. Coast Guard to maintain a visible deterrent presence 
off the coast.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------- 
More than 300 Haitians Interdicted 
---------------------------------- 
 
2.  The U.S. Coast Guard has interdicted 306 Haitians in five 
separate incidents in the four days since November 5.  The 
majority of the vessels were stopped south of Great Inagua at 
the southern end of the Bahamian archipelago, one or two days 
into their journey. 
 
-------------------------- 
Bahamian Officials Worried 
-------------------------- 
 
3.  Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for National Security 
Cynthia Pratt expressed her concern at the recent increase in 
interdictions to the DCM at an event on November 7.  Labor 
and Immigration Minister Vincent Peet and MFA Permanent 
Secretary Patricia Rodgers also phoned to express similar 
 
SIPDIS 
sentiments. 
 
4.  The Bahamian Defense Force has moved one of its ships 
closer to the coast of Haiti.  The Defense Force will work 
closely with the increased number of U.S. Coast Guard assets 
in the area to maintain a highly visible presence in an 
effort to discourage potential migrants. 
 
5.  COMMENT: The recent run of good weather in the region is 
one possible explanation for the increased number of 
interdictions.  There is also, however, uncertainty regarding 
U.S. intentions on Temporary Protected Status.  Many of the 
thousands of illegal Haitians in The Bahamas, well-connected 
to the communities in Florida and Haiti, might rightly or 
wrongly view the possibility of \"status\" in the United States 
as a sufficient incentive to launch a journey toward the U.S. 
 
 
WITAJEWSKI 
"
"23967","12/13/2004 11:52","04NASSAU2336","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU1936","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 002336 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR WBENT AND WHA/CCA JBEAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: SMIG, PREL, PGOV, PHSA, CU, BF, Migration, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: RIOT AND FIRE AT MIGRANT DETENTION CENTER 
 
REF: NASSAU 1936 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Michael P. Taylor for Reasons 1.4 (B) an 
d (D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - 
 
1.  (C) Detained Cuban migrants set fire to a dormitory at 
the Carmichael Road Detention Center the morning of December 
9, 2004, with three detainees temporarily escaping.  Violence 
broke out between some of the migrants and the Bahamian 
personnel attempting to regain control of the situation.  11 
Royal Bahamas Defense Force officials and 9 detainees 
suffered minor injuries during the melee.  At least four of 
the detainees were taken to Princess Margaret Hospital for 
treatment, two from injuries consistent with rubber bullets. 
Of the three escapees, one Cuban and one Dominican national 
were apprehended, but one Cuban remains unaccounted for. 
This unrest comes less than 24 hours after Minister of Labor 
and Immigration, Vincent Peet, made an announcement before 
the House of Assembly that \"there is no evidence of abuse at 
the detention center\" following an investigation by the Royal 
Bahamas Police Force into allegations by Amnesty 
International that Haitian and Cuban detainees were subject 
to beatings and other abuses.  End Summary. 
 
 
ESCAPE AND FIRE 
- - - - - - - - 
 
2.  (C) At approximately 9am on December 9, two Cubans and 
one Dominican escaped from the Carmichael Road Detention 
Center in Nassau, a facility mainly used to house illegal 
foreign migrants waiting to be repatriated to their home 
countries.  The Dominican and one of the Cubans were 
reportedly taken back into custody slightly over an hour 
later.  Superintendent Ferguson, the Chief Immigration 
Officer at the detention center, confirmed that the missing 
Cuban national remains at large as of noon on December 10. 
 
3.  (C) In what is described by the Minister of Immigration 
Vincent Peet as a \"separate but connected event\", officers of 
the Royal Bahamas Defense Force and Bahamas Immigration 
attempted to enter the dorm occupied predominantly by Cuban 
males.  Although the door to the dorm had been blockaded from 
the inside, these officers were able to gain access at 
approximately 11:15am.  Several of the Cuban men were acting 
belligerently, and others surrounded the Bahamian officers to 
prevent them from taking custody of the hostile men.  In a 
statement made by the Ministry of Labor and Immigration, \"the 
dorm was set alight by the detainees who also hurled fiery 
objects at the officers.  The dorm was effectively destroyed 
by the fire before it could be extinguished.  In the event, 
the officers had to fire rubber rounds to restore order. 
There was no loss of life.\" 
 
4.  (C) To control the detainees, the RBDF and Immigration 
officers fired rubber bullets at the crowd.  Nine Cuban 
detainees sustained injuries, but only four required 
treatment at Princess Margaret Hospital.  Eleven RBDF 
officers sustained injuries, but none required 
hospitalization.  The Cuban Consul General, Felix Wilson, was 
apprised of the situation by the Department of Immigration. 
 
5.  (C) The dormitory sustained significant damage from the 
fire, and will be condemned according to Superintendent 
Ferguson.  Some of the 56 migrants occupying the dorm will be 
redistributed among the other dorms designated for male 
detainees.  In a press statement released by the Department 
of Immigration late Thursday night (December 9), the 
detainees believed to have deliberately started the unrest 
were taken to Fox Hill Prison, \"and will remain there until 
their removal to their place of origin.\" 
 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
6.  (C) Fox Hill Prison and the Carmichael Road Detention 
Center have both been consistent sources of controversy for 
the Bahamian government in recent years.  Most recently, 
Cuban rights activists in South Florida raised allegations of 
severe beatings of Cuban detainees in October, which was 
followed by an Amnesty International report (see reftel). 
Post believes these reports to be largely unsubstantiated. 
Two days before this fire, several Cubans went on a short 
hunger strike at the Detention Center due to the poor quality 
of the food, and schedule of meals.  Because of limited 
Social Service staff as cooks, meals are served at 10am, noon 
and 2pm. 
 
7.  (C)  Minister Peet has admitted privately to embassy 
officials that the situation at the detention center \"was of 
concern to him\".  The detainees do not want to stay in 
detention and do not want to be returned to Cuba.  In this 
instance their frustration turned to violence. 
 
ROOD 
"
"24206","12/16/2004 15:40","04NASSAU2369","Embassy Nassau","UNCLASSIFIED","04NASSAU1936|04NASSAU2336","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NASSAU 002369 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PRM/PRP SDENTZEL AND PRM/ECA KPERKINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHSA, SMIG, PHUM, CU, HA, BF, Migration 
SUBJECT: MIXED MIGRATION FLOWS: IOM/UNHCR CONFERENCE IN 
BAHAMAS 
 
REF: A. NASSAU 1936 
     B. NASSAU 2336 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - - - - 
1.  The International Organization for Migration (IOM) and 
the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) 
co-hosted the second annual regional seminar in Nassau, The 
Bahamas on November 8-12, 2004.    Entitled \"Contingency 
Planning for Mixed Migratory Flows in the Caribbean: 
Effective Practices and Tools for the Future\", the conference 
touched on migration issues such as contingency planning, 
registration of migrants, medical screening, and refugee 
status determination as they pertain to the region.  Perhaps 
the biggest accomplishment of the seminar was to have most 
country representatives express not only the desirability but 
also the urgency to have contingency plans for mass migration 
in place.  End Summary 
 
Mass Migration Plans 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
2.  Delegates from twenty countries in the Caribbean came 
together to discuss common concerns and share ideas for 
contingency planning efforts in case of a potential mass 
migration due to political crisis or disaster-related 
emergencies in the area.  The seminar brought together 
natural disaster planners, officials from immigration and 
foreign ministries of 20 Caribbean countries, and UNHCR 
\"honorary liaisons,\" as well as representatives from observer 
countries.  Participants found that the problems and issues 
on mass migration and natural disaster planning discussed 
during the first conference in December 2003 came to fruition 
with the political crisis in Haiti and the hurricane season 
in 2004.  These crises made the countries take a good look at 
their internal systems for coping with disasters and realize 
that they need assistance to set up a system within their 
country disaster plans to deal with mass migration 
emergencies.  The seminar was well received, with 
participating government officials urging one another not to 
be complacent and to put structures in place to respond to 
mass migrations, as they realized that their country could be 
affected by such a crisis next. 
 
3.  In part due to UNHCR,s and IOM efforts, and in part due 
to the events earlier this year, government representatives 
who expressed little interest in developing contingency plans 
of mass migration two years ago, were now sharing 
recommendations with other Caribbean countries, identifying 
shortcomings in planning preparedness, and even recommending 
that the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency (CDERA) 
add plans for mass migration to its contingency plan for 
natural disaster.  At the same time, these countries are 
keenly aware of their limited resources and capacities, not 
only to develop such plans but more importantly to absorb and 
deal with a real crisis. 
 
4.  Several panel discussions revolved around the experiences 
of Caribbean countries affected by the Haitian crisis earlier 
this year. Participants benefited from hearing the very real 
situations confronted by the various agencies and services of 
the receiving countries.  In discussions on effective 
management of crises, participants identified some existing 
strengths in internal coordination and networking, in meeting 
basic needs, in status determination, and regional agreements 
and exchanges.  Areas of weakness included lack of 
legislation, cultural and language barriers, and the fact 
that more than a few migrants quickly becomes a crisis. 
Again, the issue of preparedness and potential impact of 
dealing with what would seem to be small number of in-coming 
migrants, underlined the need for capacity building 
assistance for these small island nations. 
 
5.  Delegates also had a chance to participate in workshops 
focused on issues such as public health related to mass 
migration, the protection of migrant workers, border 
security, refugee status determination and the quality of 
asylum during separate workshop sessions.  Participants 
engaged in role-play, sub-regional working groups to discuss 
tools for effective management and protection during mixed 
migratory flows. 
 
6.  Strengths, weaknesses and opportunities for improvement 
on response mechanisms were addressed.  Delegates identified 
the need to coordinate not only on a regional basis but also 
internally within their own governments.  Many agreed there 
were no mechanisms in place for a quick response.  Although 
Haiti and Grenada were used as case studies for most of the 
discussions, governments agreed that similar situations could 
occur in their own countries.   This realization that influx 
could potentially happen to nearly any Caribbean country and 
the need to prepare for it, is exactly the result the USG 
hoped for in supporting these joint IOM/UNHCR seminars over 
the past few years. Other migration issues such as 
refugees/asylum seekers, legal/illegal migrants, trafficking 
victims, and smuggled migrants were also on the agenda. 
Although the countries involved recognized that they had come 
along way since last year,s seminar, they also realized that 
they still have a long way to go before they are able to 
manage migration within their region.  Delegates, conscious 
of the connection between migration management and 
national/regional security, requested continuing assistance 
and training from UNHCR and IOM to manage their own borders 
while recognizing the human rights of refugees and migrants. 
 
Common Themes 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
7.  Common themes and concerns emerged over the course of the 
conference from several of the countries across the region. 
Although many of the countries in the southeastern region of 
the Caribbean do not face the same fears of massive influxes 
of Haitian migrants, even small numbers of illegal migrants 
can still wreak havoc on these tiny island nations.  Several 
countries described the migration to their countries as a 
&trickle8 Delegates seemed to agree that part of their 
emergency action plans for natural disasters need to include 
instructions on how to handle detained migrants. 
 
8.  Examples of common concerns regarding migration were 
varied dependent upon the location of the country, and the 
likelihood for mass influxes.  Nevertheless, most topics were 
of interest to all delegates.  Multiple participants queried 
the panels for insight on whether or not to use schools for 
shelters during a mass influx of migrants or a natural 
disaster, as this often causes long delays in the opening of 
schools.  Many delegates also voiced concern over how to 
handle migrants who are known to have criminal records.  The 
prohibitive cost of establishing temporary housing for 
migrants and their repatriation is overwhelming to small 
island nations. 
 
Who Participated? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
9.  The seminar welcomed the current Consul General from U.S. 
Consulate Monterey, Luis Moreno, who recently completed his 
tour as DCM in Port au Prince.  CG Moreno has considerable 
experience with migration issues in the region, and shared 
his insights on the panel involving early warning and 
monitoring systems.  In addition, he was able to answer some 
of the questions and comments put forth by the Cuban 
delegates to the conference with regards to bilateral 
migration agreements by saying there are no formal 
arrangements, but the U.S. makes semi-regular repatriations 
to Cuba in coordination with the Interest Section in Havana. 
The United States Coast Guard also sent a spokesman, Orsini 
Louis, the Assistant Chief of the Law Enforcement Office, to 
discuss the reception and registration of migrants on Coast 
Guard cutters in the Caribbean.  U.S. Embassy officials and 
PRM program officers also attended the seminar. 
 
10.  Representatives from twenty countries in the region were 
present at this conference to share their country,s 
experience with migration.  Although questions and 
conversations gravitated to the topic of outflows of Haitians 
through certain countries to the United States, all 
participants took away valuable information on how to manage 
the needs and the costs of illegal migrants.  Perhaps the 
most important aspects of this seminar were to raise 
awareness of the variety of issues that need to be addressed 
before the migrant arrives, and it also formed an informal 
network for the delegates to contact one another for 
information sharing. 
 
11.  In his opening statement, Vincent Peet, Minister of 
Labor and Immigration welcomed everyone to the seminar 
co-organized by IOM and UNHCR and which benefited from the 
assistance of the Bahamian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and 
the Department of Immigration and Disaster Planning 
represented by the National Emergency Management Agency 
(NEMA).   Minister Peet spoke of the rise in international 
migration and the urgency to address the impact of this trend 
on national economies, the need to develop contingency plans 
for mass outflows, concerns for refugee and asylum seekers, 
the challenges of border management and security 
(biometrics), and the highly disturbing phenomenon of 
trafficking in persons.  He highlighted the long-standing 
relationship of the Bahamas with UNHCR and IOM.  UNHCR has 
worked closely with The Bahamas on matters pertaining to 
potential asylum seekers and refugees, and detainees in the 
Detention Center.  IOM has several capacity-building 
migration management projects underway in the Bahamas, and 
has assisted the Bahamas with the voluntary repatriation of a 
number of Asian and African nationals. IOM,s support 
resulted in the Bahamas application for full IOM membership, 
which was approved at the eighty-eighth session of the IOM 
Council in Geneva, on November 30, 2004. 
 
Plea for Haiti Speech 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
12.  At the end of the seminar, Haiti,s Ambassador Louis 
Harold Joseph requested floor time to address the 
participants.  He thanked nations and international 
organizations for intervening in Haiti to help stabilize the 
country and to bring aid to the victims of the floods and 
hurricanes.  He spoke of the Haitian government\'s awareness 
of the potential problems caused by sudden exodus of Haitian 
nationals to other countries in the region, as well as 
Haiti,s commitment to respect commitments made by previous 
governments on migratory issues.  Ambassador Joseph said that 
while insecurity in Haiti is often attributed to political 
strife, it is important to stress that it also finds roots in 
social and economic problems such as urban banditry, drug 
trafficking, and the despair of unemployed youth.  He noted 
that Haiti has seen no significant growth in twenty-five 
years, while population grows at an annual rate of 1.5% (life 
expectancy is 53 years, infant mortality is 8%, HIV/AIDS 
affects 5% of the population, and only 68% of the children 
benefit from primary education).  He concluded by saying that 
while the democratic process is under way in Haiti with 
renewed dialogue among government, political parties and 
civil society, success is contingent on the realization of 
promises made by the international community to assist Haiti. 
 
 
Visit to Nassau Detention Center 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- 
13.  Political Officer, PRM program officers, CG Moreno, 
UNHCR and IOM staff took a tour of the controversial migrant 
detention center in Nassau during a break from the 
conference.  The detention center has been criticized in 
Amnesty International reports and other human rights 
organizations for inhumane practices and human rights abuses 
in the past year.  (See Reftels).  Although there were no 
obvious signs of abuse, the center does suffer from lack of 
funding and possible mismanagement.  The female detainees 
complained about the inadequate provision of meals and the 
lack of milk for the children.  Some Cuban women were 
pleading not to be returned to Cuba.  While lack of timely 
meals was brought up by and echoed by several detainees, as 
well as unwillingness to be returned, there was no mention of 
beatings. The water purification project funded by the 
Ambassador,s Fund was not yet completed at the time of the 
visit due to an additional need for a water pump.  The 
government officials at the facility believed that they could 
provide the contractors with a used water pump to improve the 
system. 
 
ROOD 
"
"24504","12/22/2004 16:24","04NASSAU2407","Embassy Nassau","CONFIDENTIAL","04NASSAU2335","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 NASSAU 002407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NORTHCOM AND SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2008 
TAGS: SMIG, PREL, PGOV, CU, BF, Migration, Human Rights 
SUBJECT: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL RENEWS CALL FOR DETENTION 
CENTER FIRE INQUIRY 
 
REF: A. A) NASSAU 2335 
 
     B. B) NASSAU 2355 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Michael P. Taylor, Reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
1. (C)  37 Cuban nationals remain in detention in The Bahamas 
after a December 9 fire at a Nassau immigration facility 
following a disturbance initiated by detainees.  Amnesty 
International continues to call for an independent inquiry 
into the fire and accompanying melee, in which 11 Royal 
Bahamian Defence Force guards and 9 detainees were injured. 
Both Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell and The Bahamas\' 
Ambassador to the U.S. have reportedly reached out to the 
Cuban-American community, which has been sharply critical of 
the Bahamian Government\'s actions and treatment of detainees. 
 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Charge d\'Affaires and Political Chief met with Peter 
Deveaux-Isaacs, the Acting Permanent Secretary at the 
Ministry of National Security, on December 21 to discuss a 
range of topics, including an extended discussion of the 
December 9th incident and fire at the Carmichael Road 
Detention Center (reftels).  Separately, Political Officer 
visited the detention center the morning of December 21. 
 
 
Cubans Remain at Detention Center and Prison 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) As of December 21, 4 adult Cuban women and 15 adult 
Cuban men remain at the Detention Center.  Eighteen other 
adult Cuban males thought by the Bahamians to be directly 
involved with the December 9 fire were transferred from the 
Detention Center and are being held at Her Majesty\'s Prison 
at Fox Hill.  They face possible arson charges arising out of 
the incident. 
 
4. (C)  All nine members of the \"Partido Democratico 30 de 
Noviembre Frank Pais\" group who have applied for political 
asylum remain in The Bahamas: Two or three of the group  who 
were not involved with the incident/fire are still at the 
Detention Center; six or seven others members of this group 
whom Bahamian authorities have under investigation as 
principals in the December 9 incident have been transferred 
to the Fox Hill.  An immigration officer at the Detention 
Center informed Political Officer that the Bahamian 
government, through its standard asylum process which 
involves a review of asylum applications by the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees, has determined that the members of 
this group are economic refugees, and so has privately 
decided not to grant them political asylum in The Bahamas. 
 
5. (C) Bahamian authorities the morning of December 21 
re-captured the one Cuban escapee who had remained at large 
since December 9.  He is currently being held by the police 
for questioning.  The Acting Permanent Secretary indicated to 
Charge that the escapee was captured in Nassau in the general 
proximity of the Detention Center, in an area in which 
evading notice and detection for this length of time -- 
without outside assistance -- would normally be unlikely. 
Deveaux-Isaacs said that the detainee had been arrested in a 
house and this strongly suggested to authorities that the 
individual had received assistance in evading re-capture. 
 
 
Amnesty Again Calls for Independent Investigation 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
6. (SBU) Amnesty International on December 20 sent a third 
letter to the Minister of Immigration again calling for an 
independent investigation into the conditions of detention 
for asylum-seekers and other migrants in The Bahamas, 
specifically referencing the December 9th fire and the use of 
force and firearms by detention center personnel.  Acting 
Permanent Secretary Deveaux-Isaacs believes that this third 
letter was sparked by a Jamaican national who on December 17 
made public allegations that he had been abused while at the 
Detention Center.  In its letter, Amnesty International 
welcomed the prompt investigation by the Bahamian Government 
to its earlier request for an inquiry into the incident that 
the investigation was conducted by an independent entity, and 
that the results of the investigation were promptly made 
public and debated in parliament.  In its follow-up letter, 
however, Amnesty requested that the scope of the 
investigation be broadened to examine overall conditions at 
the Center and include recommendations to alleviate any 
shortcomings that might be discovered. 
 
7. (C)  The Superintendent of the Detention Center, however, 
told Political Officer that the Jamaican in question is 
married to a Royal Bahamian Defense Force officer, has been 
detained three times, and was personally escorted out of the 
detention center by the Superintendent in good physical 
health.  The Acting Permanent Secretary at National Security, 
on the other hand, suggested that there might be some truth 
to the Jamaican\'s allegations, even if exaggerated.  He also 
believed that AI reacted quickly to the Jamaican\'s 
allegations because in the past the Bahamians have responded 
to Amnesty\'s queries by pointing out that no detainees other 
than Cubans have made similar complaints. 
 
8. (SBU)  The Bahamian Cabinet reportedly discussed the AI 
letter at its regular Tuesday meeting on December 21, 
although the Permanent Secretary at National Security doubted 
there would be any substantive response. 
 
 
Root Causes: Lack of Capacity and Cuban Reticence 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
9. (C) In meeting with Embassy officials December 21, the 
National Security Acting Permanent Secretary told Charge that 
he believed the Detention Center problems have two core 
causes.  First, he stated that the Immigration Department 
lacks the capacity to effectively manage and administer the 
center.  Defense Force officers are used as custodial guards 
at the facility, a duty for which they receive a limited 
amount of special training.  Overall, however, Defense Force 
personnel do not see a Detention Center assignment as 
attractive or career-enhancing.  The Center has three nurses, 
five Creole speakers, and four Spanish speakers on staff, 
although these personnel are not always present at the 
Center.  At peak times in 2004 the Center has housed over 
five hundred migrants pending repatriation, an overwhelming 
number which taxed the Center\'s modest resources. 
 
10. (C) Second, the Acting Permanent Secretary believes that 
the process for evaluating and repatriating Cuban nationals 
is excessively slow, leaving detainees, including children, 
in Bahamian custody for months at a time.  The political 
asylum process for Cubans goes in multiple stages.  First the 
migrants are given a series of questionnaires to fill out. 
Some of the \"30 de Noviembre Frank Pais\" members were 
reportedly hesitant to provide information until they spoke 
to their lawyers.  Next, a Bahamian immigration officer uses 
the information from the questionnaire to conduct an asylum 
interview.  Following this interview, the officer\'s 
assessment and recommendation is then forwarded to UNHCR for 
review.  An immigration officer at the detention center 
claimed that the assessment must be sent to UNHCR within two 
weeks of the migrant\'s detention.  UNHCR reviews the 
assessment and if the recommendation is to grant political 
asylum, the decision-memo is forwarded to the Bahamian 
cabinet for a final decision.  Detention Center personnel 
emphasized that UNHCR rarely if ever disagrees with the 
assessment the immigration officer first makes.  If the 
Cabinet decides to refuse political asylum, Bahamian 
immigration and MFA officials must then contact the Cuban 
government in Havana to begin the repatriation process. 
 
11. (SBU)  The repatriation process is further delayed once 
the case files on the interdicted migrants are forwarded to 
the Cuban Government.  Reportedly, the Cuban government 
conducts a case-by-case review to determine the background of 
the potential returning Cuban national before deciding 
whether or not to accept the repatriation.  Bahamian 
officials have told the Embassy that they often wait for 
months to get approval from the Cuban government to proceed 
with a repatriation.  (A group of twenty-eight Cubans, 
including all of the detained children, was accepted for 
repatriation on December 15, less than one week after the 
fire, following the intervention of the Cuban Consul in 
Nassau, Felix Wilson.)  Commenting on the cases in which the 
Bahamian Government did grant political asylum to Cuban 
migrants, the Acting Permanent Secretary complained that even 
if asylum is granted, the released detainees leave The 
Bahamas and \"usually end up in the U.S. within a week.\" 
 
 
Bahamian Government Reacts to Allegations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
12. (U) Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell, Bahamian Ambassador 
to the U.S. Ambassador Joshua Sears and Consul-General in 
Miami Alma Adams have reportedly all been reaching out to 
Cuban-American groups and leaders in Washington and Miami, 
respectively, in an effort to smooth relations with the 
Cuban-American community in South Florida.  Reportedly, they 
have been exasperated at the fragmented nature of different 
segments of the community in their out-reach effort.  This 
effort was in response to both the December 9 incident as 
well as to a group of Cuban-Americans who arrived to Nassau 
on a cruise ship last week and who very publicly refused to 
leave the ship in a protest against what they called a 
\"shameful island\" which was an \"extension of tyranny\'s grip\" 
and \"somewhere Cuban oppression finds its best ally.\" 
 
13. (SBU) In a further indication of the GCOB\'s sensitivity 
to charges of mistreatment at the Detention Center and its 
impact on tourism, the Bahamian MFA also sent the Embassy a 
diplomatic note on December 17 seeking \"urgent clarification 
regarding highly provocative remarks purportedly made by 
Congressman Lincoln Diaz-Balart,\" specifically quoting the 
Congressman\'s statement that the Bahamian government is 
\"corrupt and cowardly.\"  The MFA Note queried whether this 
allegation represented the view of the U.S. government. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
14. (C) The Bahamian government is sensitive to its 
international reputation and the impact of unfavorable 
publicity on its chief industry -- tourism.  It generally 
attempts to avoid controversy whenever possible.  As one of 
the world\'s oldest democracies (its parliament just 
celebrated its 275th anniversary as a functioning body), it 
has been stung by charges alleging that it is little better 
than \"Castro\'s gulag.\"  Limited resources, a tight budget, 
and international controversy have all combined to make the 
Bahamian government work overtime during what is normally an 
extended period of holiday celebration. 
 
WITAJEWSKI 
"