
"24907","1/4/2005 14:16","05KINGSTON24","Embassy Kingston","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KINGSTON 000024 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (BENT) 
NSC FOR SHANNON 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD AND J7 (RHANNAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, JM, PREL, election 
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION LEADER SEAGA TO STEP DOWN AFTER 43 
YEARS IN PARLIAMENT 
 
 
1.  Summary.  Opposition leader Edward Seaga on December 29 
announced his retirement from representational politics after 
nearly 43 years as the Member of Parliament (MP) for Western 
Kingston.  Seaga, who had previously stated his intention to 
step down as party leader by January 31, 2005, surprised some 
party officials with the announcement that he will now depart 
earlier, in mid-January, and that he will also leave his role 
as MP.  Seaga\'s exit from politics to take up what he 
described as a \"high ranking academic position at the 
University of the West Indies\" (UWI) leaves the Jamaica Labor 
Party (JLP) without an MP in Western Kingston, and without an 
opposition leader for the upcoming session of the House of 
Representatives, which will resume on January 11.  As the 
party scrambles to resolve a somewhat awkward situation, 
there is much public speculation as to who will likely 
replace Seaga.  End Summary. 
 
2.  At a meeting of JLP delegates on December 29, opposition 
leader and former prime minister Edward Seaga, who has 
represented his Western Kingston garrison community as MP 
continuously since 1962, announced that he was \"obliged to 
give up (his) involvement in active politics\" to make himself 
available for selection to a top position at the University 
of the West Indies.  The academic appointment, to be 
confirmed by the end of January, is reported to be a chair in 
the Department of Government at UWI.  Seaga had announced in 
June 2004 that he would step down as party leader, but it was 
widely expected that he would remain as MP for Western 
Kingston, a fiercely loyal constituency and JLP stronghold. 
 
3.  The annual JLP conference, scheduled for November 2004, 
was to be the venue for electing Seaga\'s successor to the 
party leadership.  However, the vote was postponed when 
leadership contender Pearnel Charles took the party to court, 
challenging the constitutionality of the process.  The issue 
was resolved, and the party conference is now scheduled to 
take place on February 19, 2005.  On that date, the party 
will choose its new leader, who will run for the office of 
prime minister in the next general elections, to be held by 
2007.  Seaga\'s earlier-than-expected departure, however, 
leaves the JLP with two immediate vacancies to be filled. 
First, the JLP needs an interim opposition leader when 
Parliament resumes on January 11.  In addition, Seaga\'s West 
Kingston constituency needs a new parliamentary 
representative. 
 
4.  Party watchers suggest that Ken Baugh, MP for Western 
Central St. Catherine and opposition spokesman on health, is 
the likely favorite to serve as opposition spokesman in 
parliament until the JLP elects a new leader in February.  A 
source told Poloff that Baugh is not known to have political 
aspirations beyond his current position, and is considered a 
safe interim spokesman who will not \"rock the boat.\" 
 
5.  Seaga\'s choice to succeed him as MP for Western Kingston 
is reported to be Olivia \"Babsy\" Grange, currently the MP for 
Central St. Catherine.  Major news outlets indicated that 
Seaga proposed to Grange that she should take over West 
Kingston and that Senator Bruce Golding should take over 
Grange\'s current Central St. Catherine constituency. 
Golding, the front-runner to succeed Seaga as party leader in 
February, represented Central St. Catherine until 1997, but 
does not currently hold a parliamentary seat. 
 
6.  Contrary to Seaga,s apparent wishes, however, the 
Western Kingston constituency committee on January 2 
expressed its preference for Kingston Mayor and deputy 
chairman of the constituency, Desmond McKenzie, to replace 
Seaga as MP.  To date, McKenzie has publicly declined the 
nomination, preferring to focus on his current role as mayor 
of the capital.  Seaga has called a meeting on January 3 to 
review the applications of all candidates for MP, including 
attorney-at-law Tom Tavares-Finson, who has also expressed an 
interest in representing Western Kingston in parliament. 
 
7.  Comment: JLP general secretary Karl Samuda described this 
as &an awkward period for the party.8  With a national 
conference postponed first by Hurricane Ivan and then by a 
court battle between the two leading contenders for party 
leadership, the JLP,s public image has suffered in recent 
months.  An interim opposition leader in parliament and the 
possibility of up to two vacant parliamentary seats threaten 
the party,s position even further, particularly in the face 
of the impending general election.  Also problematic is that 
when Seaga resigns from his position as MP for Western 
Kingston in mid-January, the position will remain vacant 
until the sitting government calls for a by-election in the 
region.  However, the current government little to gain from 
calling by-elections in a JLP stronghold like Western 
Kingston.  Some observers therefore find it unlikely that the 
PNP government will choose to call by-elections in the 
immediate future.  Even without intentional foot-dragging on 
the part of the government, elections will take time and 
money to organize, and it could be weeks before a new JLP MP 
will be elected to replace Seaga. 
TIGHE 
"
"24916","1/4/2005 15:45","05KINGSTON26","Embassy Kingston","UNCLASSIFIED","05KINGSTON3239","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KINGSTON 000026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (BENT) 
NSC FOR SHANNON 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD AND J7 (RHANNAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, JM, MARR, OPDC, OPRC, PGOV, XG, XH, XT, KICC 
SUBJECT: PM PATTERSON RESPONDS TO SECRETARY\'S ARTICLE 98 
LETTER 
 
REF: A. KINGSTON 03239 
 
     B. STATE 248109 
     C. KINGSTON 02633 
 
1.  On January 3, Post received by courier a diplomatic note 
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade 
(MFAFT).  The dipnote accompanied a letter from Prime 
Minister P.J. Patterson in response to the Secretary\'s 
November 22 letter regarding Article 98 (see Refs A and B). 
As the Prime Minister has suggested in the past (see Ref C), 
he expressed confidence that \"our countries can find a 
solution which meets both our needs.\" 
 
See paragraph 3 for complete dipnote text, and paragraph 4 
for complete text of PM Patterson\'s letter.  Post will send 
the original documents via pouch to WHA/CAR. 
 
2.  Begin text of dipnote: 
 
50/130/77 
 
     The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to the latter\'s Note No. 355/04 
of 22 November 2004, has the honour to forward the reply from 
the Most Honourable Prime Minister of Jamaica to the US 
Secretary of State. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
     The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of 
Jamaica avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the 
Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its 
highest consideration. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America 
 
Kingston 
 
December 28, 2004 
 
End text of dipnote. 
 
3.  Begin text of letter: 
 
Office of the Prime Minister 
Jamaica House 
Kingston 
 
10th December 2004 
 
Dear Secretary Powell, 
 
     I thank you for your letter of 22nd November in which 
you addressed an issue of interest to the United States. 
Jamaica also values greatly the long and close relationship 
which it has enjoyed with the United States. 
 
     My Government is fully aware of the United States\' 
concerns regarding the International Criminal Court and 
desire to conclude Article 98 agreements with Jamaica and 
other CARICOM Member States.  I note that discussions have 
been held on this subject at both the techincal and political 
levels.  The Government of Jamaica is contineuing to study 
the matter carefully, fully cognizant of the value your 
government places on the conclusion of these agreements. 
Historically, Jamaica\'s support for the Court goes back to 
the time when our fellow CARICOM Member State, Trinidad and 
Tobago first proposed the idea of an international criminal 
court to deal with drug trafficking offences.  The concept 
has evolved significantly since then but our support has not 
waned. 
 
     However, I do not believe that Jamaica\'s support for the 
Court poses a major obstacle to resolving the concerns which 
exist.  I am confident that, toghether, our countries can 
find a solution which meets both our needs while maintaining 
levels of cooperation in fields such as disaster 
preparedness, combating drug trafficking and increasing 
security in the region to combat the threat of terrorism. 
The United States has always supported the efforts aimed at 
social and economic development in the Caribbean which we 
welcome and greatly appreciate. 
 
     We look forward to the continuation of our countries 
working closely together in agreas of mutual concern, as we 
strive to create in this hemisphere, and indeed the rest of 
the world, safer and more just societies in which persons can 
achieve sustainable economic advancement, based on the 
collective decision of their people. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
P.J. Patterson 
Prime Minister 
End text of letter. 
TIGHE 
"
"24990","1/5/2005 20:15","05KINGSTON41","Embassy Kingston","CONFIDENTIAL","05KINGSTON2801","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KINGSTON 000041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (BENT) AND INL/LP (KBROWN), DS/IP/WHA, 
DS/IP/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2014 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, KCRM, JM 
SUBJECT: JCF COMMISSIONER FORBES OUT, LUCIUS THOMAS IN 
 
REF: KINGSTON 02801 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Sue M. Cobb for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  On Saturday, January 1, 2005, the Jamaica 
Police Service Commission (PSC) announced that it had 
accepted the resignation of Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF) 
Commissioner, Francis Forbes, effective January 19.  The PSC 
communiqu commended Forbes for his accomplishments as 
Commissioner and reported that he would be taking up a 
position with CARICOM as Director in the Project 
Implementation Agency for Crime and Security based in Port of 
Spain.  Forbes, one of the youngest to hold the 
Commissioner\'s position, served in that capacity for eight 
years but opted for retirement two years earlier than 
expected.  Deputy Commissioner Lucius Thomas will become the 
next JCF Commissioner.  End Summary. 
 
2. (C) In what could be considered a surprise announcement on 
New Years Day, the Police Service Commission (PSC) accepted 
the resignation of veteran JCF Commissioner Francis Forbes, 
effective January 19, 2005.  Forbes\' rapid rise through the 
JCF ranks made him one of the youngest and longest serving 
commissioners, having joined the force at age 19 in 1970 and 
becoming Commissioner in 1996.  News reports speculated as to 
the timing of the announcement, commenting that his 
resignation was inevitable given the record 2004 murder rate 
and the public pressure for government to do something about 
crime in Jamaica. 
 
-------------- 
Forbes\' Legacy 
-------------- 
 
3. (C) There were 1,469 murders in Jamaica in 2004, 
surpassing the previous year by more than 51 percent. 
Jamaica launched Operation Kingfish in October 2004 (Reftel) 
in an effort to stem the rising rate of gang-related violent 
crime but most of the Kingfish activities centered on 
international narcotics crimes prosecuted by other nations 
off Jamaican shores.  Neither the JCF nor the Ministry of 
National Security (MNS) have won public confidence in the 
ongoing operation and the crime rate has not decreased 
accordingly. There have been several attempts at creating new 
programs and \"operations\" to deal with the escalating crime, 
all of which have failed. Forbes has not taken responsibility 
for the level of crime in Jamaica, claiming that he was not 
provided with the resources needed to effectively carry out 
programs to combat the problem. 
 
4. (C) Working with the WHA-funded Law Enforcement 
Development Advisor (LEDA) Project, now in its third year, 
Commissioner Forbes had committed to the implementation of a 
JCF regionalization concept effective April 1, 2005, to 
coincide with the Jamaican fiscal year.  However, during a 
private meeting with the LEDA after Forbes\' departure 
announcement, Forbes indicated that the regionalization, a 
cornerstone of the restructuring of the JCF, could be cost 
prohibitive.  (Note: The goal of the regionalization concept 
is to bring greater accountability and effectiveness to the 
JCF by breaking the island into four regions with one senior 
officer responsible for each region reporting directly to the 
Commissioner.  Forbes\' statement may be the reason he has not 
been more cooperative in implementing this phase of the 
overall reform project.  End note.)  In addition, the 
announcement that three foreign police officers, presumably 
from the UK, would be joining the JCF at the Deputy 
Commissioner level and be operational, leaves unclear the 
direction the JCF is planning to take.  Forbes indicated to 
the LEDA that he was unaware of the role the UK officers 
would play indicating that he has been left out of the 
planning loop. 
 
------------------ 
Thomas\' Initiative 
------------------ 
 
5. (C) Lucius Thomas is the current Deputy Commissioner for 
Crime and is the logical choice among the three current 
deputies.  He will begin his duties as Commissioner on 
January 19.  Although Thomas has lots of operational 
know-how, he lacks management experience.  He will have to 
learn this most important aspect of the new assignment, \"on 
the job\".  (Comment:  Post believes that Thomas will be 
effective in this position as he has collaborated with Post 
on different initiatives and has proven receptive to USG 
programs and interests.  However, rumors and unsubstantiated 
allegations about Thomas suggest his possible involvement in 
corrupt conduct during his earlier years with the JCF.  The 
allegations were never corroborated.  End Comment.) 
 
6. (C) During a meeting with Poloff in late December, Thomas 
explained that the increase in the murder rate is due in part 
to the increase in guns that come from the U.S.  He alleged 
that 60 percent of the handguns that are on the streets in 
Jamaica come from ports in Miami and New York although he 
noted that there is definitely an increase in weapons coming 
from Haiti.  Thomas implicated extortion and the drug trade 
as also playing a large role but noted that politics continue 
to play a part in the escalating numbers as the 
unavailability of government contracts, poverty, and the lack 
of \"political will\" in areas such as Clarendon and St. James 
continue to fuel violence. 
 
7. (C) Explaining that the Constabulary Communications 
Network (CCN) is not a public relations entity, Thomas 
claimed that the GOJ must get out the word that \"if you are 
not involved, you won\'t get killed.\"  He explained that 95 
percent of the individuals that have been victims of homicide 
are in some way related to the drug trade, extortion or some 
other illegal activity. 
 
-------------------------------- 
JCF Corruption is Out of Control 
-------------------------------- 
 
8. (C) Thomas lamented that corruption exists in virtually 
every part of the JCF.  He stated that every illegal 
operation in Jamaica - gangs, drug runners, extortionists, 
etc. have at least two to three JCF officers involved.  He 
noted that it is impossible for the illegal activity to take 
place without JCF assistance.  Poloff inquired as to what was 
hampering the JCF from taking purposeful measures to address 
this, to which Thomas replied that the Commissioner does not 
have the authority to hire and fire.  Effective measures to 
deal with JCF corruption is also complicated by the way the 
law is written and with police union backing for the accused, 
it could take years to have an officer removed.  He also 
noted that no one will come forward as a witness to testify 
against another officer, describing this as a serious 
cultural problem within the JCF.  He claimed that through 
intelligence sharing the JCF is now more capable of building 
a case, however, they are still hampered by ineffective 
policies. 
 
9. (C) Comment: Public reaction to the announcement of Thomas 
as the new Commissioner has been positive.  Thomas will be 
working under a microscope as he takes up the position in the 
wake of the highest murder rate in Jamaican history.  Public 
sentiment underscores this fact with Jamaican citizens 
calling for Thomas to be provided with the resources 
necessary to do the job.  Post will collaborate closely with 
the new Commissioner to urge the JCF to move forward with 
restructuring of the force.  Whether or not Thomas will truly 
be an effective Commissioner remains to be seen; however, 
Post anticipates the presence of the LEDA will provide the 
necessary expertise in the area of management that Thomas is 
lacking.  End Comment. 
COBB 
"
"25094","1/7/2005 17:22","05KINGSTON63","Embassy Kingston","UNCLASSIFIED","05SECSTATE274601","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS KINGSTON 000063 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (BENT) AND G/TIP (PUCCETTI) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KWMN, PHUM, PGOV, PREL, JM, TIP 
SUBJECT: DELIVERED: FINAL INTERIM TIP ASSESSMENT FOR JAMAICA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 274601 
 
1. On January 4, poloff delivered reftel text of Jamaica\'s 
Interim TIP Assessment by fax to Ann Scott, Assistant 
Director, Caribbean and Americas Department, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade (MFAFT).  Scott 
acknowledged receipt of the fax, and stated that she would 
pass the information to the appropriate office. 
 
2. On January 5, poloff conveyed reftel text to Karl Hamilton 
in the Security, Intelligence, and Operations Division of the 
Ministry of National Security.  MNS officials have indicated 
to emboffs on several occasions that MNS would provide the 
GOJ\'s official response to the 2004 TIP Report.  They have 
offered only non-specific criticism of the report to date, 
and post expects a considered response to be forthcoming. 
Poloff assured Hamilton that post looks forward to working 
with the GOJ on anti-trafficking measures. 
COBB 
"
"25239","1/11/2005 19:09","05KINGSTON100","Embassy Kingston","CONFIDENTIAL","03KINGSTON991|04KINGSTON1608|04KINGSTON1956","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KINGSTON 000100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CAR (BENT), INL/LP (KBROWN), DS/IP/WHA, DS/IP/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2015 
TAGS: PREL, KCRM, PGOV, SNAR, JM 
SUBJECT: 2004 A BANNER YEAR FOR CRIME IN JAMAICA 
 
REF: A. 03 KINGSTON 0991 
     B. 04 KINGSTON 01956 
     C. 04 KINGSTON 01608 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Sue M. Cobb for reasons 1.5 (b) & (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  For many Jamaicans, crime remained a major 
preoccupation throughout 2004.  According to the Jamaica 
Constabulary Force\'s (JCF) Crime Statistics Report (CSR) for 
2004, close to nine thousand major crimes were committed 
island-wide during the year.  By December 31, the number of 
homicides had skyrocketed to 1,469 (the most in Jamaica\'s 
history), with October the worst month, accounting for over 
157 murders. Because not all crimes are reported or come to 
the attention of the police, and because the criminal code 
contains many more varieties of major crimes than those 
listed in the CSR, the sum total of crime actually committed 
during 2004 may have been greater than is indicated by the 
CSR.  Incoming JCF Commissioner Lucius Thomas will have his 
hands full if he is to address the JCF\'s many shortcomings, 
and, with frequent, credible allegations of corruption in the 
police force and the political arena, there is little 
indication at present that the country\'s crime problem will 
be resolved soon.  His is likely to be a short honeymoon. 
End Summary. 
 
------------------------- 
Crime Rate Spirals Upward 
------------------------- 
 
2. (C) The latest Crime Statistics Report (CSR) compiled by 
the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF) for the period covering 
January 1 through December 31, described a 29 percent 
increase in major crimes as compared with the same period in 
2003.  A total of 8,800 major crimes were committed, an 
increase of 2,003. (Note: the CSR lists major crimes as 
murder, shooting, rape, carnal abuse, robbery, breaking and 
larceny, but does not take into account other major crimes 
such as extortion and felonious wounding. End Note.)  The 
number of murders rose 51 percent, breaking and entering as 
well as shootings each followed with a jump of 46 percent, 
and robberies increased 23 percent.  The number of rapes 
dropped by 8 percent while carnal abuse and larceny offenses 
rose slightly.  According to the 2004 CSR, 28 percent of the 
murders committed were reprisals, 21 percent were domestic 
disputes (Note:  Domestic disputes are defined as 
disturbances between two individuals that know each other, 
but who may not necessarily be family members.  For example, 
an altercation between a store proprietor and customer would 
also fall within this category.  End Note.)  Sixteen percent 
went undetermined, 18 percent were gang related, while the 
remaining 17 percent consisted of drug, rape and mob-related 
motives. 
 
3. (C) In stark human terms, during the 12 months of 2004, 
1,469 people died through intentional criminal violence. 
This is the highest number of murders in Jamaica\'s recorded 
history.  As in previous years, the great bulk of the crimes 
committed were firearms related (murder and shootings).  At 
76 percent, the gun was by far the weapon of choice used in 
committing murders, followed by knives (13 percent), and 
machetes (5 percent).  The total number of reported crimes 
rose 31 percent in rural areas as compared with a 61 percent 
increase in the total for urban communities. 
 
----------------------------------- 
The Difficulty with Measuring Crime 
----------------------------------- 
 
4. (C) Statistics about crime are gathered by the JCF as one 
of its responsibilities.  To get this data, the JCF relies on 
the cooperation of police from each of its nineteen 
divisions.  The JCF requests information in more or less 
standardized forms, but the police are not required by law to 
comply.  The crime data at best only estimates the incidence 
of a selected number of crime categories.  The best 
conclusion that can be drawn from even the most carefully 
gathered statistics is that the actual incidence of crime is 
probably no less than indicated but may be much more 
extensive.  Many crimes are underreported, such as rape and 
extortion, in which the victim is likely to receive as much 
unwanted publicity as the criminal, or suffer retribution, 
while other crimes remain undetected and unsolved. 
 
5. (C) Some observers have questioned whether the JCF figures 
reflect reality.  The police have been accused of reporting 
serious crimes as lesser offenses in order to create the 
appearance of less crime in their divisions.  Furthermore, 
available crime statistics deal with only a select few 
categories, and even assuming reliable data within these 
categories, the total crime picture of Jamaican society is 
incomplete.  The CSR is based upon \"crimes known to the 
police\".  Also missing from this picture are the complex yet 
apparently frequent illicit activities of Jamaica\'s 
widespread organized criminal elements, as represented by the 
\"community leader\", \"shotta\" (slang for gunman), \"gangster\" 
or \"don\" (Ref A).  Added to this equation is the fact that 
statistics are compiled manually.  The JCF does not have an 
automated system, thus the compilation of statistics is 
subject to human error. Aware, however, that no problem - 
whether medical, scientific, or social - can be attacked 
successfully until its dimensions are known, the JCF 
leadership is trying to implement more accurate central 
reporting methods. 
 
---------------------------- 
Corruption Hinders Progress 
---------------------------- 
 
6. (C) In 2004, there were a number of graphic illustrations 
of the weakness of law enforcement and political institutions 
in combating crime.  One particularly stark example:  at the 
time of his murder in July 2004, alleged Spanish Town \"One 
Order\" gang leader Oliver \"Bubba\" Smith was using a vehicle 
registered in the name of his alleged criminal deputy, Andrew 
\"Bun Man\" Hope, and Jamaica Labor Party (JLP) MP Olivia 
\"Babsy\" Grange. (Ref B)  Police questioned Grange for several 
hours regarding her connection to Smith and Hope.  She denied 
knowing Smith and claimed that she only guaranteed a loan for 
Hope, who is one of her \"constituency workers.\"  During a 
four hour search of Smith\'s home, the police found a green 
Jamaica Labour Party t-shirt with the words \"One Love Babsy 
Cares\" written on the front and \"One Order Central St. 
Catherine\" written on the back.  The investigation into 
Grange\'s relationship with Smith has been dropped. 
 
7.  (C) Deputy Commissioner of Police Lucius Thomas, who is 
to become the new Commissioner of the JCF on January 19 (Ref 
C), recently told Poloff that every illegal operation in 
Jamaica - gangs, drug runners, extortionists, etc. have at 
least two to three JCF officers involved.  He stated frankly 
that it is impossible for illegal activity to take place in 
Jamaica without some sort of JCF assistance.  In an effort to 
address corruption in its ranks, the JCF is to implement new 
reform policies under the Professional Standards Branch of 
the JCF.  This new unit\'s core function will be to target and 
investigate police misconduct and corruption.  It is 
anticipated that its policies will be implemented after the 
new JCF commissioner is sworn in on January 19. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (C) Somewhat ironically, embattled former JCF Commissioner 
Forbes may have been yet another \"casualty\" of 2004\'s soaring 
crime rate, and of widespread public dissatisfaction with the 
JCF\'s seeming impotence in effectively confronting the 
problem.  In his departing remarks, Forbes publicly invited 
other senior JCF officers to consider early retirement in 
order to allow \"new blood\" to circulate within the JCF 
leadership. We shall see how many others follow - or are 
compelled to follow - Forbes\'s lead in retiring. 
 
9. (C) There is every reason to believe that crime in Jamaica 
will remain a significant public concern during 2005.  Some 
commentators note a lasting solution to the problem rests not 
only with law enforcement, but with the public.  Effective 
policing requires a level of trust in the JCF that does not 
currently exist and that citizens cease tolerating the many 
types of illicit activities that often occur openly without 
comment or action.  It can be a vicious cycle, however, the 
general lack of trust in the JCF is often a direct result of 
corruption in the force, heavy handed or incompetent 
policing, fear of reprisals, and the JCF\'s unresponsiveness 
to emergency calls.  Forbes\'s departure offers the 
possibility of an improvement in JCF performance, but the new 
commissioner may well have a short honeymoon.  It remains to 
be seen whether he and other senior officers will succeed in 
making the JCF more effective in its assigned role.  End 
Comment. 
COBB 
"